As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  87  of  2022
THE PROTECTION OF TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
BILL, 2022
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
_______
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
_______
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement
2. Definitions
CHAPTER II
DEEMED OWNERSHIP AND DEEMED RIGHTS
3. Ownership and License Rights
4. Rights of members of Knowledge Society
5. Access agreement for use by non-members
6. Equitable benefit sharing agreement
7. Recognition of value-addition to traditional knowledge
8. Intellectual Property Rights and traditional knowledge
9. Misappropriation and regulation of traditional knowledge
10. Civil remedies for misappropriation of traditional knowledge
11. Punishment for misappropriation
CHAPTER III
NATIONAL AUTHORITY ON TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
12. Establishment of National Authority on Traditional Knowledge
13. Conditions of service of Chairperson and members
14. Committees of NA TK
15. Officers and employees of National Authority
16. Authentication of orders and decisions
17. Delegation of powers
18. Salaries and Allowances of NA TK
19. Central Government to provide grants and loans to NA TK
20. National Traditional Knowledge Fund

CLAUSES
21. Budget accounts and audit
22. Functions of the NA TK
23. Powers of the National Authority
CHAPTER IV
STA TE BOARD OF TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
24. Establishment of State Board on Traditional Knowledge
25. Conditions of service of Chairperson and members
26. Officers and employees of State Board
27. Authentication of orders and decisions of State Board
28. Delegation of powers
29. Expenses of State Board on Traditional Knowledge
30. Grants and loans to State Board
31. Constitution of State Traditional Knowlegde Fund
32. Audit of accounts of State Board
33. Functions of State Board
34. Powers of the State Board on Traditional knowledge
CHAPTER V
PROCEDURES, TKDS, TKDL AND FUNCTION OF GOVERNMENT
35. Application for grant of custodianship
36. Traditional Knowledge Docketing System
37. Traditional Knowledge Digital Library
38. Functions of the Central Government
39. Functions of the State Government
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
40. National Authority to be bound by the directions given by Central Government
41. Power of State Government to give directions
42. Settlement of disputes
43. Appeals
44. Execution of determination or order
45. Protection of action taken in good faith
46. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable
47. Act to have effect in addition to other Acts
48. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Government
49. Cognizance of offences
50. Power of Central Government to make rules
51. Power of State Government to make rules
52. Power to give effect to the provisions of the Act
53. Power to remove difficulties
(ii)

Bill No.  87  of  2022
THE PROTECTION OF TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
BILL, 2022
By
DR. SHASHI THAROOR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the in-situ protection, preservation, promotion
and sustainable development of India’ s Traditional
Knowledge and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.(1) This Act may be called the Protection of  Traditional Knowledge Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “appropriate Government” means the concerned State Government or the
Union Territory administration;
(ii) “commercial use” means making available any product, process, material,
form, practice or performance, that is traditional knowledge, for sale in the market
or making available for sale in market the outcome of any research in traditional
knowledge;
(iii) “knowledge society” means a group of people or family, whether
indigenous, tribal or otherwise, residing within the boundaries of the national
territory, who may be identified as a separate group from other groups or other
members of the society by reason of their exclusive association with one or more
forms of traditional knowledge:
Provided that such group of people or family shall constitute itself as
a legal entity such as trust, society or company other than large enterprise
but including a company under sub-section (62) of section 2 of the
Companies Act, 2013 and is constituted specifically and exclusively for
managing commercial and non-commercial use of one or more forms of
traditional knowledge;
(iv) “licensee” means any person who holds traditional knowledge license
under this Act and is authorized to use the traditional knowledge subject to the
conditions of the license;
(v) “large enterprise” means an enterprise which is not a micro, small or
medium enterprise under the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Development
Act, 2006 and includes any industry classified as a large industry by the Central
Government by notification in the Official Gazette;
(vi) “non-commercial use” means making available any product, process,
material, form, practice or performance, that is traditional knowledge, for purposes
other than commercial use and includes the use of such knowledge for research,
provided that the research is conducted and knowledge disseminated as per the
guidelines of the Central Government;
(vii) “person” means any citizen of India, body corporate, whether
incorporated or not, partnership or organization, whether registered or not, or
anyone who is not a citizen of India;
(viii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(ix) “traditional knowledge” means knowledge and expression of culture,
which may subsist in codified or oral or other forms, whether publicly available or
not, that is dynamic and evolving and is passed on from generation to generation,
for at least three generations, whether consecutively or not, which is associated
with group or groups who are maintaining, practicing or developing it in traditional
cultural context and includes know-how, skills, innovations, practices, learning,
medicinal preparations, method of treatment, literature, music, art forms, designs
and marks but does not include any traditional knowledge covered by any law for
the time being in force providing for its preservation, promotion, management or
unauthorized commercial exploitation;
(x) “NA TK” means the National Authority on Traditional Knowledge
constituted under section 12;
(xi) “State Board” means the State Board constituted under section 24;
(xii) “TKDL” means Traditional Knowledge Digital Library, that is, the
system of identifying, classifying, codifying and cataloguing traditional knowledge
obtained or derived from India and maintained by the unit of the Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research; and
2
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
Definitions.
45
50

3
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
(xiii) “TKDS” means Traditional Knowledge Docketing System of information
to identify communities with their respective traditional knowledge, maintained by
the State Boards and coordinated by the NA TK.
CHAPTER II
DEEMED OWNERSHIP AND DEEMED RIGHTS
3.(1) For all traditional knowledge that is obtained, derived or practiced solely
within a State or Union territory, the respective appropriate Government shall be
deemed as the  owner of the traditional knowledge:
Provided that if a particular traditional knowledge is practiced in more
than one State or Union territory, then all such appropriate Government shall
be deemed to have joint ownership and equal and undivided share on any
claim or interests in that traditional knowledge.
(2) Every knowledge society shall apply to the appropriate government
according to the procedure laid down in section 35 to get recognition as the
custodian of traditional knowledge:
Provided that the appropriate government shall encourage individual
practitioners of traditional knowledge to form knowledge societies.
(3) Subject to sub-section (8) of section 22 and sub-section (8) of
section 33, an application under sub-section (2) made by a knowledge society, shall
be accepted only if another knowledge society is not a company under sub-section
(62) of section 2 of Companies Act, 2013 and recognized as a custodian of the same
traditional knowledge.
(4) Subject to sub-section (4) of section 22, the appropriate Government
shall forward the application to NATK under sub-section (2) of section 33 for
issuing a letter of recognition after recording vital information about the traditional
knowledge and the custodian in TKDS in accordance with sub-section (5) of
section 35.
(5) The knowledge society shall, consequent upon recognition as the
custodian of the traditional knowledge by NATK under sub-section (4) be deemed
to have a non-exclusive perpetual license for commercial use and non-commercial
use of the traditional knowledge and all the members of the knowledge society
shall enjoy the rights collectively:
Provided that the letter of recognition shall contain provisions of
deemed license in the prescribed format and such letter shall be deemed as
a duly signed contract between the appropriate Government and the custodian
under the Indian Contract Act, 1872:
Provided further that the knowledge society or its members shall not
have the right to sub-license the non-exclusive perpetual license granted
under this sub-section, except for the right to permit limited use by others
under sub-section (3) of section 4.
(6) Without prejudice to sub-section (4), there shall be no registration of the
traditional knowledge or creation of rights.
(7) Subject to sub-section (4) of section 22 and sub-section (3) of
section 35, the appropriate Government and NATK shall not recognize another
knowledge society as a custodian of the traditional knowledge without providing
an opportunity of being heard under section 42 to the knowledge society which
is already recognized as the custodian or as one of the custodians of such
traditional knowledge:
Provided that all such knowledge societies may be encouraged by
NATK to form a consortium of custodians of that traditional knowledge.
40
45
50
Ownership and
License Rights.

4
(8) The knowledge society recognized as the custodian of the traditional
knowledge shall bring all instances of usurpation or misappropriation to the notice
of the appropriate Government and the appropriate Government shall entrust the
NATK or the State Boards, to take appropriate legal action against the usurper or
appropriator as the case may be.
(9) Without prejudice to sub-section (8), the custodian of such traditional
knowledge may sue any person against any matter other than remedies for
infringement of ownership rights on traditional knowledge.
4.(1) A knowledge society, recognized as custodian of traditional knowledge
under section 3, shall have the collective right to—
(i) create, maintain, control and develop their protected traditional
knowledge;
(ii) authorize, deny or revoke, the access to and utilization of traditional
knowledge by non-members;
(iii) offer membership to interested persons;
(iv) be informed of access to their traditional knowledge through a
disclosure mechanism in all applications, which shall require evidence of
consent prior to the applications, and benefit sharing requirements, in
accordance with this Act;
(v) a fair and equitable share of benefit, whether in monetary or non-
monetary terms, arising from the utilization of traditional knowledge.
(2) All persons who are members of the knowledge society, shall have the
right to commercial and non-commercial use of the attributed traditional knowledge.
(3) The knowledge society shall have the right to permit the use of
traditional knowledge by a non-member, for a limited period of time and for a
specific application and revoke such license, for good cause:
Provided that grant of license to a non-member shall be notarised by
the appropriate Government.
(4) The knowledge society may seek advice of the appropriate government
on granting permission to a non-member as per sub-section (3).
(5) The knowledge society shall regulate the rights relating to deemed
license and its use with respect to the traditional knowledge, against members and
non-members, by forming a decision making body in such form and manner as the
knowledge society deems appropriate.
(6) The decision making body under sub-section (5) shall be formed by
election of its members by majority vote of each of the member of the knowledge
society.
(7) The term of the decision making body shall be five years.
5.(1) An agreement shall be executed between the knowledge society and the
non-member, who seeks the grant of permission under sub-section (3) of
section 4, for allowing commercial or non-commercial use of the traditional knowledge
by the non-member and a copy thereof shall be deposited with the concerned State
Board or NATK, as the case may be:
Provided that such permission for commercial or non-commercial use of
traditional knowledge shall be non-transferable and non-exclusive in
nature:
Provided further that the NATK or State Board, as the case may be,
shall ensure that an equitable benefit sharing contract under section 6 is
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
40
Rights of
members of
Knowledge
Society.
Access
agreement for
use by non-
members.

Equitable
benefit sharing
agreement.
Recognition of
value-addition
to traditional
knowledge.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
5
signed within a period of three months if the use of traditional knowledge
is for commercial purposes.
(2) The agreement for commercial or non-commercial use of the traditional
knowledge shall be accompanied with clear labelling, demarcation or identification
of the original traditional knowledge, period of permitted use, specific nature of
application for which permission is granted, and other information as considered
necessary in this regard.
(3) Any enrichment, development or advancement of the traditional knowledge
as a result of its non-commercial or commercial use shall be included within the
realm of the original traditional knowledge held by the custodian of the traditional
knowledge.
(4) The non-member granted permission for commercial or non-commercial
use of the traditional knowledge shall not transfer any technology associated with
the traditional knowledge to any other person or allow the use of traditional
knowledge by unauthorised persons.
(5) Any enrichment, development or advancement of the traditional
knowledge as a result of its non-commercial use shall be included back to the realm
of the original traditional knowledge to be placed in the custody of the original
custodian:
Provided that a  non-disclosure  agreement  shall be  signed  with the
knowledge society to ensure compliance to this sub-section.
6.Where permission for the commercial use of the traditional knowledge has
been granted under section 5, a mutually agreeable and equitable benefit sharing
contract shall be signed by and between the knowledge society, the appropriate
Government and the non-member who has been granted the permission for
commercial use of the traditional knowledge:
Provided that NATK shall receive the lump sum and royalty on behalf of
the knowledge society and appropriate Government, as per the benefit sharing
contract specified under this section, to be transferred to its National Traditional
Knowledge Fund set up under section 20, and shall ensure the equitable
sharing of benefits between the knowledge society and the appropriate
Government.
7.(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 5, a request for
non-commercial use of traditional knowledge in a non-exclusive manner, especially
for research purposes, shall not ordinarily be rejected by the knowledge society
unless it is detrimental to the interests of the knowledge society:
Provided that the use of the traditional knowledge shall be accompanied
with clear labelling and demarcation or identification that the traditional
knowledge is obtained or derived from India.
Illustration.—The use of traditional knowledge for research shall be
accompanied with referencing in the following words:
“This traditional knowledge referring to was obtained/derived from India
and is in the custody of the Union of India.”
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 5, the non-member
granted permission for non-commercial use of traditional knowledge shall be
felicitated by the appropriate government for having contributed to such enrichment,
development or advancement of traditional knowledge, in a manner as prescribed
by the appropriate government.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 4, the non-member
granted permission for the commercial or non-commercial use of the traditional50

Intellectual
Property
Rights and
traditional
knowledge. 10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
6
knowledge may also be made an associate member of the knowledge society at the
discretion of its decision body:
Provided that such associate member shall become entitled to one vote
in the decision making body of the knowledge society with regard to the use
and enrichment, development or advancement, whether for commercial or non-
commercial use, of such traditional knowledge.
8.(1) No patents or any other form of intellectual property protection shall be
granted or applied for by any person, within India or abroad, on any traditional
knowledge or aggregation thereof, on any traditional knowledge obtained or derived
from India, whether in the custody of the knowledge society or in public domain.
(2) Subject to sub-section (1), an invention, according to clause (j) of
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Patents Act, 1970, which is the output of
advanced research on traditional knowledge, may be patented:
Provided that prior to submitting an application to the patent office for
acquiring a patent for such invention based on the traditional knowledge,
the applicant shall acquire permission from the NATK.
9.(1) The misappropriation of traditional knowledge shall include, but is not
limited to—
(i) access and use of the traditional knowledge without prior approval of
the appropriate Government or knowledge society;
(ii) transfer of traditional knowledge in violation of the conditions laid
down in sub-section (4) of section 5;
(iii) where applicable, violation of any terms of the agreement between the
authorised user of the traditional knowledge under sub-section (3) of
section 4 and the custodian of traditional knowledge, for whatever purpose,
whether commercial or non-commercial;
(iv) willful attempt to apply or obtain a patent or intellectual property
protection for a traditional knowledge in the custody of a recognized
knowledge society through deliberate efforts;
(v) any act that is in breach of confidence and which results in the
violation of any law in force; and
(vi) such misappropriation, which may or may not have resulted into
gainful profit for the violator or may or may not have caused any harm to
the custodians, monetary or otherwise.
(2) Subject to section 49, the misappropriation of traditional knowledge
shall be deemed as an offence and shall be punishable under this Act.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3) of section 4, the
following persons shall apply to the appropriate government to seek permission
to enter into an agreement with a knowledge society under sub-section (1) of
section 5 and the appropriate government shall entrust NA TK or State Boards, as
the case may be, to decide on the matter:–
(i) a person who is not a citizen of India;
(ii) a citizen of India, who is a non-resident as defined in clause (30) of
section 2 of the Income tax Act, 1961;
(iii) a body corporate, association or organization not incorporated or
registered in India;
(iv) a body corporate, association or organization incorporated or registered
in India under any law for the time being in force which has any non-Indian
participation in its share capital or management;
Misappropriation
and regulation of
traditional
knowledge.

Civil remedies
for
misappropriation
of traditional
knowledge.
Punishment
for
misappropriation.
Establishment
of National
Authority on
Traditional
Knowledge.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
7
(v) a body corporate, association or organization incorporated or registered
in India which is a large scale enterprise; and
(vi) anyone, who is not a relevant custodian of the traditional knowledge,
defined as per this Act.
(4) Without prejudice to clause (iii) of sub-section (2) of section 20 and
clause (iv) of sub-section (2) of section 31, any person continuing the use or
practice of traditional knowledge post enforcement of this Act shall be considered
to constitute the offence of misappropriation as specified under sub-section (1) of
this section, unless a recognition is obtained under sub-section (4) of section 3.
10. Where traditional knowledge has been misappropriated, the appropriate
government shall, subject to sub-section (8) of section 3, be entitled to all such
remedies by way of injunction, damages, accounts and otherwise as are or may be
conferred by law for the infringement of a right.
11.(1) Whoever is found guilty of misappropriation under clause (i) of
sub-section (1) of section 9 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and,
where the damage caused exceeds ten lakh rupees, such fine as may commensurate
with the damage caused, or with both.
(2) Whoever is found guilty of misappropriation under clauses (ii) to (vi)
of sub-section (1) of section 9 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees,
and, where the damage caused exceeds five lakh rupees, such fine as may
commensurate with the damage caused, or with both.
(3) If any person contravenes any direction given or order made by the
Central Government, the State Government, the NA TK or the State Board for which
no punishment has been separately provided under this Act, he shall be punished
with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in case of a second time
offence, with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and in the case of
continuous contravention with additional fine may extend to two lakh rupees
everyday during which the default continues.
(4) Where an offence or contravention under this Act has been committed
by a company, every person who at the time of the offence or contravention was
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct
of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be
guilty of the offence or contravention committed unless proved that the offence
was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence
to prevent the commission of such offence or contravention.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), where an offence
or contravention under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved
that the offence or contravention has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence or
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
CHAPTER III
NATIONAL AUTHORITY ON TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
12.(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established by the
Central Government for the purposes of this Act, a body to be called the National
Authority on Traditional Knowledge (NATK).
(2) The NA TK shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose
40
45
50

of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said
name sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the NA TK shall be at Thiruvananthapuram and the
NATK may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish
offices at other places in India.
(4) The NA TK shall consist of the following members–
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent person having adequate
knowledge and experience in the conservation and sustainable use of
India’s traditional knowledge, patents and intellectual property protections,
and in matters relating to equitable sharing of benefits, to be appointed by
the Central Government;
(ii) a Member Secretary, who is the head of staff structure created under
section 15 and shall be a person of adequate experience in handling
knowledge resources, docketing and documentation to be appointed by the
Central Government;
(iii) ex-officio members, to be appointed by the Central Government, one
each as representatives of the following ministries and departments–
(a) Ministry of Tribal Affairs;
(b) Ministry of Science and Technology;
(c) Ministry of Law and Justice;
(d) Office of the Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade
Marks;
(iv) the Director General of the Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research;
(v) the Chairperson of the National Biodiversity Authority;
(vi) five non-official non-voting members, to be appointed by the
Chairperson of NATK for a period of three years, from amongst specialists
and scientists, in an advisory capacity, having special knowledge of, or
experience in, matters relating to conservation and sustainable use of
traditional knowledge, patents and intellectual property protections, and
equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of traditional knowledge,
representatives of industry, conservers, creators and knowledge holders of
India’s Traditional knowledge:
Provided that one such member shall be the head of the Traditional
Knowledge Digital Library unit of the Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
13. (1) The salary, term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson,
Member-Secretary and honorarium for non-official non-voting members other
than the ex-officio members of the NATK shall be such as may be prescribed.
(2) The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer of the NA TK and shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by rules made
by the Central Government.
(3) The Central Government may remove from the NATK any member who,
in its opinion, has—
(i) been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(ii) been convicted of an offence which involves moral turpitude; or
(iii) become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or
Conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and members.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
8

(iv) so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
detrimental to the public interest; or
(v) acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a member;
(vi) acquired any other conflict of interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a member.
(4) The NA TK shall meet at such time and place and shall observe such
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including the quorum at its meetings) as may be prescribed by rules made by the
Central Government.
(5) The Chairperson of the NA TK shall preside at the meetings of the
NA TK.
(6) If for any reason, the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of
the NATK, one of the ex-officio members of the NATK, as chosen by the members
present at the meeting, shall preside over the meeting.
(7) All questions and appeals which come before any meeting of the NATK
shall be decided by a majority of votes consisting of two-thirds of the members
present and voting and in the event of equality of votes, the Chairperson or, in
his absence, the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting
vote.
(8) Every member who is in any way, whether directly, indirectly or
personally, concerned or interested in a matter to be decided at the meeting shall
disclose the nature of his concern or interest and after such disclosure, the member
concerned or interested shall not attend that meeting.
(9) No act or proceeding of the NA TK shall be invalidated merely by reason
of–
(i) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the NATK; or
(ii) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member; or
(iii) any irregularity in the procedure of the NA TK not affecting the merits
of the case.
14.(1) The NA TK may constitute such number of committees as it deems fit
for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under this
Act.
(2) A committee constituted under this section shall co-opt such number of
persons, who are not the members of the NA TK, as it may think fit and the persons
so co-opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the committee and take
part in its proceedings but shall not have the right to vote.
15. The NATK may appoint such officers and other employees as it considers
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
16. All orders and decisions of the NATK shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Chairperson or any other member authorized by the NATK in this
behalf and all other instruments executed by the NA TK shall be authenticated by
the signature of the Member Secretary of the NA TK.
17. The NATK may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any
member or officer of the NA TK or any other person subject to such conditions,
if any, as may be specified in the order, such of the powers and functions under
this Act (except the power to prefer an appeal under section 43 and the power to
make rules under section 50) as it may deem necessary.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
Committees of
NATK.
Officers andemployees ofNationalAuthority.
Authentication
of orders and
decisions.
Delegation of
powers.
9

18. The salaries and allowances payable to the members and the administrative
expenses of the NATK including salaries, allowances and honorarium to non-
official non-voting members, and pension payable to, or in respect of, the officers
and other employees of the NATK shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund
of India.
19. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, pay by way of grants or loans such sums of money to the
NATK as the Central Government may think fit for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
20.(1) There shall be constituted a Fund, to be managed by the NATK, to be
called the National Traditional Knowledge Fund and there shall be credited to the
Fund—
(i) any grants and loans made to the NATK under section 19;
(ii) all royalties and other benefits received by the NATK on traditional
knowledge under its custody; and
(iii) all sums received by the NATK from such other sources as may
be decided upon by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund shall be applied for—
(i) channelling benefits to the knowledge societies and appropriate
governments;
(ii) in-situ conservation, promotion and sustainable development of
traditional knowledge; and
(iii) socio-economic development of persons practising traditional
knowledge and incentivizing formation of knowledge societies within the
country.
21.(1) The NA TK shall prepare a budget, maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records (including the accounts and other relevant records of the National
Fund) and prepare an annual statement of account in such form as may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India.
(2) The accounts of the NA TK shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the NATK
to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor General of India and any other person
appointed by  him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the NATK shall
have the same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit
as the Comptroller and Auditor General generally has in connection with the audit
of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the
production of books accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and
papers and to inspect any of the offices of the National Authority.
(4) The accounts of the NA TK as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with
the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government.
22.(1) NTKA shall be deemed as the institutional repository of vital information
concerning the traditional knowledge owned by the appropriate government under
Section 3 and custodian of unified TKDS.
(2) The NA TK shall advise the Central Government on matters relating to
grants of erroneous patents based on India’s traditional knowledge and shall
directly oppose the grant of such patents by the Patent Offices.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
Salaries and
Allowances of
NATK.
Central
Government to
provide grants
and loans to
the NATK.
National
Traditional
Knowledge
Fund.
50
Budget
accounts and
audit.
Functions of
the NATK.
10

(3) The NA TK shall compile and maintain a central and unified TKDS, by
acquiring such details from the State TKDS as may required.
(4) The NA TK shall settle all disputes and ambiguities in regard to recognition
of new knowledge societies, subject to sub-section (7) of section 3 and
sub-section (3) of section 33, post investigation and consultation with the TKDL
unit or any experts it deems necessary, and the decision shall reflect in the TKDS.
(5) The NA TK shall examine any dispute, application or appeal, brought to
its notice in a manner prescribed by the Central Government, and after due
investigation and hearing, grant decisions as per powers vested in it by this Act.
(6) The NA TK may—
(i) advise the Central Government on matters relating to the in-situ
conservation, sustainable management and use of traditional knowledge
and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of traditional
knowledge;
(ii) advise the Central Government on matters relating to TKDL access
(non-disclosure) agreements with foreign patent offices and such other
matters as may be deemed necessary, for access to material from the
TKDL;
(iii) assist the right holders to negotiate terms with other possible
users, whether commercial or non-commercial;
(iv) undertake promotional activities for traditional knowledge; and
(v) perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(7) The NA TK shall issue guidelines in accordance with provisions of sub-
section (2) of section 3 for the certification of knowledge society with the State
Board, in order for them to be recognized as custodians of traditional knowledge.
(8) The NA TK may, after consultation with any expert committee constituted
in this regard, declare any form of traditional knowledge, ‘under threat of extinction’,
and shall constitute special provisions and programmes to prevent the extinction
of the traditional knowledge.
(9) The NA TK shall, in consultation with the Central Government, State
Boards and an expert committee constituted for such purpose, frame guidelines for
benefit sharing agreements, for the benefit of the knowledge societies and the
appropriate governments, which may be given effect in all or any of the following
manner, namely:
(i) transfer of technology;
(ii) location of production, research and development units in such
areas which will facilitate better living standards to the benefit claimers;
(iii) association of benefit claimers and the local people with research
and development in traditional knowledge and its utilization;
(iv) setting up of venture capital fund, for aiding the cause of benefit
claimers;
(v) payment of such monetary compensation and non-monetary benefits
to the benefit claimers as the NATK may deem fit;
(vi) payment of lump sum or royalty on commercial use; and
(vii) joint patenting under sub-section (2) of section 8 or royalty from
benefits arising out of licensing of patenting.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
11

(10) The NATK shall prepare an annual report on sustainable management
of traditional knowledge in accordance with this Act, including the functioning of
the NA TK, the State Boards, and the appropriate governments with regard to
India’s traditional knowledge.
(11) The NA TK shall lay the report prepared under sub-section (10) before
each House of Parliament and shall also publish the report on its website.
23.(1) The NATK shall have, for the purpose of discharging its functions
under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following matters, namely:–
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath;
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(iii) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(iv) issuing commissions for the examination of witness or documents;
(v) reviewing its decisions;
(vi) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex-parte;
(vii) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application or any order
passed by it ex-parte;
(viii) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) All members, officers and other employees of the NA TK shall be deemed,
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act,
to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code,1860.
CHAPTER IV
STA TE BOARD OF TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
24.(1) With effect from such date as the respective State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established
by that Government for the purposes of this Act, a body for the State to be known
as the (name of the State) State Board on Traditional knowledge.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no State Board shall
be constituted for a Union territory and in relation to a Union territory, the NATK
shall exercise the powers and perform the functions of a State Board for that Union
territory:
Provided that in  relation to any Union territory, the NA TK may delegate
all or any of its powers or functions under this sub-section to such person
or group of persons as the Central Government may specify.
(3) The State Board shall be a statutory body by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose
of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said
name sue and be sued.
(4) The State Board shall consist of the following members, namely:
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent person having adequate
knowledge and experience in the conservation and sustainable use of
traditional knowledge, patents and intellectual property protection and in
matters relating to equitable sharing of benefits, to be appointed by the NA TK.
(ii) three ex-officio members, namely:–
(a) President of the State Sahithya Academy or Folklore Academy;
Powers of the
National
Authority.
Establishment
of State Board
on Traditional
Knowledge.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
12

(b) Vice-Chancellor of a University to be nominated by the State
Government;
(c) the Advocate-General of the State;
(iii) one scientist having adequate knowledge and experience in the
conservation and sustainable use of traditional knowledge, patents and
intellectual property protection and in matters relating to equitable sharing
of benefits nominated by the State Government; and
(iv)  not more than five non-official members from amongst experts in
matters relating to conservation and sustainable use of traditional
knowledge, patents or other forms of intellectual property protections and
equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of traditional knowledge,
to be appointed by the State Government.
(5) The head office of the State Board shall be at such place as the State
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
25.(1) The salary, term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson
and the members other than ex-officio members of the State Board shall be such
as may be prescribed by rules made by the State Government.
(2) The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the State Board
and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by
rules made by the State Government.
(3) The State Government may remove from the State Board any member
who, in its opinion, has–
(i) been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(ii) been convicted of an offence which involves moral turpitude; or
(iii) become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or
(iv) so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
detrimental to the public interest; or
(v) acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a member;
(vi) acquired any other conflict of interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a member.
(4) The State Board shall meet at such time and place and shall observe such
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including the quorum at its meetings) as may be prescribed by rules made by the
State Government.
(5) The Chairperson of the State Board shall preside at the meetings of the
State Board.
(6) If for any reason, the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the
State Board, any member of the State Board chosen by the members present at the
meeting shall preside at the meeting.
(7) All questions and appeals which come before any meeting of the State
Board shall be decided by a majority of votes consisting of two-thirds of the
members present and voting and in the event of equality of votes, the Chairperson
or, in his absence, the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting
vote.
(8) Every member who is in any way, whether directly, indirectly or personally,
concerned or interested in a matter to be decided at the meeting shall disclose the
nature of his concern or interest and after such disclosure, the member concerned
or interested shall not attend that meeting.
Conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and members.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
13

(9) No act or proceeding of the State Board shall be invalidated merely by
reason of—
(i) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the State
Board; or
(ii) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member; or
(iii) any irregularity in the procedure of the State Board not affecting
the merits of the case.
26. The State Board may appoint such officers and other employees as it
considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
27. All orders and decisions of the State Board shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Chairperson or any other member authorized by the State Board
in this behalf and all other instruments executed by the State Board shall be
authenticated by the signature of an officer of the State Board authorized by it in
this behalf.
28. The State Board may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to
any member or officer of the State Board or any other person subject to such
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of the powers and
functions under this Act (except the power to prefer an appeal under section 42
and the power to make rules under section 50) as it may deem necessary.
29. The salaries and allowances payable to the members and the administrative
expenses of the State Board including salaries, allowances and pension payable to,
or in respect of, the officers and other employees of the State Board shall be
defrayed out of the Consolidated Funds of the State.
30. The State Government may, after due appropriation made by the State
Legislature by law in this behalf, pay to the State Board by way of grants or loans
such sums of money as the State Government may think fit for being utilized for
the purposes of this Act.
31.(1) There shall be constituted a Fund, to be managed by the State Board,
to be  called the State Traditional Knowledge Fund and there shall be credited to
the Fund—
(i) any grants and loans made to the State Board under section 30;
(ii) any grants or loans made by the State Government;
(iii) all sums received by the State Board from such other sources as
may be decided upon by the State Government or the NA TK including
benefits received from NA TK in line with equitable benefit sharing
contracts under section 6.
(2) The State Fund shall be applied for—
(i) the management and conservation of traditional knowledge;
(ii) compensating or rehabilitating any section of the people economically
affected by acts committed under sub-section (1) of section 9 or the
violation of the rights of traditional knowledge societies;
(iii) in-situ conservation, promotion and sustainable development of
traditional knowledge;
(iv) socio-economic development of persons practicing traditional
knowledge and incentivizing formation of knowledge societies within the
State; and
(v) meeting the expenses incurred for the purposes authorized by this
Act.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
Officers and
employees of
State Board.
Authentication
of orders and
decisions of
State Board.
Delegation of
powers.
Expenses of
State Board on
Traditional
Knowledge.
Grants and
loans to State
Board.
Constitution
of State
Traditional
Knowledge
Fund.
14

32. The accounts of the State Board shall be maintained and audited in such
manner as the State Government may, in consultation with the Accountant General
of the State, prescribe and the State Board shall furnish, to the State Government,
before such date as may be prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together with
auditor’s report thereon.
33.(1) The State Board shall be the trustee of traditional knowledge owned by
the State under sub-section (1) of section 3.
(2) The State Board shall, if satisfied after sufficient scrutiny of application
received under sub-section (2) of section 3 and following the procedures under
sub-section (2) of section 35, forward the application to NA TK with a clear
recommendation for processing the same under sub-section (4) of section 22.
(3) Subject to sub-section (1) of section 23, NA TK shall pass an order within
a period of six months, recognizing or rejecting the claim of the knowledge society
for recognition as a custodian of traditional knowledge.
(4) The State Board shall ensure that the TKDS remains up to date and that
all orders of NATK, in regard to custodianship of traditional knowledge, are
reflected in the TKDS within one month of the order of NA TK under sub-
section (3) above.
(5) The State Board may—
(i) advise the State Government on matters relating to the conservation
and sustainable use of traditional knowledge and equitable sharing of
benefits arising out of the utilization of traditional knowledge;
(ii) advice the NA TK or appropriate government on matters relating to
grants of erroneous patents based on India’s traditional knowledge;
(iii) assist the right holders to negotiate terms with other possible users
under sub-section (3) of section 4, whether commercial or non-commercial
for which they may charge a fee;
(iv) undertake promotional activities for traditional knowledge, protection
and management;
(v) perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(6) The State Board may facilitate and support, in any manner necessary, the
indentifying, classifying, codifying and cataloguing of all traditional knowledge of
the State, which are already in public domain and no custodianship can be claimed
thereon, in collaboration with the TKDL unit of Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
(7) The State Board shall, by any act or measure necessary, promote and
protect the traditional knowledge of the State and the rights of the knowledge
societies, and build awareness of the communities on the aforementioned rights as
custodians of traditional knowledge.
(8) The State Board may, after consultation with any expert committee
constituted in this regard, recommend to NA TK for declaring any form of traditional
knowledge ‘under threat of extinction’, and shall constitute special provisions and
programs to prevent the extinction of such traditional knowledge.
(9) The State Board shall prepare an annual traditional knowledge report on
sustainable management of traditional knowledge in accordance with this Act,
including the functioning of the State Board and State Government with regards
to the State’s Traditional knowledge.
(10) The State Board shall lay the report prepared under sub-section (8)
before the State’s Legislative Assembly and Council if applicable, for a total period
of thirty days and shall also publish the report on its website.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
Audit of
accounts of
State Board.
Functions of
State Board.
50
15

34.All members, officers and other employees of the State Board shall be
deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions
of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860.
CHAPTER V
PROCEDURES, TKDS, TKDL AND FUNCTION OF GOVERNMENT
35.(1) The NA TK or the State Board, as the case may be, shall receive  an
application under sub-section (2) of section 3 and fees in a manner prescribed and
sufficient scrutiny of details as per sub-section (2) of section 3, accept an application
from a knowledge society, to be recognized as custodians of traditional knowledge.
(2) The NATK or the State Board, as the case may be, shall give wide
publicity for at least one month to the application for grant of custodianship of
traditional knowledge to a knowledge society with a view to invite any objections
or grievances to such grant of custodianship  before the procedure under
sub-section (4) of section 22 is initiated by NATK.
(3) The NATK or the State Board, as the case may be, shall examine
objections or grievances brought to its notice in regard to grant of custodianship
and after following due process under sub-section 4 of section 22, take a decision
on application for grant of custodianship.
(4) The NATK or the State Board, as the case may be, shall decide on grant
of custodianship as per powers vested in it by this Act.
(5) In case of grant of custodianship to the knowledge society, the NATK
or the State Board, as the case may be, shall issue a letter of recognition, and a
unique and exclusive docket number from its TKDS, to the knowledge society with
due intimation to the respective State Board.
36.(1) A Traditional Knowledge Docketing System (TKDS) shall be created
and maintained by each State Board for its jurisdiction and centrally coordinated
and maintained by the NATK.
(2) The TKDS shall be deemed as a repository of vital information in order
to identify the custodian knowledge society with the traditional knowledge.
(3) The TKDS shall constitute—
(i) details of the custodian knowledge society in respect of nature or
definition by which members of the knowledge society may be identified
and where they may be found.
(ii) a short non-exploitable description of the traditional knowledge:
Explanation.— The description of the traditional knowledge shall be enough
to identify the traditional knowledge but not so much that it can be exploited
without the consent of the knowledge society.
(iii) the details of constitution of knowledge society, if any, which shall
include matters like details of the decision making body of the knowledge
society, whom to contact and how to approach the knowledge society.
37.(1) The Traditional Knowledge Digital Library unit under Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) shall maintain, protect and develop
India’s Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) for the purposes of identifying,
classifying, codifying and cataloguing the traditional knowledge that is obtained
or derived from India.
(2) The TKDL unit shall attempt to identify, classify, codify and catalogue
India’s traditional knowledge which is in the custody of the appropriate Government.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
Powers of the
State Board on
Traditional
knowledge.
Application
for grant of
custodianship.
Traditional
Knowledge
Docketing
System.
Traditional
Knowledge
Digital Library.
16

(3) The TKDL unit shall attempt to identify, classify, codify and catalogue
the traditional knowledge in the custody of any knowledge society, if the knowledge
society provides consent to the TKDL unit, prior to its use.
(4) In the case of traditional knowledge in the TKDL, before the custody of
traditional knowledge is transferred to a knowledge society, the knowledge society
may, by way of notification through the appropriate Government, choose to purge
the information relating to their traditional knowledge from the TKDL.
(5) The TKDL shall be made available to patent or intellectual property
offices around the world, by whatever name called, as ‘prior art’, to prevent or
revoke the grant of erroneous patents on India’s Traditional Knowledge, under
reasonable and necessary non-disclosure and privacy agreements.
(6) The access to the TKDL shall only be granted on consent of the
custodian and after signing a non-disclosure agreement with the TKDL unit of
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR).
38.(1) The Central Government may take any measures necessary to oppose,
prevent or get revoked, the grant of patents or any other form of intellectual
property protection, within India or abroad, which is based on traditional knowledge
obtained or derived from India.
(2) The Central Government may constitute such schemes and programs, as
it deems necessary, for the protection, in-situ preservation, promotion and
sustainable development of traditional knowledge obtained or derived from India,
as per the spirit of this Act.
39.(1) The State Government may take any measures necessary to oppose,
prevent or get revoked the grant of patents or any other form of intellectual
property protection, within India, which is based on traditional knowledge obtained
or derived from its jurisdiction.
(2) The State Government may constitute such schemes and programs, as
it deems necessary, for the protection, preservation, promotion and development
of traditional knowledge, as per the spirit of this Act.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
40.(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the NATK shall, in the
discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions
on  questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from
time to time:
Provided that the NA TK shall, as far as practicable, be given opportunity
to express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of
policy or not shall be final.
41.(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the State Board shall, in
the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such
directions on questions of policy as the State Government may give in writing to
it from time to time:
Provided that the State Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under this
sub-section.
(2) The decision of the State Government whether a question is one of
policy or not shall be final.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
Functions of
the Central
Government.
Functions of
the State
Government.
National
Authority to
be bound by
the directions
given by
Central
Government.
Power of the
State
Government to
give directions.
17

42.(1) Every determination, order or adjudication made by the NA TK in regard
to any dispute shall be given in such form and after following such procedure as
may prescribed by rules made by the Central Government:
Provided that before determining, ordering or adjudicating, the parties
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(2) While adjudicating any dispute under this section, the NATK shall be
guided by the principles of natural justice.
43. Any person, aggrieved by any determination or order of the NATK or State
Board under this Act, may file an appeal to the respective High Court within sixty
days from the date of communication to him, of the determination or order of the
NATK or State Board, as the case may be:
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the said period,
allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding sixty days.
44. Every determination or order made by the NA TK or by the High Court in
any appeal against any determination or order of the NATK shall, on a certificate
issued by any officer of the NATK or the Registrar of the High Court, as the case
may be, be deemed to be decree of the civil court and shall be executable in the
same manner as a decree of that court.
45. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central
Government or the State Government or any officer of the Central Government or
the State Government or any member, officer or employee of the NA TK or the State
Board for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this
Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
46. The offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
47. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation
of, the provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to
bio-diversity.
48. The Central Government may give directions to any State Government as
to the carrying into execution in the State of any of the provisions of this Act or
of any rule or regulation or order made thereunder.
49. No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on
a complaint made by—
(a) the Central Government, appropriate government, NATK, State Boards
or any authority or officer authorized in this behalf by that Government; or
(b) any knowledge society or user under sub-section (3) of section (4)
who has given notice of not less than thirty days in the prescribed manner,
of such offence and of his intention to make a complaint, to the Central
Government, appropriate government, NATK, State Boards or an officer
authorized as aforesaid.
50.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for any of the following matters, namely:–
(i) form of letter of recognition and provisions of deemed license under
sub-section (5) of section 3;
(ii) manner of felicitation under sub-section (2) of section 7;
(iii) terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and members
under sub-section (1) of section 13;
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
Settlement of
disputes.
Appeals.
Execution of
determination
or order.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Offences to becognizable andnon- bailable.
Act to haveeffect inaddition toother Acts.
Power ofCentralGovernment togive directionsto StateGovernment.
Cognizance of
offences.
Power of
Central
Government to
make rules.
18

(iv) powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub-section (2) of
section 13;
(v) procedure under sub-section (4) of section 13 in regard to transaction
of business at meetings;
(vi) allowances of committee members under sub-section (2) of
section 14.
(vii) form in which the annual statement of account shall be prepared
under sub-section (1) of section 21;
(viii) form of application and payment of fees for undertaking activities
under sub-section (1) of section 35;
(ix) the additional matter in which the NA TK may exercise powers of the
civil court under sub-section (1)(viii) of section 23;
(x) the manner of giving notice under sub-section (5) of section 22;
(xi) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect
of which provision is to be made, by rules.
(3) Every rule made under this section and every regulation made under this
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session or a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule
or regulation.
51.(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:–
(i) form of application for recognition as custodian and the manner for
transfer of traditional knowledge under sub-section (2) of section 35;
(ii) manner of felicitation under sub-section (4) of section 6;
(iii) terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and members
under sub-section (1) of section 25;
(iv) powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub-section (2) of
section 25;
(v) procedure under sub-section (4) of section 25 in regard to transaction
of business at meetings;
(vi) the manner of maintaining and auditing the accounts of the State
Board and the date before which its audited copy of the accounts
together with auditor’s report thereon shall be furnished under section 32;
(vii) manner in which the application to be forwarded to NA TK under
sub-section (2) of section 33;
(viii) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in
respect of which provision is to be made, by rules.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
Power of State
Government to
make rules.
19

(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House,
before that House.
52. The NA TK shall, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
53.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act,
remove the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of
two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be,
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
10
5Power to give
effect to the
provisions of
the Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
20

21
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is one of the oldest societies of the world, as well as one that has been
most aware and conscious of its surroundings. Its observations over the years
have translated into one of the largest repositories of knowledge about medicinal
preparations, methods of treatment, literature, music, art forms, designs, marks etc.
as well as a vast range of know-how, skills, innovations, practices and learnings.
Collectively, this constitutes India’s traditional knowledge, which has become, in
many ways, an expression of our culture.
The advancement of science, technology and commerce offers considerable
opportunities for the benefit and spread of India’s traditional knowledge. However,
since many of the indigenous communities who are its custodians still rely on their
traditional knowledge for their livelihood and identity, its misappropriation can
severely prejudice their interests. For instance, patenting and intellectual property
protection grants ownership and exclusive rights of use over innovative knowledge.
There have already been several attempts to acquire such exclusive access to India’s
traditional knowledge, which is a gross injustice. Traditional knowledge is neither an
innovation nor held by any single person. Rather it is passed down and refined over
several generations and therefore may not be considered as ‘intellectual property’.
Even as the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) holds consultations
to define and provide guidelines for traditional knowledge and its management,
India must appropriate all its traditional knowledge to ensure that any application
of it is accompanied with recognition of its original custodians. Moreover, India
must ensure that the application of traditional knowledge does not harm the
interests of its custodians and the benefits are equitably shared between the
knowledge societies and the users.
In this regard, India has even set up an innovative and one-of-its-kind
‘Traditional Knowledge Digital Library’ to classify and codify India’s traditional
knowledge so that it can be offered as ‘prior art’ to prevent the grant of erroneous
patents. Parliamentary recognition shall give it the due importance it deserves to
protect India’s interests. However, it should be complimented with a system of
registration that identifies the traditional knowledge with its rightful custodians.
The protection of traditional knowledge must ensure that there is enough
incentive for research and innovation and for its benefits to be shared in a fair manner.
There is a vast amount of social benefit from further development of traditional
knowledge, and it must equally reward those who are willing to invest in it.
This Bill recognizes the complete and absolute right of the Union of India over
the traditional knowledge that exists within its national territory. In addition, it
recognizes the contribution of specific communities in the development of the
traditional knowledge by giving them certain rights, including the right to self-
determination. The Bill also proposes administrative framework to manage traditional
knowledge in India.
Legislation is required so that traditional knowledge of India is rightly
attributed, correctly defined and its use appropriately incentivized to maximize its
potential benefits.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                    SHASHI THAROOR
17 February, 2022.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 12 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish a
NATK. It also provides for appointment of a Chairperson and other members to
the NA TK. Clause 13 provides for conditions of service of Chairperson and
members. Clause 15 of the Bill provides for appointment of Officers and other
employees to the NA TK. Clause 18 provides the salaries and allowances payable
to the members and the administrative expenses of the NATK. Clause 19 of the Bill
provides that Central Government shall provide grants and loans to the NA TK for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. Clause 20 provides for the constitution of
a National Traditional Knowledge Fund. Clause 35 of the Bill provides that NATK
shall give wide publicity for application for grant of custodianship of traditional
knowledge to a knowledge society. Clause 36 provides for creation of a Traditional
Knowledge Docketing System. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees ten crore would be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seventy-five crore is also likely
to be involved.
22

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 50 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
23

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the in-situ protection, preservation, promotion
and sustainable development of India’s Traditional
Knowledge and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Shashi Tharoor, M.P .)