1
THE LABOUR FORCE (DEMAND AND SUPPLY SURVEY)
BILL, 2014
By
SHRI RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for conducting yearly demand and supply survey of labour force across
various  sectors  of economy in order to provide demand and supply estimates of
employment and bridge the gap between demand and supply of labour force
 for effective performance of the economy.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Labour Force (Demand and Supply Survey) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Committee" means the Advisory Committee constituted under section 3;
(b) "Fund" means the Labour Survey Fund constituted under section 5;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 87 of  2014
Definitions.
5
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) "labour force" includes workers employed or employable or seeking
employment in organised or unorganised sector; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Governments,
constitute an Advisory Committee to conduct yearly survey of demand and supply of labour
force.
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of members
including experts, as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of the
Chairperson and members of the Committee, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Committee shall have its headquarters at Delhi and may establish its regional
office in every district.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff, as may
be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Committee.
4. The Committee shall—
(i) collect and maintain yearly information on demand and supply of labour
force through survey across various sectors of economy;
(ii) maintain a consolidated report of demand and supply mismatch by dividing
the working-age group population into three mutually exclusively categories, namely,
demand, supply and requirement;
(iii) in consultation with the State Governments, conduct demographic analysis
of labour market and suggest measures to bridge the gap between demand and supply
of labour force mismatch in different sectors of economy;
(iv) submit periodical reports, in such form and manner, as may be specified by
the Central Government; and
(v) carry out such other tasks as may be assigned by the Central Government for
the purposes of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Labour
Survey Fund.
(2) The Fund shall be administered by the Chairperson of the Committee.
(3) The Fund shall be utilized by the Chairperson of the Committee to meet the
expenditure in connection with any work relating to yearly surveys under this Act.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide such sums to the Labour Survey Fund as may be necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. (1) The Central  Government may, by  notification in Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, each House of the State Legislature,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, Parliament or, as the case may
be, the State Legislature agrees in making any modification in the rule or agrees that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of Advisory
Committee.
Functions of
the
Committee.
Constitution of
Labour Survey
Fund.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to make
to rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Due to globalization and technological progress, there has been a considerable growth
in demand for labour with higher skills whereas the supply has not grown correspondingly.
Therefore, projections on demand and supply of labour force require conducting of a
detailed survey from time to time to identify emerging trend of demand and supply in labour
market.
The demand and supply of labour force study also helps to know about how jobs are
changing and what knowledge, skills, educational qualifications and competence are required
to be developed to meet the need of labour market.
There is also a need to have a clearer idea of how supply and demand of  labour force
can match. This information is crucial to understand if there is  a mismatch between  skills
possessed by workers and skills required by the employers.
Therefore, it is proposed to conduct a yearly survey on demand and supply of labour
force in order to match the dynamics of the labour market.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJIV PRATAP RUDY
June 30, 2014.
3

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of an Advisory Committee to conduct
yearly survey on demand and supply of labour force in various sectors. Clause 5 provides
for constitution of a Labour Survey Fund to meet expenditure in connection with any work
relating to yearly surveys. Clause 6 provides for supply of funds to the Labour Survey Fund
by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
one hundred crore is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
incurred.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for conducting yearly demand and supply survey of labour force across
various sectors of economy in order to provide demand and supply estimates
of employment and bridge the gap between demand and supply of labour
force for effective performance of the economy.
————
(Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1754LS—31.07.2014.