1
THE PREVENTION OF ADVERSE PHOTOGRAPHY BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to prevent adverse photography with a view to ensure that advancement in photography
and drone technology does not lead to violation of privacy of individuals or
servicemen on the line of duty or pose threat to the places of national or
strategic importance.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Adverse Photography Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 108 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "adverse", in relation to photography, means  making video recording or
taking photograph of a person without that person's implied or express consent and
where such recording or photography is defamatory, distressful or capable of causing
considerable damage to that person;
(b) "drone" means any non-State, manned or unmanned, aerial vehicle which is
capable of taking photographs or creating videos;
(c) "photography" means the process of producing images or videos of object
using any device including, but not limited to, cameras, mobile phones, camcorders
and other recording devices; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
P
ROHIBITION OF ADVERSE PHOTOGRAPHY
3. No person shall, for private consumption, indulge in adverse photography and take
photograph of an unrelated individual without his consent.
4. No person shall indulge in photography, adverse or otherwise, or obtain or cause to
obtain such photographs of policemen, defence personnel or any other servicemen on the
line of duty for public consumption in a manner in which—
(a) individual is personally identifiable; and
(b) private or sensitive information of such individual is photographed.
5. No person shall indulge in photography or take or cause to take photographs of a
private property if the owner of such property explicitly by signage so prohibits:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a private property which is generally
open to public unless specially prohibited in the interest of national security or public safety.
6. (1) Every owner of a drone shall register such details of drone, as may be prescribed,
with such authority of the Central Government, as may be designated for this purpose.
(2)  No person shall use drone technology to capture photographs of places of national
or strategic importance without the prior permission of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation,
Government of India.
(3) In addition to punishment which may be imposed on a person violating the provisions
of sub-section (2), a drone found capturing photographs in violation of sub-section (2) may
also be shot down.
CHAPTER III
P
UNISHMENTS
7. Whoever contravenes the provision of section 3 shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend upto three years or fine which shall not be less than rupees one
lakh.
Definitions.
Provisions for
violation of
individual
privacy for
private
consumption.
Provisions for
violation of
privacy of
policemen,
servicemen or
defence
personnel on
the line of
duty.
Provisions for
private
property
photography.
Provisions for
use of drone
technology.
Punishment
for violation
of individual
privacy for
private
consumption.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
8. Whoever contravenes the provision of section 4 shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend upto three years or fine which shall not be less than rupees five
lakh.
9. Whoever contravenes the provision of section 5 shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend upto three years or fine which shall not be less than rupees one
lakh.
10. Whoever contravenes the provision of sub-sections (1) or (2) of section 6 shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which
may extend upto seven years and with fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakh.
CHAPTER IV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order or direction shall be made after the expiration of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
12. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Punishment
for violation
of privacy of
policemen,
servicemen or
defence
personnel on
the line of
duty.
Punishment
for violation
of provisions
for private
property
photography.
Punishment
for violation
of provisions
to curb illegal
drone
photography.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The last few years have seen significant improvement in photography technology.
Every person today carries a camera phone in his pocket. Every day, a number of cases are
reported where misguided elements of the society capture inappropriate pictures or videos,
especially of women. The Current section 354 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 dealing with
punishment for outraging the modesty of a woman is insufficient to deal with misuse of
adverse photography for two reasons—Firstly, it is not gender neutral. Secondly, secretly
capturing someone's photo may not directly and immediately have a component of assault
or criminal force or done with the intent to outrage a woman's modesty. But such an immoral
act should be illegal nonetheless.
Additionally, capturing, communicating or displaying of faces of policemen, servicemen
or defence personnel on the line of duty could be of significant threat to operations or to
their families. In certain democracies, such act of capturing photos of armed personnel is
explicitly covered under counter-terrorism acts. Reporting of any operation by media
professions is quintessential but that also carries the duty of not causing harm, intentional
or unintentional, to the security of either the nation or the families of forces.
Moreover, number of countries around the world are trying to minimise the threats
posed by drones by regulating the usage of drone technology. The number of drones is only
going to rise in future and we need to have a pre-emptive legislation to ensure the safety of
our skies. At the same time, drones are being developed across the world with specific intent
of understanding the structures or creating the replicas of places of strategic importance.
Such drones vary from the size of aerial toys to large scale planes. Recently, a person was
captured with a small sized drone flying around the Prime Minister's residence. Repetition of
such an incidence can't be tolerated under any circumstances.
Currently, foreign citizen require a "permit" for creating documentary or television
show or feature films. The permit process can take thirty days. The Bill seeks to remove the
distinction between foreign nationals and Indian citizens creating photographs or videos so
long as it is done for personal consumption and to prescribe punishment for violation of the
provisions.
However, the permit will still be required for all photographs/videos created or used
for commercial or public purposes including use at various international forums and
competitions.
The Bill, therefore, with a view to prevent the misuse of adverse photography seeks to
provide for:—
(i) prohibition of taking photograph of unrelated individual without his consent
for private consumption;
(ii) prohibition of taking photograph of policemen or servicemen on the line of
duty for public consumption which is personally identifiable or sensitive;
(iii) prohibition of photography of private property explicitly prohibited by
owner; and
(iv) registration of drones and restriction on the use of drones for specific
purposes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
February 12, 2016.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent adverse photography with a view to ensure that advancement in photography
and drone technology does not lead to violation of privacy of individuals or
servicemen on the line of duty or pose threat to the places of national
or strategic importance.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—28LS(S3)—26.04.2016.