1
THE POPULATION (STABILISATION) BILL, 2017
By
DR.  RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK'
A
BILL
to increase the minimum age of marriage for woman from eighteen years to twenty one
years and to establish a National Population Stabilisation Authority to look into
the schemes to encourage two-child norm and having an appropriate gap
between children, incentivising adoption, creating recreational centres
in villages, formulating policies wherein certain minimum criteria is
present before a family can start having children and for all
matters  connected herewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population (Stabilisation) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  87 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "annual report" means a report giving the details of developmental activities
taken up and targets set and achieved over the year by the Authority;
(b) "Authority" means the National Population Stabilisation Authority
established under section 4;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act; and
(d) "small family" means family having not more than two living children.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the minimum age for marriage for woman shall be twenty one years.
4. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in
Official Gazette appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority
to be known as the National Population Stabilisation Authority.
(2) The Authority shall consist of:—
(a) the Director General of Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare—ex-officio Chairperson;
(b) the Secretaries of the Union Ministries of Human Resource Development,
Health and Family Welfare and Statistics and Programme Implementation—
ex-officio Members;
(c) the Director, International Institute of Population Sciences—ex-officio
Member;
(d) the Director, National Institute of Health and Family Welfare—ex-officio
Member;
(e) Senior Research Officer or equivalent officer of Population Research
Centres, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare—ex-officio Member;
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the functioning of the Authority.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and terms and conditions of services of
officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Authority shall discharge such functions as may be necessary to ensure
stabilisation of population in the country and formulate a comprehensive policy within one
year after its constitution to achieve the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), the Authority
shall—
(a) undertake a baseline study to collect data about small families and to help
arrive at a qualitative human dignity index which shall be completed within one year
of setting up of the Authority;
(b) recommend to the Central Government, a framework to regulate families to
have children based on certain minimum standards fixed, including the human dignity
index;
(c) formulate schemes to provide for subsidised healthcare, education upto
college level for the first child and to the second child only if gap between children is
greater than four years;
(d) provide for funds to help incentivise adoption of children;
Minimum age
of marriage
for woman.
Constitution
of National
Population
Stabilisation
Authority.
Meetings of
the Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(e) establish recreational centres at panchayat level to host traditional art forms
and also use them as medium to disseminate messages regarding family planning;
(f) recommend to the Central Government penalties to those who do not follow
the said policies framed by the Authority;
(g) undertake, promote and publish studies relating to the Indian population
and the impact of developmental schemes on population stabilisation;
(h) frame syllabus for including awareness about family planning in school
curriculum;
(i) provide for free contraceptives devices through the recreational centres;
(j) conduct awareness compaigns relating to medical procedures regarding birth
control and strive to improve sterilisation rates among men, in particular; and
(k) undertake such other activities as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(3) The Authority shall disseminate any necessary knowledge and information
collected, to the respective departments of the State Governments.
7. (1) The Authority shall prepare once every year, a report giving the summary of its
activities undertaken during the previous year and statement of annual accounts to the
Central Government in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall cause such report to be laid before each House of
Parliament as soon as it is received.
8. The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or give
such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it be necessary
or expedient for the removal of any difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions, aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have affect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Annual report
and its laying
before the
Parliament.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
According to the last census of 2011, the population of our country stood at one
hundred and twenty-one crores. The Government estimates that it is approxiamtely one
hundred and twenty-seven crores in 2016 and by 2025 it will be one hundred and thirty-nine
crores. The annual rate of growth has been about 2 per cent with a total fertility rate at
2.3 per cent. India spans 2.4 per cent of the land area of the world but contains 15 per cent of
the world population. One fact to note is that more than 50 per cent of this population is
within the reproductive age of 18—50 years. Expert reports suggest that the population in
India will stabilize only around the year 2045. This growing population creates enormous
stress on infrastructure and leads to rapid usage of natural resources. This population
pressure leads to deterioration of the quality of basic human sustenance.
Our country has the largest number of under-nourished children and malnourished
woman. We have one of the highest number of illiterate children in the world. The huge
population is one of the main reasons which has led to such a pathetic scenario. The primary
infrastructure needed for survival is crumbling fast. This problem of un-controlled growth in
population has various socio-economic reasons. One major factor is that families in our
country, mainly in the rural areas, equate more kids to safer livelihood. The poverty prevalent
in large parts of our country, creates a situation where more children means more hands to go
to work and earn for the household. Another contributing factor has been social practices
like child marriage or marriage at an early age which leads to a scenario where the first
pregnancy happens early. Some studies also point out the idle lifestly among people in
villages, as a causative reason for this. Even though medical science has shown rapid
advancements, lack of awareness among the rural parts of our country has still kept large
portions of our society in darkness.
The Bill seeks to increase the minimum age of marriage of woman from 18 years to
21 years. This will ensrue that the woman is better informed and attains greater mental
maturity before having her first child. Also, it is proposed in this Bill to constitute a National
Population Stabilisation Authority consisting of Membes from the concerned Ministries and
expert bodies. This body will be responsible for stabilizing the population growth in the
country. It will recommend measures wherein, a family will be allowed to have a child only
when certain basic living conditions are present and if they are absent, this body will take
measures to provide for the same. It will also bring in schemes to provide for subsidised
healthcare and higher education along with assured job opportunities for the first child. The
same will be applicable for the second child only if the gap between two children is greater
than four years and will be discontinued if the family has more than two children. It will work
to frame a policy providing for greater incentives to the girl child. The body shall organise
greater awareness campaigns regarding medical science relating to contraceptives and surgical
birth control procedures. It shall also help develop recreational centres in rural areas which
will host traditional art forms to keep the community engaged and also use it as a mode of
spreading the Government’s message.
This Bill, by providing a comprehensive plan to help stabilise the population, will help
to fill the long pending void for a legislation in the area of population control. Development
in both the social and economic aspects of the people is the best solution to control popu-
lation and the independent body established by this Bill, will aim to work towards this
objective. this will result in higher standards of living for the citizens of the country, thereby
creating greater quality of human capital which is much needed in India’s journey to become
a developed superpower.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIY AL 'NISHANK'
March 31, 2017.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of National Population Stabilisation
Authority and also appointment of such number of officers and staffs for its functioning.
Clause 8 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the  Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees
two thousand crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to increase the minimum age of marriage for woman from eighteen years to twenty one
years and to establish a National Population Stabilisation Authority to look into
the schemes to encourage two-child norm and having an appropriate gap
between children, incentivising adoption, creating recreational centres
in villages, formulating policies wherein certain minimum criteria is
present before a family can start having children and for all
matters connected herewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank', M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—556LS(S3)—24-06-2017.