'( iI. 
BiBBo. 88 of 1861 " .... ,... 
THE CENTRAL. SILK BOARD (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1952 
(As IlfTBODUOIID Iii 'l'BE HOVSI OF THB PaonB) 
A 
HILL 
further to amend the Oentral Bilk Board Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows :-
1. Short tttle.-This Aet may be called the Central Sil!k Board 
(Amendment) Act, 1982. 
i. AlneDd!DIDt Of section 4, Act LXI of 1H8.-In seotion 4 of the 
Central Silk Board Act, Hl48 (hereinafter referred to 88 the principal Act), 5 
for clause (e) of sub-section (3), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
~'(c) •• 0 persone elected by the members of the House of the 
People from among themselves and one person eleeted by the 
members of the Council of States from among themselves". 10 
8. Amendment of, IICtion 6, Act LXI of 1948.-1n se('tion 6 of the 
principal Act, ill Bub-section (1), for the words "The Board shall flooct 
from among its members", the words "The Central Government shall 
appoint from among the members of ~e Board" shall be substituted. 
t. AmendmlDt of aectJoD 13, Act' LXI of 1948.-1n section 1B of the 15 
principal Act, in clause (b) of sub-seetion (9), the words "the election of 
the Vice-Chairman of the Board ; and" shall be omitted. 

G 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS ANP. REASONS 
The silk industry in Indio. has been passing through a· series of vicis-
situdes. The Govenlment of India consider that in order to' place this 
industry on a ltable foundation it is necessary that the Government should 
have a more effective voice in the control exercised over the silk industry 
by the Central SUk Board. 
As the Act at present stands, the control of the Central Govenlment is 
t'xereised by the Central Silk Board, and the Minister for Commerce and 
Industry is the Chainnan of the Board. The Secretary of the Board is 
appointed by Government in oonsultation with the Board. The Chairman 
is alBo a Member of the Standing Committee, but· by reason of the fact 
that the Minister cllnnot give his olose personal attention to this matter, 
co-ordination of the activities of the Board with effective control by the 
Ministry is not possible, which is not satisfactory. It seems desirable • 
. considering the difficult circumstances in which this industry is placed, that 
the Government should give the question of the well-being of this industry 
close and continuous attention. It is felt that if the Vice-Chairman is a 
Government Official appointed by Government, he could take greater 
interest in the work of the Board. Besides being the Vice-Cha.irman, he 
will aIRo be II Member of the Standing Committee, and such attention would 
undoubtedly be necessary during the next five. or six years until the industry 
gets stabilised. Section 6 is therefore amended empowering the Govern-
ment to appoint fl'om among the Members of the Board a Vice-Chainnan_ 
Amendment to "ection 13 is a. consequential one. . 
Advantage is taken of this opportunity to amend section 4 so as to 
provide sepllrately for the representation on the Board of the' Council of 
States. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 14th July, 1952. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI, 

3 
ANNEXURE 
EUBAOT8 !'BOil TBB C'lIxTaAl. SILK BOABD AOT, 1948 (LXI I)Jr 1948) • 
... ... ... 
Beotion 4. 
t. OoDItltutlon of the Board.-
* ... ... 
... 
'" 
(3) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:"":' 
... '" '" '" 
(c) Two persons elected by the members of the Parliament from 
among themselves, in such manner as may be prescribed ; 
'" '" '" '" 
Beotioft 6 
6. Vice-Ohalnnan and Standtnl Oommittee.-(l) The Board sbe.l!l 
eleet from among its members ~ Vice~Chairman who shall exercise such 
of the powers and perform such of the duties of the Chairman as may be 
prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairman. 
'" '" '" '" 
Sectioft 18 
11. Power of O.~tra1 Government to make rul8l.-
... '" ... '" 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, luch rules may provide for-
'" '" '" '" 
(b) the election of the Vice-Chairman of the Board; and the delegation, 
to the Standing Committee, to the Vice-Chairman, or to members or 
officers of 1;he Board, of any of the powers and duties of the Board under 
~il Act: 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Central Silk Board Aot, 1948. 
(8kri T. T. K rishnamachari, 
Minister for Oommeroe antlloo'U8try) 
GlPD-LAD-I5B4P8- 17-7.152-UOO 