Bill No. 88 of 1962 
THE BLECTRICITY (SUPPLY) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LoJ: SABRA 
ON 3ID SIP'OMBBI, 1963) 
r~ .'\RUAMENl LllSttAlU 
No ... ~ ................... --
~&t.f\ •• ~J:.l1;_€..~.;; 

BiU No. 88 of 1,63 
THE ELECTRICITY (SUPPLY) AMENDMENT BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted. by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called. the Electricity (Supply) Amendment Shon tide. 
Act, 1~62. I . 
5 2. After section 20 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, the Insertion)f 
following section shall be inserted namely:- new lection 
10 
, 2oA. 
"20A. Without prejudice to the generality of the power of Pow~r to 
the Board to acquire eny property, the Board may acquire from ;:~i': •. 
the State Government on lease any project relating to the gene- etc., on 
ration of electricity and all transmission lines and other works lease. 
connected with such project on such terms and conditions, in-
cluding terms and conditions relating to the operation and main-
tenance of the project, as may be agreed. upOn between the State 
Government and the Board .... 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Koyna Hydro-Electric Project in the State of Maharashtra 
is being financed by a loan from the International Bank for Re-
construction and Development. Although the project is being 
executed by the State Government of MlBhall'ashtra departmentally, 
the intention was to transfer it to the State Electricity Board on 
completion pursuant to the loan agreement with the International 
Bank. 
2. The loan agreement with. the International Bank provides tbat 
the rates for the sale of electricity generated by the project would 
be fixed at such level as would ensure that the earnings from the 
operati~n of the project would after providing for all operating ex-
penses, including taxes, 'adequate depreciation, mterest and repay-
ment of all loans and advances, aHow for a reasonable contribution 
towards the cost of expansion of power facilities of the Electricity 
Board. An out and out transfer of the project to the Board would 
involve tr'msfer to the Board of the liability of the State Govern-
ment regarding the payment of interest and principal of the loan. 
The Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, does not permit such payment 
from the revenues of the Board and hence such payment cannot be 
taken :inIto account in the fixation of the rates of supply. An outright 
transfer of the project to the Board would, therefore, stand in the 
way of compliance with the stipulations in the loan agreement with 
the Bank. It is proposed to overcome the difficulty by empowering 
the Board to acquire the project on laue. Having regard to the 
scheme of the Act, however, doubt., have been expressed 81 to the 
power of the Board to operate any project on lease. An express 
proviSion is, therefore, considered necessary in this respect. Hence 
this Bill. ' 
HAFIZ MOHD. mRAHIM. 
NEW Da.Iu; : 
The 25th AuguR. 1962. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. 
(Hafiz Mohammad Ibrahim, 
Minister of Irrigation and Power.) 