As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 88 of 1987 
THE NATIONAL' DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD BILL, 1987 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Declaration of National Dairy Development Board as an insti-
tution of national importance. 
3. Definitions. 
CHAPTER U 
THE NATIONAL' DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
4. Incorporation of National Dairy Development Board. 
5. Vesting of undertakings of Indian Dairy Corporation in Na-
tional Dairy Development Board and dissolution of Indian Dairy 
Corporation. 
6. Effect of incorporation of National Dairy Development Board. 
7. S$ving of legal proceedings. 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGEMEN'lI OF THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEvELoPMENT BoARD 
8. Management of National Dairy Development Board and compo-
sition of its Board of Directors. 
9. Terms of office and conditions of service, etc., of Chairman and 
directors. 
10. Meetings of Board. 
11. Manner of transacting busit1£!!ls of Board. 
12. Management committees. 
13. Allowances, etc;, of members of rtlanagerrtent committees. 
14. Delegation of poW!!rs to managemertt cammtttees, etc. 
15. Delegation of powers to whole-time directors, etc. 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BoARD 
16. Powersa.nd functions of National Dairy Development Board. 
2 1 AUG 1So/ 

ii ': .... .. " 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO DIRECTORS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE NATIONAL 
DAIRY· DEvELoPMENT BoAltD 
CLAUSES 
r7. Prov;sions· regarding members of board of society and directors 
of dissolved company. 
18. Provisions relating to officers and other employees of society 
and of dissolved company. 
19. Power of Board to restructure and streamline organisational 
and functional set up of National Dairy Development Board to 
secure utmost efficiency in functioning. 
20. Schemes regarding compensation to redundant employees, etc. 
21. Compensation for transfer of employees not payable. 
22. Provident fund, gratuity, welfare and other fu,nds. 
CHAPTER VI 
FINANCE, AlCCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
:!3. Borrowing powers of Board. 
24. Grant.s and loans by Central Government. 
2;'). Grants, donations, etc. 
~. National Dairy Development Board Fund. 
~:7. Preparation of accounts and balance-sheet 
28. Audit. 
29. Reports to be laid before Parliament. 
30. Power to call for repayment before agreed period. 
31. Special provisions for enforcement of claims by National Dairy 
Development Board. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
32. Defects in appointments not to invalidate acts, etc. of Board. , 
33. Protection of acts done in good faith. 
34. Indemnity of directors. 
35. Obligation as to fidelity and seerecy. 
36. Recruitment of additional officers and other employees. 
:17. Liquidation only under orders of Central Government. 
3'J. Delegation of certain powers by Central Government. 
;J9. Transitional provisions for auditors. 
40. Trasitional provisions with regard to Chairman and Board. 
41. Management or assistance to others to continue. 
42. Mother Dairy to be a subsidiary unit of National Dairy Deve-
lopment Board. 
43. Formation of companies with previous approval of Central 
Government. 

iii 
CLAUSES 
44. Exemption from tax on income. 
45. Power to make schemes and regulations regarding service 
matters retrospectively. 
46. Retrospectively operation of schemes and regulations regarding 
service matters retrospectively. 
47. Act to have oveniding effect. 
48. Power to make regulations. 
49. Power to remove difticulties. 
50. ScheInlOS and regulations to be laid before Parliament. 
TH'J SCHEDULE. 

11 of 1860. 
.'; . 
1 alit". 
Bill No. 88 01 Its'71 
THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD BILL, 198'7 
A 
BILL 
to decmre the institution known as the Nati.anal Dairy Development 
Board in the State of Gujarat to be an institution of national impo-r. 
tance and to provide for its incorporation and for the vesting in that 
body corporate of the undertakings of the Ind:.an Dairy Corporation 
with a view to provide for the administration and the carrying on 
of the functions to be perfctrmed by the body corporate more effec-
tively throughout the country and for matters connected therewith 
and incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS the National Dairy Development Board, a society fonned 
and registered ,under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 has been serv-
ing the country by the adoption of a co..operative strategy, being a 
strategy evolved at Anand (Gujarat). for the economic development of 
the rural masses and has been playin,g a vital role in improving the 
quality of life of the people through co-operative effort; 
AND WHEREAS the objects of the National Dairy Development Board 
are such as to make it an institution of national importance and to consti-
tute it as a body corporate; 
. • AND WHEREAS the functions of the Indian Dairy Corporation. If com-
pany, formed and re~!1:ered under the ·'Comp.anies Act. 1956. and the 
functions of tbe National Dairy Development Board are complementary 
to each, other and aimed at achieving common objectives; 

8bort 
title 
and 
Com-
mence-
ment 
Declara.. 
tion of 
NatlODal 
Dairy 
Develop-
ment 
Board 
u an 
iD&t1tu-
tlon of 
ilatiClnal 
Impor-
tance .. 
Defini-
tions. 
2 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary that the freedom and flexibility of ope-
ration hitherto available to the National Dairy Development Board 
should continue to be available to it so as to enable it to perform its 
functions more effectively and to playa wider and increasingly impor-
tant role in serving the nation; 
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to vest the undertakings of 
the Indian Dairy Corporation in the National Dairy Development Board 
and to dissolve the said Corporation with a view to provide for the 
administration and the carrying on of the functions to be performed by 
the body corporate more effectively. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PdLIMnrARY 
t. (1) This Act may be called the National Dairy Development Board 5 
Act, 1987. I 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notiflcation in the OfRcial Gazette, appoint. 
2. Whereas the objects of the National Dairy Development Board at 
Anand in the State of Gujarat are such as to make the institutien one 10 
of national Importance, it is hereby deelared that the National !)airy 
Development Board is an institution of national importance. 
3: In this Act, unless the context otherwise'requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the date of commencement of this 
Act; l' 
(b) ·'Board" means the Board csf Directors of the Natimal 
Dairy Development Board; 
(e), "Chairman" means the Chairman of the National Dairy 
Dew10pment Board; 
(eI) "Companies At!t" means the Companies Act, 1956: 20 1 Gl19S6. 
(e) ··director" means a director of the National Dairy De~ 
ment Board; and includes the Chairman; 
(f) "foodstuffs" means sueh of the foodstuffs as are included in 
the definition of essential eommodities as contained in clause (a) of 
section· 2 of the E6sential Commodities .Act. 1955; 251001 195', 
(11) "Indian Dairy Corporation" mees the Indian Dairy· eer,o.. 
ration, a company formed and registered un~r' the- Cbmpanies Ad, 
and having Its registered offtee at ~. fa the, State. of G\tjaratf 
• 

21 of 1860. 
10 
(h) "milk products" means-
(i) Jterirised, standardised, recombined, toned, double-
toned, skimmed, flavoured or acidified milk; 
(ii) ice-cream; 
(iii) cream; 
(iv) cheese; 
(v) butter; 
(vi) milk powders; 
(vii) wea:ling foods with milk and infant milk foods; 
(viii) malted milk foods with or without cocoa powder; 
(i:t') ghee; 
(x) anhydrous milk fat and butter oil; 
(xi) casein; 
(xii) any other product containing milk. Or ·an or any of 
15 the milk products specified above which the Central Govern-
ment may" by notification in the Official Gazette. specify in this 
behalf; 
• 
(0 "National Dairy Development Board" means the National 
Dairy Development Board incorporated under section 4; 
20 (j) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made under 
this Act; 
(k) "restructuring and sl reamlining" in relation to the organi-
sational and functional set LIp of the National Dairy Development 
Board. includes-
25 (i) opening or closing of units or offices; 
(ii) revision of the organisational and functional set-up; 
(iii) decla.ration of staff reqUired: 
(iv) integration of posts, fixation of seniority and pay 
BCaleS: 
30 (v) integration of required personnel in the revised set-up 
3S 
and issuance of appointment orders in that behalf; 
(vi) declaration or demarcation of duties and responsibilities 
attendant to posts; . 
(vii) declaration .of posts equivalent to one another; and 
(mii) any other matter that may be necessary or incidental 
to meet the organisational or functional needs of the National 
Dairy Development Board; 
(1) "society" means the National Dairy Development Board, a 
society formed and registered under the Societies Registration Act, 
1860 and functioning as such immediately before the appointed day; 
(m) words and expressions used herein and not defined, but 
defined in the Companies Act, have the meanings respeetively 
assigned tQ them in that Act. 

Inc0r-
poratiOn 
of 
National 
Dair7 
Deve-
10pJDeDt 
Board. 
vestins of 
under-
takinia 
of 
Indian 
Dah)o 
Cor-
porati 9n 
in 
National 
Dairy 
Deve-
lopment 
Board. 
aDd 
dieIolu-
dOD of 
lDdiau 
Dairy 
C0rpora-
tion. 
EJfectof 
iDcorpora-
National 
Dairy 
Develop. 
ment 
BOard. 
, 
4 
CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
4. (1) The National Dairy Development Board is hereby constituted 
a body corporate by the same name, and as such body corporate, it shall 
have perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to 5 
the provisions of this Act. to acquire, hold and dispose of property and 
to contract, and shall, by that name, sue and be sued. 
(2) The head office of the National Dairy Development Board shall 
be at Anand in the State of Gujarat. 
(3) The National Dairy Development Board may establish units, 10 
offices, branches or agencies at any such place in or outside India as it 
may consider necessary. 
5. (1) On and from the appointed day, subject to the other provisions 
of this Act, all the undertakings of the Indian Dairy Corporation shall 
stand transferred to and vest in the National Dairy Development Board. 15 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, the 
Indian Dairy Corporation shall, on and from the appointed day. stand 
dissolved by virtue of the provisions this Act. 
6. On and from the appointed day,-
(a) all properties and assets, movable and.. immovable. of, or 20 
belonging to, the societ.y and the Indian Dairy Corporation (herein-
after referred to as the dissolved company) shall vest in the National 
Dairy Development Board; 
tb) all the rights, debts, liabilities, interests. privileges and 
obligations of the society and the Indian Dairy Corporation shall 2S 
stand transferred to. and be the rights. liabilities, interesi.s, privileges 
and obligations of, the National Dairy ·Development Board; 
(c) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (b), all debts, 
I liabilities and obligations incurred. all contracts entered into and 
all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for, the society 30 
or the dissolved company, immedIately before the appointed day for 
or in connection with their purposes, shall be deemed to have been 
incurred, entered into, or engaged to be done by, with, or for, the 
National Dairy Development Board; 
• I 

10 
15 
20 
25 
J 
(d) all sums of money due to the society and the dissolved 
company, immediately before the appointed day, shall be deemed to 
be due to the~oard; 
(e) every subsidiary of the society and the dissolved company 
shall become the subsidiary of the National Dairy Development 
Board; 
(f) eve·ry organisation, which was being managed immediately 
before the appointed day by the society or, as the case may be, 
by the dissolved company, shall be managed by the National Dairy 
Development Board for such period to such extent and in such 
manner as the circumstances may require; 
(g) every organisation which was getting financial, managerial 
or technical assistance from the society or the dissolved company, 
immediately before the appointed day, may continue to be given 
financial, managerial or technical assistance, as the case may be, by 
the National Dairy Development Board, for such period, to such 
extent and in such manner as the National Dairy Development 
Board may deem fit; 
(h) the amount representing the capital of the dissolved company 
Shall form part of the funds of the National Dairy Development 
Board; 
(i) any reference to the SOCiety or, as the case may be; to the 
dissolved company, in any law other than this Act or in any Qontract 
or other instrument. shall be deemed to be reference to the National 
Dairy Development Board. 
11. If, on the appointed day, there is pending any suit, arbitration, 
appeal or other legal proceedings of whatever nature by or against the 
society or the dissolved company, the same shall not abate, be discon-
tinued or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason of the incor-
30 po ration of the National Dairy Development Board under section 4 or 
dissolution of the Indian Dairy Corporation under section 5, as the case 
may be, but the suit,· arbitration, appe~l or other proceedings may be 
continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the National Dairy 
Development Board in the same manner and to the same extent as it 
35 would or puly have been continued, prosecuted ~d enforced by or 
ag~inst the society or the dissolved company, as the case may be, it 
this Act had not been passed. 
CHAPTER m 
MANAGEMEln' OF THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEvI:r..oPM:ENT BoARD 
.0 8. (1) The general superintendence, direction, control and manage-
ment of the affairs and business of the National Dairy Development 
Board shall vest in a Board of Directors, which shall exercise all powers 
and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by the 
National Dairy Development Board. 
4~ (2) The Board of Directors of the National Dairy Development Board 
shall consist of the following, namely:-. 
(a) a Chairman; 
(b) one director from limongst the officials of the Central QQv-
knmerltj 
Saving of 
legal pro' 
ceedings. 
Mana,,, 
ment of 
National 
Dait"y 
Develop· 
ment 
Board 
and com. 
position 
of jis 
&ard ot 
Director!, 

'l'erms of 
Qfftce 
and con_ 
ditions of 
~ervice, 
e1c., of 
Chairman 
a!IU 
di!'c,.t~:s. 
6. 
(c) two directors from amongst the Chairmen. of the Stat~ 
Co-operative Dairy Federations; 
(d) whole-time directors, not more than three in number, from 
amongst the executives of the highest grade of the National Dairy 
Development Board; 5 
(e) one director, being an expert. from outside the National 
Dairy Development Board. 
(3) The Chairman and the director referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (2) shall be nominated by the Central Government and the 
dlrectors referred to in clauses (c), (d) and (e) of sub-section (2) shall l( 
be nominated by the Central Government after consultation with the 
Chairman: 
Provided. that the Chairman and the directo,r referred to in clause (e) 
of sub-section (2) shall be persons professionally qualified in one or more 
lpecilities, namely, dairying, animal husbandry, rural economics, rural 15 
development, business administration or banking. 
(4) The Board may associate with itself, in such manner, on such 
terms and for such purposes as it may deem fit, any person whose assis-
tance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the provisions of 
this Act, and a person So associated shall have the right to take part in 20 
the discussions of the Board relevant to the purposes for which he has 
been associated but shall not have the right to vote. 
9. (1) The Chairman shall be the Chief Executive of the National Dairy 
Development Board and shall hold office for such period as the Central 
Gowrnment may determine and any person so nominated shall be 25 
eligible for renomination. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
Central Government shall have the r.ght to terminate the services of the 
Chairman, at any time before the expiry of the period determined under 
that sub-section, by giving him notice of not less than three months in 30 
writing or three months salary and allowances in lieu thereof, and the 
Chairman shall also have the right to relinquish his office, at any time 
before the expiry of the period specified under that sub-section, by giving 
to the Central Government notice of not less than three ·months in 
writing. "\,.135 
(3) The Chairman shall receive such salary and al1owan~ as may be 
determined by the Central Government. 
(4) Where an executive of the National Dairy Development Board 
has been nominated uncler section '3 as a whole-time director thereof. 
such nomination shall be without prejudice to his continuance as an 40 
executive of the National Dairy Development Board and he may be con-
tinueci as such executive on his ceasing to be a director. 
(5) The directors nominated under clause (c) of SUb-section (2) of 
section 8 shall hold office for such period not exceeding one year 
at a time as the Central Government may determine. and the directors 45 
nominated under clauses (d) and (e) of sub-section (2) (If section 8 shall 
hold office for such period as the Central Government may determine. 

7 
(6) Every director, other than the Chairman, shall hold office during 
the pleasure of the Central Government. 
(7) The directors referred to in clauses (b), (c) and (e) of sub.-
section (2) of section 8 shall be paid such allowances as the Central 
5 Government may determine. 
10. (1) The Board shall meet at the head office of the National Meetings 
Dairy Development Board or any of its offices at such times as the of Board. 
Chairman may direct, and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard 
to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at 
10 its meetings) as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Chairman or, if he is unable to attend a meeting of the BoarcJ .. 
any other director nominated by the Chainnan in this behalf and, in the 
absence of such nomination or where there is no Chairman, any director 
chosen by the directo.rs present from among themselves, shall preside 
.15 at the meeting. . 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board 
shall be decided by a majority of votes of the directors present and 
votinlit. and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman or the 
person presiding shall have the right to exercise a second or castini 
20 vote. I I "-"-"" 
(4) Save as otherwise p;r.ovided lin sub·section (3), every ddrector 
of the Board shall have one vote. 
11. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shaR, in tha 
discharge of its functions, act on sound business principles with due 
25 regard to public interest. 
'(2) Save as otherwise prescribed, the Chairman shall have the powers 
of general superintendence, direction, control and management of the 
affairs and business of the National Dairy Development Board, and he may 
exercise all other powers and do all acts and things which may be exer-
3J cised or done by the Board. 
(3) The Chairman may, when he is unable to discharge his functicm'~: 
by reason of his being away or otherwise, authorise any whole-time 
director to discharge all or any of his functions for a temporary period. 
(4) In the absence of the Chairman and of an authorised whole.time 
35 director as referred to in sub-section (3), for whatsoever reason, the 
powers of the Chairman may be exercised by the senior-most of the 
whole.time directors referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (2) of 
section 8. 
12. (1) The Board may from time t9 time con::;titute such number of 
40 management committees as it may deem fit for the purpose of assisting 
the Board in the efficient discharge of its functions. 
(2) A management committee shall com;ist of such number of 
persons (whether directors or otherwise) as its members IlS the Board 
may determine. subject to the condition that in every such committee 
45 either tlte Chairman or a whole-time directl)r shall be a memher thereof, 
Manner 
of tran-
sacting 
bushl88a . 
of Board. 
Manage· 
m£mt 
commlt-
teell. 

Allow-
aDces, 
etc .• of 
mcmbera 
of 
manap 
meftt 
commit-
tees. 
Dele,s.. 
tion of 
powers 
to mana-
gement 
commit· 
. ~ees. etc. 
Delega_ 
tion of 
powers 
to whole-
time 
directors, 
etc. 
Powers 
and func· 
tio~ of 
National 
Dairy 
Develop· 
ment 
BoP!. 
8 
(3) Every management committee shall function under the general 
control, direction and superintendence of the Board, and for such dura-
tion and in such manner as the Board may direct. 
(4) The minutes of every meeting of the management committees 
shall, as soon as may be, be laid before the Board. 5 
13. (1) The members Of any management committee, other than the 
Chairman and whole-time directors, may be paid such allowances, if any, 
as may be prescribed, for attending the meetings of the management 
committee or for attending to any other work of the National Dairy 
Development Board. '10 
(2) All other matters pertaining to the conduct of proceedings of the 
management committees shall be such as may be prescribed. 
14. (1) The Board may delegate to any management committee or to 
any member thereof or to any officer of the National Dairy Development 
Board, subject t6 such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be sped- 15 
fied by the Board, such of its powers and functions under this Act as it 
may aeem necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions . 
(2) The Board may, if it considers it necessary so to do in the public 
interest. delegate any of its powers and functions, subject to such con-
ditions and limitations, if any" as may be specified by it, to a co-operative 20 
federation at the national or State level. or to any organisation owned, 
managed, controlled or assisted by the National Dairy Development 
Board. 
15. Tlle BMrd may, from time to time, by order, delegate, subject to 
Ruch general and special conditions as it may deem fit to impose. the 25 
powers of appointment, termination, suspension and clismissal from 
service of any employee of the National Dairy Development Board,-
(a) who is dra'wing a salarv in such higher grade al'! may be 
prescribed, t(' a whole-time director. and 
(b) who i!': drawing a salary in any grade, ot.her than a higher 30 
grade prescribed under clause' (a), to such officer of the National 
Dairy Developrn .. nt Board as it may deem fit: 
Provided that in relation to employeec:; falling under clause (bY, the 
Chairman may, if he f'onRiders it necessary or expedient so to do, perform 
the functions of the Board under this section. 35 
CHAPrER IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVEl.OPMENT 
BoARD 
16. (1) Subject to the nrovisi-ons of this Act,-
(a) it shall be thp duty and function of th(' National Dairy 40 
Development Board to promote ulan and organise programmes for 
the purposes of development of dairy and other agriculture ba,sed 
and allied industries and biologicals on an intensive and nation-wide 
basis and to render assistance 1'1 the implementation of such oro-
grammes; 
(bY it shall be the respon~jbi1itv of the National Dairy DeveloI>-
ment Board to adopt the ('ooOperative strategy in a more effective 

manner on an intensive and nation-wide basis and to take such step' 
as may be necessary for the purposes aforesaid; and 
(c) the National Dairy Development Board may take such 
measures for carrying out the said purposed, and fo.r the exercise of 
~ its powers and the performance of its functions and responsibilities 
under this Act, as it may consider necessary. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing provisions, the measures referred to therein may p.rovide for-
(a) facilitating research and p.romotiO'flal activities in the 
10 fields of dairying, immunology, animal husbandry, agriculture and 
horticultu.re; 
(~) imparting technological know-how to such organisations bs 
the co-operative or public sector as are engaged in the production, 
procurement, preservation or marketing of milk and milk products; 
15 (c) facilitating the training of personnel for absorbing and utilis-
ing the technical know-how that may be imparted; 
(d) designing, planning, promoting, developing, constructing, 
sponsoring and setting up of dairy industries and undertaking any 
other related promotional activity including the financing of the 
20 same; 
(e) providing consultancy and managerial services and the 
execution of any project on a turn-key basis or otherwise, furnishing 
integral services such as storage, transportation, processing, distribu-
tion of milk and milk prodUcts and to serve as a lead institution with 
25 reference to milk and milk products; 
(f) adopting such measures as may be practicable-
(i) for the conservation of milk and milk products by 
avoidance of waste at all stages or otherwise; 
(ii) to assist primary producers of milk and milk products 
30 and persons in the co-operative and public sector to get incentive 
prices; and 
(iJii} to build up a national milk grid; 
(g) recommending to Government, as and when necessary, the 
maximum and minimum prices to be fixed for the purchase or sale 
3S of milk and, if so required, assist in the enforcement of it; 
(h) functioning as a cr..annelising agency in respect of import 
and export Of milk and milk products and of milch animals or bulls; 
(i) providing financial, technical, administrative, managerial or 
other assistance or taking such measures as may be necessary-
(A) for the development (if required by the import of 
quality semen) and preservation of high yielding cattle; 
(8) for adopting improved methods of cattle breeding: 

10 
(C) for increasing production and supply of better nad 
improved animal feed including fodder; and 
(D) generally for the enhancement of the cattle wealth of 
the country; 
(j)' processing, promoting or financing technological, industrial 5 
or economic research in milk and milk products ip such manner u 
the Board may deem fit by the utilisation of available institutions or 
otherwisej 
(k) financing, in such manner as the Board may deem appro-
priate (including contribution to capital), of co-operative federations. 10 
co-operative union~ or co-operative enterprises or of any scheme in 
the co-operative or public sector intended to stimulate the production, 
preservation, distribution and consumption of milk and milk products 
nation-wide; 
(1) regulating the dairy and allied industri~ and functioning as 15 
regulatory autho.rity therefor, as may be required by the Central 
Government; 
(1nj) adopting measures for the development and co-ordination 
of organisations in the production of milk and milk products so as 
to enable the primary producers thereof to become participants in, and 20 
beneficiaries of, the development and growth of dairy and allied 
industries; 
(n) collecting and compiling relevant dataanu statistics neces-
sary for the efficient management of the national milk gtid and 
national milch herd and on any other matter relating to dairying 25 
and allied industries; 
(0) promoting publicity on the research and development of 
dairy and allied industries; 
(p) promoting and developing production, grading and market-
ing of milk and milk products in various parts of the country; 30 
(q) co-ope,rating with international organisations and foreign 
experts and for functioning as the agent of the Central Govemment 
for the reception, utilisation and disbursement of any gift of milk 
and milk products and any other foodstuffs; 
(Tj) building up of a reserve of buffer stock Of basic commodities; 3S 
(8) promoting the export of milk and milk p.roducts where, in 
the opinion of the Board, it is so required to avoid waste or to other-
wise serve the public interest and gelle'rally for exporting any article 
produced, processed o:r promoted by it; 
(t) acquiring, holding and disposing of any 'Property for the 
pur.poses of its business; 
40 

11: 
(u) transferring the whole or any part of its managerial, techni-
calor other functions in relation to any organisations receiving 
assistance from the National Dairy Development Board to the re-
cipient organisation: 
5 (v) advancing or len:ling money upon security of movable or 
immovable property or otherwise; 
(w) borrowing money in such manner and upon such security 
as the Board may deem fit; 
(x) carrying on, either by itself or through any other organisa-
.10 tions any other business or class of bUSiness, in a case where such 
business Or class Of business was being carried on by the society 
or the dissolved company immediately before the appointed day; 
(y) promoting and encouraging co-operative effort among those 
engaged in the production of milk and milk products and other 
1 S foodstuffs; 
(z) levying fees or othe.r charges for any assistance given or 
services rendered by the National Dairy Development Board; 
(za) carrying on any other business or doing any other act or 
thing as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to further the 
20 objectives of the National Dairy Development Board under this Act. 
(3) If, immediately befure the appointed day, either the society or the 
dissolved company was engaged in the production, research and develop-
ment processing. marketing" import, export or other activities. or had 
been rendering any service or assistance, in relation to any article or 
2S product, othe.r than milk and milk products or the dairy industry, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law, the 
National Dairy Development Board may engage in the production, research 
and development, processing, marketing, import, export or othe.r activities, 
or render sUch other services or assistance in relation to the said article 
30 or product as may be required, and the provisions of sub-sections (1) and 
(2) shall. so far as may be, apply in relation to that article or product, as 
it any ref~ence therein to milk and milk products or to dairy and allied 
industries had been a ref~ence to that article or product or service or 
activity. 
35 (4) Where the Central Government or the Government of any State 
considers that, haVing regard to the special expertise of the National 
Dairy Development Board and the nee<ls of the public, it is necessary or 
advisable to entrust the National Dairy Development Board with any 
activity, other than that to whiCh the foregoing sub-sections apply, it 
40 may. entrust 'Such activity to the National Dairy Development Board, 
whereuport it shall be competent for the National Dairy Development 
Board to carryon such activity. 
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, it 
shall be competent for the National Dairy Development Board to parti-
45 cipate. with the prior approval of the Central Government. in any other 
organisation, financially, managerially or in any other manner. 

i>rovi" 
sions re_ 
garding 
members 
d! lXNlrd 
of society 
and 
directors 
of dis· 
solYed 
com. 
pany. 
ProvL 
sions reo 
lating to 
officers 
and 
other 
emplo-
yee6 of 
society 
and of 
dissolv_ 
ed com-
pany_ 
Power of 
Board to 
restruc-
ture and 
stream-
line organi-
sational 
and 
functional 
liDt-up of 
National 
Dairy 
Develoip-
ment 
Roard 
to 
1leCUt'8 
utmost 
tmcl-
ency ill 
functJoo-
'" 
ii· . 
CHAPTER V 
:PROVISIONS RELATING TO DIIUX:TORS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE 
NATIONAL DAIRY DEvELoPMENT BoARD 
17, Every l)erson holding office as a member of the board of the society. 
o,r as a director of the dissolved company, immediately before the appoint- 5 
ed day, shall on and from that day cease to hold office as such member 
or director. 
18. Subject t'O the provisions of section 19, every full·time officer or 
other employees holding office immediately before the appointed day, in 
the society Or the dissolved company, shall, on and from the appointed 10 
day., become an officer 'Or other employee, as the case may be, of the 
National Dairy Development Board and shall hold office or service in 
the National Dairy Development Board on the same terms and conditions 
of service as he would have had under the society or the dissolved 
company, as the caSe may be, and shall continue to do so unless and 15 
until his terms and conditions of service are duly altered by the Board. 
19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contajned in this chapter, the Na. 
tional Diary Development Board may make such orders or take such 
action as may be necessary for restructuring and s~reamlining the orga-
nisational and functional set-up of the National Dairy Development 20 
Board to secure utmost efficiency in its functioning, and the Board shall, -
for achieving this object, be competent to declare any officer or other 
employee or any class of officers or other employees to be redundant 
if it finds them redundant by way of being surplus or otherwise due to 
duplication of posts of the same nature, or absence ()f the special exper· 2S 
tise required for the post in the revised set-up, or the non-availability of 
posts in a particular office or unit of the National Dairy Development 
Board and it is not practicable to accommodate him in the type of post 
in the particular grade. 
(2) Nothing in this chapter sha11 preclude the Board, if it is 10 
considered necessary for the pu.rpose of rationalising the conditiofis of 
service of the officers and other employees so transferred to it, to change 
their· designation, conditions of service or the scales of pay applicable 
to them ·or to reallocate their duties Ilnd functionS. 

MoIIMT. 
13 
. It. (1) The officers or other employees declved .. redun __ 
in c. pursuance of section 19, shall be dealt with in aceor4ance-
wtthsuch scheme or schemes as the Board may, with the previous appro. 
S val of the Central Government, make in this behalf and different schemw 
may be made in relation to different classes or categories of officers and 
other' efnployees. I 
Sehem. 
re,ard.. 
.in, 
com. 
pensa· 
tIooto 
redwa-
dlDt 
(2) The scheme or schemes referred to in sub-section 
provide for-
(1) may;' emp' 
( loyees, . eta. ,. 
10 
IS 
20 
(a) the quantum of compensation payable to any officer or 
other employee referred to in sub-section (1) and the mode of pay .. 
ment thereof: 
Provided that the compensation so payable shall in no eue be' 
less than that payable to him under the service conditions applicable 
I to him if his services w..ere dispensed with; 
(b) the quantum of arrears of salary or other emoluments, pro· 
vident fund, gratuity or any other amount that may be payable in 
accordance with the serviCe conditions applicable to them; 
(c) the provision for appeal for the aggrieved redundant 
o1ftcers and other employees and for the appellate authQl'ity, belftg' 
an officer not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the GOvemrne!lt'--
of India in the Ministry dealing with Agriculture; 
(d) any other matter pertaining to the termination of serviee 
consequent on their being declared redundant. 
U. The transfer of the services of any officer or other employee' of 
25' the-society or of the dissolved company to the National Dairy Develop.. 
men.i Board shall not entitle any such officer or other employee to any 
compensation under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or any other law' 
for the time being in force, and no such claim shall be entertained by 
any court, tribunal or other authority. 
30 ft. (1) Where a provident fund has been established by the society 
Or the dissolved company in respect of either of them for the benefit of 
the -officers Or other employees and the same stands vested in a trust, 
the moneys and other assets standing to the credit of each provident 
fund shall continue to be held in trust with the same objects as were 
35 appllcable before the appointed day! and the trustees of such trusts 
immediately before the appointed day shall, subject to the provisions of 
the trust deeds and the rules relating to the respective trusts, continue 
to function as trustees in respect of the respective provident fund 
o until and unless otherwise directed by the National Dairy Development 
.. Board, and the rights relating to the said trusts shall, as from the ap-
pointed day, vest in the National Dairy Development Board. 
(2) Where any gratuity, welfare or other fund had been established 
by the society Or the dissolved company for the benefit of its ofiicers or 
other employees and is in existence immediately before the appointed 
4! day, all moneys and other assets standing to the credit of or relatable 
to such gratuity, welfare or other fund shall vest in the National Dairy 
~vel&pment Board. 
Compell-' 
satio. 
for 
transfer. 
of em~ 
loyee. 
not 
payab~. 
Provi: 
dent. 
fund, 
gratuity, 
welfare 
and other 
fundt. 

(kant. 
and 
loans by 
Centnl 
Oovem. 
ment. 
Xational 
Dairy 
Develop.. 
ment 
Board 
!'undo 
14 
, (~) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) . and 
(Z), the Board may give such directions relating to the trusts or lunda 
or take such other action as it may deem fit so as to bring about unifor.. 
mity or to effect integration in part or in whole in such trusts or funds. 
(4) The Board may, having regard to the welfare of the officers and S 
other employees or their families, take such steps for the advancement of 
their health, education or other interests as may be prescribed and create 
such institutions as may be required for the purpose. 
(5) Nothing in the foregoing provisions 'Of this section shall derogate 
the power of the Board to make regulations for establishing or main- 10 
taining any provident fund, welfare fund, gratuity fund or other fund 
for any of its officers or other employees. 
CHAPTER VI 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTs AND AUDIT 
%3. The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Govem- 15 
ment or in accordance With the terms of any general or special authority 
given to it by the Central Government, borrow money from any source 
as it may' deem fit for discharging all or any of its functions under th1a 
Act. 
24. The Central Government may, after due appropriation. made by 20 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the National Dairy Development 
Board by way of grants or loans such sums of money as the Central 
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
%5. (1) The National Dairy Development Board may receive gifts, 
grants, donations or benefactions from Government or any other source 2S 
in Or outside India and the same shall be used by the Baud for 
exercising its functions and discharging its responsibilities unde.r this Act. 
(2) The National Dairy Development Board shall not receive any giftI, 
gr~nts, donations or benefactions from a foreign government or any 
other source outside India except with the previous approval 30 
()f the Central Government. 
26. (1) The National Dairy Development Board shall maintain a Fund 
to be called the National Dairy Development Board Fund to which shall 
be . cr~ited-
(a) all sums of money vested in the National Dairy Develop. 3) 
m.ent Board under Chapter II; 
(b) all sums of money that nlay be provided by Government; 

15 
(c) all fees and other charges received by the N~tional Dai1')' 
Development Board; 
(d) all sums of money generated from gift commodities by the 
National Dairy Development Board or received by it by way of 
~ grants, donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers; and 
('e) all Sunls of money received by the National Dairy Develop-
ment Board in any other manner or from any other source. 
(2) All sums of money credited to the said Fund shall, subject to 
the regulations, if any, made in this behalf, be deposited with the 
10 State Bank of India or any other nationalised bank. 
'ol1970. Explaination.-In this suD-section "nationalised bank" means a cor-
40af 
1P80, 
responding new bank as defined in the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, and the Banking Companies 
(Acquisitlon and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980. 
15 (3) The said Fund shall be applied towards meeting the administra-
tive and other expenses of the National Dai,ry Development Board, 
including expenses incurred in the exercise of the powers and the 
diacharge of its functions and responsibilities under section 16 or in 
relatlon to any of the activities referred to therein or for anythini 
20 relatable thereto..........J I.-:-t 
27. (1) The balance-sheet and accounts of the National Dairy Develop-
ment Board shall be prepared in such form and in such manner as may 
be prescribed.. I , . ~ .10 
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the National 
2S Dairy Development Board to be closed and balanced as on the 31st day 
of March each year or such other date as the Board may, with the con-
currence of the Central Government, decide. 
28. (1) The accounts of the National Dairy Development Board shall be 
audited by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of companies under 
the Companies Act, and the appointment of auditors and remuneration 
.30 payable to them shall be subject to the app.roval of the Central Govern-
ment. 
(2) Every auditor in the performance of his duties shall have at all 
reasonable times access to books, accounts and other documents of the 
National Dairy Development Board. 
35 (3) The auditors shall submit their report to the Board which shall 
forward a copy of their report to the Central Government. 
29. The Central Government shall cause the report of the auditors 
under section 28 to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament as 
soon as may be after such report is received by the Central Government. 
~o 30. Notwithstanding anything contained in any agreement to the 
contrary, the Board may, by notice in writing, require any person to 
which the National Dairy Development Board or the society or the dis-
101ved company has granted any loan or advance, to discharge forthwith 
in full, its liabilities to the. Board,-
(4) if it appears to the Board that any false or misleading in-
fo.rmation in any material particular was given in the application for 
the loan or advance; or 
(b) if the person has failed to comply with the terms of itl 
contract in the matter of the loan or advance; or 
L., 
Prepwa-·· 
tion of 
account. ' 
and 
balance-
sheet. 
Audit. ' 
Reports 
to be 
laid 
betore 
Parlia-
ment. 
Power 
toeall 
tor 
repay-' 
ment 
before 
agreed 
period. 

spedlll 
proft. 
aionafar 
enfan:e. 
mentof 
elaiml by 
National 
Dairy 
Dnelop. 
ment 
Bou4. 
Detect, 
In appoint-
ment. 
not \0 
invali-
date 
.de,ete .. 
of Board. 
16 
(c) if there is • reasonable apprehension that the persoD II 
unable to pay his debts or that proceedings for liquidation may . be 
commenced in respect thereof; or 
Cd) if the property pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or autp-
ed as security for the loan or advance is not insured and kept iDaUl'ed. 5 
by the person to the satisfaction of the Board (or depreciates in 
"value to such an extent that, in the opinion of the Board,further 
security to the satisfaction of the Board should be given and such 
.. security is not given after demand); or 
(e) if, without due permission.. any machinery, plant or other ':10 
equipment (whether forming part of security or not) is 
. TeInOvedfrom the concerned premises without being replaced; ~r 
(1) if it appears to the Board that any condition in the loan 
agreement relating to_ the supply of goods or implementation of the 
project is being SUbstantially violated; or IS 
(g) if, for any other reason, the Board considers it necessary so 
to do for protecting the interests of the National Dairy Development 
Board. 
'!t. (1) Where any person, in breach of any agreement, makes any 
default in the repayment of any loan or advance or any instalment thereof .20. 
(oJ: in meeting its obligations in relation to the guarantee given by the 
National Dairy Development Board) Or otherwise fails to comply with 
the terms of agreement with the Board or whe.re the Board requil!es 
any person 'to make immediate repayment of any loan or advance under 
section. 30 and the person fails to make such repayment. then. without ~ 
prejudice to the provisions of section 69 of the Transfer of Property 
", 
Act, 1882, any officer of the National Dairy Development Board, gene- 4 of lIn. 
rally or specially authorised by the Board in this behalf, may apply to 
the court for one or more of the following reliefs, namely:-
(0) for an order for the sale of the property pledged,mori-
gaged, hypothecated or assigned to the National Dairy Developmeat 30 
Board as security for the loan or advance; Or 
(b) -for transferring the management of any organisation to the 
"National Dairy Development Board; or 
(c) for an ad interim injunction where there is apprehension 
that the machinery or other equipment is being removed from the. 35 
I premises of the organisation without due permission. 
,(2) The procedure for making an application under sub-aectWn 
(1) and for the disposal thereof shall be such as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VII 
MIsCELLANEOUS 
nNo act or proceeding of the Board or of any committee oftbe 
National Dairy Development Board shall be questioned on the ground 
merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constituttOfl 
of, the Board or the committee, as the case may be. '4' 

17 
La., No .• uit or other legaL proceeding .hall lie against the National 
-DaJ,y Development Board or any director or any officer or other employee 
of the Board or any other person authorised by the Board to discharge 
any functions under this Act, for any loss or damage caused or likely 
, to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
f1iaae ',in pursuance of this Act or of any other law or provision having 
..tile force of law. 
:SI. ,Every director shall be indemnified by the National Dairy Develop-
ment Board against all losses and expenses incurred by him, in, or in 
10 relation to, the discharge of his duties, except such as are caused by his 
own wilful act or default. 
35. (1) The Board shall not, except as otherwise required by this Act 
.. Qr any other law, divulge any information relating to, or to the affairs 
of, the National Dairy Development Board· or of the society or of the 
IS diJlolved company except in circumstances in which it is in accordance 
with the law or practice and usage customary among financial institutions, 
necessary or appropriate for the Boa.rd to divulge such information. 
(2) Every director, member of a committee, auditor or officer or 
other employee of the National Dairy Development Board shall, before 
20 entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in 
the form set out in the Schedule. 
36. Nothing contained in Chapter V shall be deemed to prejudice 
the right of the National Dairy DeVelopment Board to create such 
~DUmber of additional posts or to appoint such number of additional 
2S'afIl~rs or other employees as it may consider necessary or desirable 
__ the efticien..t discharge of the functions of the National Dairy Develop-
ment Board and where any such officer or other employee is appointed, 
the terms and conditions of service, including inter se seniority. may 
also be determined by the Board. 
30 37. No provision of any law relating to the winding up of companies 
or corporations shall apply to the National Dairy Development Board 
and it shall not be placed in liquidation save by an' order of the Central 
Government and in such manner as it may direct. 
'18. ~l) The Central Government may, on the recommendation of the 
3S National Dairy Development Board, if satisfied that it is necessary so to 
do in the public interest, make any scheme for the purpose of enabling 
1.1:AeNational Dairy Development Board to undertake and perfonn any 
of the activities or functions of the Central Government relatable to 
dairy, foodstuffs and connected industries, particularly with reference 
4O'.to matters related to the development of the national milk 
-.rid. by the regulation of the production, procurement, marketing, export-
,.import, maintenance of standards or such like activities (including the 
collection and compilation of statistics and relevant data). 
Protec!-
tion ot 
acta done 
in good 
faith. 
Indem-
nity-of 
directors. 
ebliaa.. 
tion .. 
to fide-
lity and 
aecrecy. 
Redruit· 
ment of 
additio-
nalofR-
cera and 
other 
emplo-
yee.. 
LIIquIda-, 
tion 
only 
under 
orders 
of 
Central 
GoMrn-
meat. 
Dele-
ptfOD 
of 
certain 
poWers 
by 
Central 
Govern. 
ment. 

Transi-
tional 
pro-
visions 
fOr 
auditors. 
Transi-
tional 
provi-
aionawith 
regard 
to 
Chairman 
and 
Board. 
Manage-
ment or 
assistance 
to 
others 
to 
continue. 
Mother 
Dairy 
to bea 
lubsi-
diary 
unit of 
National 
Dairy 
Deve-
lopment 
Board. 
Formation 
Of com-
paniea 
with 
previous 
approval 
of 
Central 
Oovem. 
ment. 
18 
(2) Every scheme made under sub-section (1) shall be published Sa 
the Official Gazette and may contain such conditions, restrictions or llml· 
tations as the Central Government may deem fit to impose. 
39. Any auditor appointed in relation to the society or the dissolved 
company, functioning immediately before the appointed day, may. not- 5 
withstanding anything contained in this Act, be continued by the 
National Dairy Development Board for such period and on such terms 
as may be considered Jlecessary. 
40. The Chairman of the society. holding office immediately before 10 
the appointed day, shall be the Chairman of the National Dairy Deve-
lopment Board until a Chairman is nominated in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and he shall be competent to "perform the functions 
of the Board until the constitution of the Board under this Act. 
41. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where, before 
the appointed day, either the society or the dissolved company was 15 
managing any other organisation or rendering any technical or other 
assistance to any organisation or person, the National Dairy Development 
Board may continue to render the same or similar service to such extent, 
for such period and with such modifications as the Board may deem fit. 
42. The undertaking known as the Mother Dairy, Delhi, shall, on and 20 
from the appointed day, become a subsidiary unit of the National Dairy , 
Developmen.t Board but shall retain its separate character, unless other-
wise decided by the Board. 
43. (1) Where the Board considers it necessary so to do, for the imp1e- 25 
mentation of any of its objectives, it may. subject to the previous appro-
val of the Central Government, form one or more companies either by 
itself or in conjunction with any Of its subsidiaries Or with any other 
undertaking. 
(2) Where any company has been formed in pursuance of sub-section 
(1).- 30 
(a) in the case of a company formed by the Board by itself Or:. 
along with its subsidiaries" it may contribute such capital, transfer 
such of its assets or render such assistance, as may be required, so II 
to enable the company so formed to function; and : ( 

a otll'l. 
1401 1M.,. 
It 
(b) in any other case, it may contribute capital, transfer asset. 
, " or render assistance in such manner and to such extent as th~ Board 
may deem fit subject to specific previous approval of the Central 
Government in that regard. 
, ". Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961 
10 
or,.. any other enactment for the time being in force relating to tax on 
income, profits or gains, the National Dairy Development Board shall not 
f 
be liable to pay income-tax or any other tax in respect of its income, 
profits or gains derived. 
45. The- National Dairy Development Board shall furnish, from time 
to time, to the Central Government such returns as the Central Govern-
ment may require. 
48. Any scheme or regulation made under this Act in relation to condi-
tions of service or like matters of officers or other employees of the 
15 National Dairy Development Board, may be made retrospectively from 
any date not earlier than the appointed day. 
47. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in the Companies Act, tlhe 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or any other law for the time being in force 
20 or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this 
Act" or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority. 
48. (1) The Board may, by notification. in the Gazette of India. make 
regulations not inconsistent with the 'Provisions of this Act and the sche-
mes made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision ilt 
2S necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions 
30 
3S 
40 
of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore· 
going power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing 'matters, namely:-
I (a) the procedure to be followed for the transaction of business 
at. the meetings of the Board and the number of members which shall 
fonn quorum at a meeting under sub-section (1) of section 10; 
(b) the allowances to be paid to the members of any manage-
ment committee, other than the Chairman and whole-time directors, 
for attending the meetings of the management committee or for 
a.ttending to any other work of the National Dairy Development 
Board under sub-section (1) of section 13 and the other matters 
pertaining to the conduct of proceedings of the management com-
mittees under sub-section (2) of that section; 
.. (e) the higher of grade for the purposes of clause (a) of sec-
-Uon 15; 
Exemp--
tion 
from 
tax on 
income. 
R&tums. 
Power to 
make 
scheme, 
and 
regula-
tions 
regard-
ing 
serviCe , 
matter.; .. 
retrospect-
ively .. 
Act to 
have 
oyer-
riding 
effect. 
Power 
to 
make 
regula-
tions. 

Power 
tore-
move 
~ 
culti •. 
Scheme, 
and • 
regula-
tions 
to be 
laid 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
20 
(d) the particulars of the steps for the advancement I of _ 
health, education at' other interests of the officers and other .empta,.. 
or their families as referred to in sub-eection (4) of seetiMl 21; 
(e) the matters of detail regarding establishment or main-
. tenance of funds referred to in sub-section (5) of section 22;" $1 
(f) the conditions subject to which sums of money are te be 
deposited under sub-section (2) of section 26; 
(g) the form and manner in which the balance sheet ... 
accounts of the National Dairy Development Board shall be pre-
pared under sub-section (1) of section 27; to 
(h) the procedure for making an application waderau'b E et' 
(1) of section 31 and for the disposal thereof under sub-section (2) 
of that section; 
(i) conditions of service of officers and other employees;. 
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. U 
49. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Oftlclal 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:. 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of Ave 20 
years from the appointed day. I 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, JiS sodnu mat, 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
5(). Every scheme and every regulation made under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be af~ it is made, before each House of Parliameat, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 'bar2S 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, aDd 14, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the. 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modUlo.-· 
tion ill the scheme or regulation or both Houses agree that the scheme 30 
or regulation should not be made, the scheme or regulatian shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form Or be of no effect, as the· 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shBDj 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously daDe. under 
thai scheme or regulation. 3,. 
4. U 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 35(2)] 
DeclnrCltimt oj fidelity lind secrecy 
I, , do hereby declare that I will faithfully" truly, ad 
to the best of my skUl and ability execute and perform the dutie$r~~ 

21 
of me as Chairman, director, member of committee, auditor, officer or 
other employee (as the case may be) of the National Dairy Develop-
ment Board and which properly relate to the office or position held by 
me in or in relation to the National Dairy Development Board. 
S I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communi-
cated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information relating 
to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the National Dairy 
Development Board nor will .I allow any such person to inspect or have 
access to any books or documents belonging to or in the possession of 
10 the National Dairy Development Board and relating to the business of 
the National Dairy Development Board Or the business of any person 
having any dealing with the National Dairy Development Board. 
Signed before me. (Signlat-ure.) 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) was set up in 199 
by the Government of India as a registered society with the primary 
objective for providing technical services to implementing agencies in 
building up their dairy projects on co-operative lines on the pattern 
of .the Kaira District Co-operative Milk Producers' Union Limited, 
Anand, popularly known as tlie 'Anand pattern'.. The National Dairy 
Development Board has since beell progressively playing a wider role 
together with the Indian Dairy Corporation which is a company formed 
in 1~7~ to give supportive assistance in the implementation of the Opera-
tion Flood Programme. 
2: The Central Government had appointed a Committee-commonly 
1m own as the Jha Committee-which had recommended the formation 
of a body corporate to perform the functions of both these institutions 
taking care to ensure that the autonomy and freedom and flexibility 
presently enjoyed by the National Dairy Development Board is not 
adv~rsely affected thereby. 
3. To achieve the above, it is proposed to declare the National Dairy 
Development Board as an institution of national importance and incor-
porate it as a statutory body: With the enlargement of functions of the 
National Dairy Development Board over the years, it is felt that the 
functions of both the institutions can henceforth be performed by the 
corporate body and as such it is proposed to vest the undertakings of 
the Indian Dairy Corporation in the body corporate and dissolve the 
Indian Dairy Corporation. 
4. The name of the National Dairy Development Board is retained 
for the corporate body so that there may be a continuity in reputation 
and understanding both in India and abroad. Provisions have been 
in('luded in the Bill to ensure that the body corporate is able to carry on 
all the functions that they are discharging at present and play an en-
larged and vital role with regard to milk, milk products and other com-
modities with which it is. concerned or in respect of which the Govern .. 
ment deems it necessary to involve i;hem. 
5-. The iBill also makes provtllton for better administration of the 
body corporate including the constitution caf the fund, provision for 
accounts, audit, etc. . 
6. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the provisions of the 19i1l. 
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
NEW DELm; 
The 17th August, 1987. G. 5. DHILLON. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDA nON UNDER ARTICLE 117 AND 274 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
rCopy of letter No. 17-24/87-LD. I dated 17 August, 1987 from 
Shrl G. S. Dhillon, Minister of Agriculture to the Secretary-General 
Lok Sabha.J .• ',~...,."'\. 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill. recommends under clauses (]) and (3) of article 117 re~d 
with article 274 of the Constitution of Indio, the introduction and conSt-
derntiot". of the National Dairy Development Board Bill, 1987, in Lok 
Sahha. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2 'seeks to declare the existing National Dairy Development 
Board as an institution of national importance. 
Clause 3 seeks to define certain words and expressions used in the 
Bill. 
,Clause 4 provides for the incorporati6n of the existing National Dairy 
Development Board and the corporate body is to be known by the same 
name. 
Clause 5 provides for the simultaneous vesting of the Indian Dairy, 
, Corporation in the National Dairy Development Board and for itl' dis-
.olution. 
Clause 6 provides for the transfer of assets, liabilitieS and activities 
of the existing National Dairy Development Board and of the dissolved 
company to the body corporate. 
Clause 7 provides for the saving of legal proceed~gs. 
Clause 8 provides for the management of the National Dairy Deve-
lopment Board and the composition of Board of Directors. 
Clause 9 provides for the terms of office and conditions of serVice, 
etc., of Chairman and directors. 
Clauses 10 and 11 make provisions regarding meetings of the Board 
and the manner of transaction of business. 
Clause 12 provides for the c(lnstitution of management committees of 
the National Dairy Development Board. 
Clauses 13, 14 and 15, provide for the allowances etc. of management 
committee members and delegation of powers by the Board to manage-
ment committees, Co-operative federations whole-time directors, etc. 
Cl~ 16 provides for the powers and functions of the National 
" Dairy Development Board. Apart from enabling it to carry on the 
~.xisting and enlarged functions, provision is made enabling the Central 
Government or the Government of any State to entrust the National Dairy 
Development Board with any activity if, having regard to expertise of 
the Nationall)airy Development Board, it considers it necessary so to do. 
Cf4tue 17 provides that the members etc. of the existing National 
Dairy Development Board and dissolved company win cease to hold 
oftice. ' ~ 
Clauses 18 and 19 provide that the existing full-time officers and other 
employees will continue in the National Dairy Development Board subject 
,. tofts restructuring and' stre*Mlining under clause 19. 
Clause 20 provides for framing of sChemes to' safeguard monetary 
inte,rest of the officers and· other employees who may be declared '. as 
·Ndiiildant. 
23 

24 
Clause 21 makes it clear that no compensation shall be payable under 
. the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or any other law. by reason of the 
transfer of any officer or other employee to the incorporated National 
Dairy Development Board. 
Clause 22 makes provisions regarding provident fund, gratuity, 
welfare and other funds. 
Clause 23 empowers the Board to borrow money after obtaining pre-
vious approval from the Central Government. 
Clause 24 is intended to enable the Central Government to make 
grants or loans to the National Dairy Development Board in case it becomes 
necessary. 
c,J,ause 2S enables the National Dairy Development Board to receive 
gifts, grants, donations, etc., and stipulates that where it is from any 
source outside India, previous approval of the Central Government should 
be obtained. ~ 
Clause 26 provides for the Fund of the National Dairy Development 
Board to be called the National Dairy Development Board Fund. 
Clauses 27, 28 and 29 make the usual provisions regarding preparation 
of balance-sheet and accounts by the Board and for its audit. The ap-
pointment of auditors and the remuneration payable to them shall be 
subject to approval of the Govemment and copies of their reports have 
to be forwarded to the Central Government. The auditor's reports are to 
be laid before both Houses of Parliament. ' 
CLauses 30 and 31 provide for recall of loans and enforcement of 
claims in certain situations where the interest of the, National Dairy 
Development Board would otherwise be adversely affected. 
Cl.a1.l.8e 32 provides that the defects in any appointment shall not in-
validate actions taken by the Board or by any committee thereof. 
Cla'uses 33 and 34 are the usual provisions to protect directors and 
employees in cases where they act in good faith, Directors are also pro-
vided indemnity against losses and expenses 1n U1e diacharge of their 
duties. ) 
ClatLBe 35 imposes obligation as to fidelity and secrecy. 
Clause 36 provides for the recruitment of additional officer. and other 
employees., 
Clause 37 provides that the National Dairy Development Board can be 
placed in liquida~ion only by th~ Central Government. 
Clause 38 provides for the delegation of certain powers ot the Central 
Government relating to dairy, foodstuffs and connectec:l industries, to the 
Board ·where the public interest so requires. 
Clause 39 enables the existing auditors for the completion of their 
work in respect of the organisations in relation to which they were 
funct.ionini· 

25 
Cla.me 40 is transitional provision to enable the Chairman of the 
existing National Dairy Development Board to continue until freIh 
appointment undel· the Act is made. 
Clau.se 41 enables the National Dairy _Development Board to continue 
assistance which the two institutions were earlier rendering. 
Clause 42 provides that the Mother Dairy shall be a subsidiary unit 
of the National Dairy Development Board with separate identity. 
Clau.se 43 provides for the formation of new companies' with the ap-
proval of the Central Government.· 
CLau.se 44 provides for exemption from tax on income of the National 
Dairy Development Board. 
C.7,ause 45 provides for returns to be furnished to the Central Gov-
ernment. ! • 
Clau.se 46 provides for the making of regulations and schemes regard-
ing service conditions of officers and other employees with retrospective 
effect. 
Clause 47 is the general overriding clause. 
C14u.se 48 deals with powers of the Board to make regulations in 
particular about matters that are spelt out therein. 
Clause 49 empowers the Central Government to make orden forre-
moving difficulties and it is restricted to five years. Every such order shall 
be laid before both Houses of Parliament; 
Clause 50 provides that all regulations and schemes shall be laid 
before both Houses of Parliament. 
The Schedule contains the form of declaration of fidelity and secrecy 
to be made by all directors, officers and other employees. 

I," -
FINANCIAL MEMORANnuM 
The National Dairy Development Board whieh is a society registered 
under the SOcieties Registration Act has been functioning on a: nationwide 
basis together with the Indian Dairy Corporation which was formed to 
playa supplementary role to it. In the Bill, it is proposed to declare the 
National Dairy Development Board as an institution of national importance 
. iUtd make it into a body corporate so as to enable it to take over both the 
undertakings and perform thei.r functions. The National Dairy Develop-
_ meni Board (together with the Indian Dairy Corporation) hai been func-
tioning succeSsfully by generating their own funds right from its incep-
tion. 
2. Under the above circumstances, it is not expected that the body 
corporate will require any financing from the Central Government. 
However, clause 20 indicates that full-time officers or other employees 
dec1ared as redundant in pursuance of clause 19, shall be dealt With in 
, 'accordance with such scheme Or schemes as the Board may, with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, frame to provide for the 
qua~tum of compensation ;payable to them. At this stage, it is nct 
. 'p~ible to make a precise estimate of the expenditure involved on this 
, accoUnt as this would depend on the final shape of the new organisation. 
Similarly, clause 24 makes the usual provision enabling the Central 
.' -Guvernment ·to-make grants or loans to the National Dairy Development 
Board after due appropriation. 
3. In view of the above, the Bill, if enacted and brought int6- operation, 
is not likely to involve any expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India, whether recurring or non-recurring . 
• "t-_ 'I f 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the National Dairy Development Board 
to make, with the previous approval of the Central Government, scheme 
or schemes regarding officers or other employees Of the Board declared 
as redundant. Such scheme or schemes may provide for the quantum ot 
compensation to such office.rs and other employees and for other connected 
matters including the provisions for appeal for. the aggrieved redundant 
employees. Clause 38 empowers the Central Government to make any 
scheme under certain circumstances for the purpose of enabling the 
National Dairy Development Board to undertake and perform certain 
activities and functions relatable to dairy, foodstuffs and connected 
industries. Clause 48 of the Bill empowers the Board to make regula-
tionc;, not inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill and the schemes 
made thereunder, to provide for all such residuary matters 'for which 
provision is expedient for giving effect to the provisions of the proposed 
legislation. The matters in respect of which such regulations may, in 
particular, be made have been enumerated in sub-clause (2) of clause 
48 of the Bill. Under clause 46, any scheme or regulation in respect of 
service conditions could operate retrospectively, but not earlier than the' 
date of commencement of the Act. 
2. Clause 49 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to remove 
by order any difficulty which may arise in giving effect to the provisions 
of tlhe legislation. This is by way of abundant caution and for covering 
difficulties which it is not practicable to visualise. I~ has, however, been' 
provided that no such order shall be made afte.r the expiry of a period of 
five years from the date of incorporation of the National Dairy Develop-
ment Board. A copy of the order is also to be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 
3. Provision has also been made i~ clause 50 of the Bill for the laying 
of the schemes and .regulations made under the Act before both Houses 
of Parliament. I 
4. The matters in respect Of which-.such schemes and regulation!! may 
be made pertain to matters of procedure or administrative detail. The 
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character, 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to declare the institution known as the National Dairy Development 
Board in the State of Gujarat to be an institution of national impor-
tance and to provide for its incorporation and for the vesting in 
that body corporate of the undertakings of th~ Indian Dairy Cor-
poration with a view to provide for the administration and the 
carrying on of the functions to be performed by the body corporate 
more eftectiyely throughout the country and for matteI'$ <:onnected 
therewith and incidental thereto . 
.. 
(Shri G. S. Dhillon. 
Minister of A9riC141ture.) 