i ITSP सकल

As Intropucep in Lox 55888

4 MAY 1992

88 of 1992

Bill
_ THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITIES BILL, 1992

A
BILL

constitute a National Commission for Minorities and to provide for
‘matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
"Bp it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
India as follows: —

.~ CHAPTER 1
‘PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Minori-
ct, 1992.

89) 1६ extends to the whoie of India except the State of Jammu and

(8) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
_ by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —

mize. (7) “Commission” means the National Commission for Minorities

‘constituted under section 3; 2

Short
title,

and
com.
mence-
ment.

Defini-
tions.


2

(0) “Member” means a Member of the Commission;

(c) “minority”, for the purposes of this Act, means a |
notified as such by the Central Government;

(०) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

1 CHAPTER वा

Tue Nationat Commaisston For Mrnorrries

eras २ eangeinmlasion shall consist of a Chairperson aid six Memberg
to

‘Minori- be nominated by the Central Government from amongst persons of
ties eminence of ability and integrity: =

Provided that five Members including the Chairperson shall be from

amongst the Minority Communities,

‘Term ot 4. (1) The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office for such |,
office Period, not exceeding three years, as may be specified by the Central Goy-
and ernment in this behalf, 1
condi-
tions of

(2) The Chairperson or a Member may, by writing under his hand
Garvie ot addressed to the Central Government, resign from the office of Chair-
person Person or, as the case may be, of the Member at any time.

and

Members. (3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office
of Chairperson or a Member referred to in sub-section (2) if that Ferson—

(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent;

(6) is convicted and Sentenced to imprisonment for an offence

which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involyes moral
turpitude;

(c) becomes of unsound nnd end stands so declared by a com-
petent ccurt; है 1

(४) refuses io act or becomes incapable of acting;

(०) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission,
absent from three consecutive meetings of the Commission; or

(f) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so abused the
Position of Chairperson or Member as to render that person’s continu-
ance in office detrimental to the public interest:

Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause until 4

that person has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard
in the matter,

(# A vacancy caused under sub-section (2) or otherwise
filled by fresh nomination, 1 a: i a


3

(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
| of service of, the Chairperson and Members shall be such as
may be prescribed. ' |

5. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with
5 a Secretary and such other officers and employees as may be necessary
for the efficient performaice of the functions of the Commission under
this Act. |
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the officers and other employees appointed for
10 the purpose of the Comuraission shall be such as may be preseribea.

6. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Mem-
bers and the administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and
pensions payable to the officers and other employees referred to in sec-
tion 5, shall be paid out of the grants referred to in sub-section (1) of

15 section 10.

7. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned ox
shall be invalid merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy or
defect in the constitution of the Commission.

8. (1) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary at such time
20 and place as the Chairperson may think fit.

(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure.

(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated
by the Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly authorised
by the Secretary in this behalf. | {

25° ४५ CHAPTER DI
: Functions OF Tig COMMISSION

9. (1) The Commission shali perform all or any of the following
functions, namely: — ‘ {

(a) evaluate the progress of the development of minorities under
the Union and States;

(0) monitor the working of the safeguards provided in the
Constitution and in laws enacted by Parliament and the State Legis-
Jatures;

(c) make recommendations for the effective implementation of
safeguards for the protection of the interests of minorities by the
Central Government or the State Governments;

(७) look into specific complaints regarding deprivation of rights
and safeguards of the minorities and take up such matters with the
appropriate authorities;

Officers
and
other
emplo-
yees of

Commis-

Salaries
and al-
Jowances
to be
paid out
of grants,

Vacancies,
ete., not
to in-
validate
proceed-

of the
Commis-
sion.

dure to
be regu-
lated. by

mission,

Fune-
tions of
the Com-
mission.


Grants

Central
Govern-
ment,

4

(8) cause studies to be undertaken into problems arising 0 |
of any discrimination against minorities and recommend measures
for their removal;
() conduct studies, research and analysis on the issues relating
to socio-economic and educational development of minorities; 4
(g) suggest appropriate measures in respect of any minority to
be undertaken by the Central Government or the State Governments;
(h) make periodical or special reports to the Central Govern-

ment on any matter pertaining to minorities and in particular diffi-
culties confronted’ by them; and

(6) any other matier which may be referred to it by the Central
Government,

(2) The Central Government shall cause the recommendations
referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) to be laid before each House
of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or |
proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and
the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommen-
dations,

(3) Where any recommendation referred to in clause (c) of sub-
section (1) or any part thereof with which any State Government is con- 20
cerned, the Commission shall forward a copy of such recommendation or
Part to such State Government who shall cause it to be laid before the
Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action
taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the

State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such re- 25
commendation or part..

(4) The Commission shall, while performing any of the functions
mentioned in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (d) of sub-section (1) have all the
powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular, in respect of the

following matiers, namely:— 30

(@) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from
any part of India and exanuning him on oath;

(०) requiring the discovery and production of any document;

(०) receiving evidence on affidavits; | H

(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 35
court or office; 5

(०) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
documents; and

(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.

CHAPTER IV

FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND: AUDIT

10. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf, Pay to the Commission by way of
grants such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit
for being utilised for the purposes of this Act,

(2) The Commission may spend such sums at it thinks fit for per-
forming the functions under this Act, and such, sums shall be treated as
expenditure payable out of the grants referred to in sub-section (7).

45


5

| (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such
form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

5 (2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by
him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall
be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.

(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed
40 by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission
~ under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the autho-
rity in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General generally has in connection with the audit of Government ac-
counts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production
5 of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers
and to inspect any of the offices of the Commission.

12. The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time,
for each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving
a full account of its activities during the previous financial] year and
0 forward a copy thereof to the Central Government,

. 13. The Central Government shall cause the annua] report together
with a memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained
“therein, in so far as they relate to the Central Government, and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations
and the audit report to be laid as soon as may be after the reports are
‘received before each House of Parliament.

CHAPTER V
‘MISCELLANEOUS

14. The Chairperson. Members and employees of the Com-
‘mission shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

__ 45. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
‘azette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
joing powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
tters, namely:— :

(७) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members under sub-
section (5) of section 4 and of officers and other employees under
sub-section (2) of section 5;

Acounts

audit,

Annual

report.

Annual
report
and audit
report

to be
Jaid
before
Parlia
ment.

Chair-
person,
Members
and
staff of
the Com-
mission
to be
public

Power
to make
rules.


(९) the form in which the annual statement of accouny
be maintained under sub-section (1) of section ats

* (7) the form in, and the time at, which the annual
be prepared under section 12;

(©) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, p
eribed.

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is
Session, for a total period of thirty days which May be comprised

‘© or more successive sessions, and if, before the
of the-session immediately following

if the-session or the successive
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making i

Bower 16. (7) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of th
10 remove Act, the Central Government
difficulties,

may, by order published in the Om cial
Gazette, make such Provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions

this Act as appear to it to be necessary, or expedient for Temoving the
difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of ;
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act,

(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be
after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS . AND REASONS

The Minorities Commission was set up in January, 1978 for providing
an institutional arrangement for evaluating the safeguards provided in
the Constitution for protection of the minorities and to make recommen-
dations for ensuring implementation of the safeguards and the Jaws.

2, The Minorities Commission with statutory status would infuse
‘confidence among the minorities about the working and the effectiveness
of the Commission. It would also carry more weight with the State
Governments/Union territory Administrations and the Ministries/De-
‘partments and the other organisations of the Central Government.

8. It has, therefore, been decided to give statutory status to the
Minorities Commission by the proposed legislation.

4. The National Commission for Minorities will consist of a Chair-
erson and six Members.

5. The main task of the Commission shall be to evaluate the progress
of the development of minorities, monitor the working of the safeguards
wided in the Constitution for the protection of the interests of minori-
and in laws enacted by the Central Government or State Govern-
ents, besides looking into the specific complaints regarding deprivation
rights and safeguards of the minorities. It shall also cause studies.
hand analysis to be undertaken on the issues relating to socio-
momic and educational development of the minorities and make recom-

dations for the effective implementation of the safeguards for the
ection of interests of minarities by the Central Government or State
nments. It may also suggest appropriate measures in respect of
minority to be undertaken by the Central Government or State

6 The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

w DELHI; SITARAM KESRI.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a National Co
ior Minorities. Clauses 6 and 10 provide for ‘expenses to be met
Commission on various items referred to in those clauses from out
grants paid to the Commission by the Central Government under
10(1) of the Bill. ०

_2. It is estimated that an amount of Rs, 57 lakhs will be
cover the expenses of the Conimission during the year 1992-98.
recurring and non-recurring expenditure which may be incurred
1992-93 is to be met out of the grants made by the Central Gor


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may provide for
| matters such as—

(a) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members and of officers
and other employees of the Commission;

(b) any matter under clause 9 (4) (0);

(6) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall
be maintained;

(७) the form in, and the time at, which the annual report shall
be prepared;

(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed.

1] 2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of
procedural and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide
for them under the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power
is, therefore, of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to constitute a National Commission for Minorities and to provide
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto,

(Shri Sitaram Kesri, Minister of Welfare)