6.
7.
8.
WKS.h.BHA
CORRIGENDA
to
IOllJ(FORTY-FIFTH lJ'-1ENDHENT) BILL, 1978THE CONSTITUT 1 .•.
(To be/As introducedin 10k Sabha)
1. Page 19, line6,-
for "supp, SCR 11 )II read IIStlpP.SCR 1)
Page 21, lines 8-and9,-
for "sub-clause(2) " read "clause(2) "
2.
3. Page 23, line18 frombo t tomi ;
for "prov~sion"read "provisions"
4. Page 25, 1 . 8,-_llle
for "a CentralGovernmentII read "theCBntral_....Governm.- -
-Page 28,line5,-
for "article311 read "article13"-.
Page 28, line
.-)
froT::bottom,_I
for IIqustionII read IIquest.LonII-Page 32, line8,-
5.
for "casedII ~ liceased"-
Page ....,'
inthemarginalheadingto articlo
..)'+,
239B, -' .
for "0 rdidinances" ~ "0 rdinancesII-
9. Page 35, line5 frombottom,_
10.
11.
for "orderII read "ordersII-Page 38, line23,-
for "hereby" read "wnerebyII- -Page 39, line14 frombottom,_
for lip]aces" read Ilplace"- -
P. rn
.I


- 2 -
12. Page 40, inthemarginal.headarigto ar.t.icLe 359,-
for ''t.neenrorcernent" read "theenforcement"
13. P 3 l·age + , _lne 2.,-
/
NE.WDELHI;
Nay 10,·1978
~l
,..,.~


~$~{t!~:rb'A._t~ '1. I' 
• ,..-.,Q • 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
ff· 
THE CONSTITUTION (FORTY -FIFTH AMENDMENT) BILL. un8 
ARRANGEMENT .0' ·CLAUSES 
CLAUSU 
1. Short title and commencament. 
2. Amendment of article 19. 
3. Amendment of article 22. 
4. Amendment of article 30. 
5. Omission of sub-heading after arti<!ie 30 ... 
6. Omission of article 31. 
7. Amendment of article 3lA. 
8. Amendment of article 31C. 
9. Amendment of 8Irticle 38. 
,..,-; '10. Substitution of new article for article 71. 
11. Amendment of article 74. 
12. Amendment of article 77. 
13. Amendment of article 83. 
14. Substitution of new article for article 108. 
15. Amendment of article 105. 
18. Amendment of article 123. 
17. Amendment of article 132. 
18. Amendment of article 133. 
19. Amendment of article 134. 
20. Insertion o;f new article lMA. 
21. Amendment of article 139A. 
22. Amendment of article 150. 
23. Amendment of article 168. 
24. Amendment of article 172. 
25. Substitution of new article for article 192. 
28. Amendment of article 194. 
27. Amendment of article ~13. 
28. Amendment of article 217. 
29. Amendment of article 225. 
30. Amnment of article 22ft 

(U) 
€LAu .. 
31. Amadment of article 227. 
32. Amendment of article 239B. 
33. Omission of article 257A. 
34. Insertion of new Chapter IV in Part XII. 
35. Omission of Part XIV A. 
38. Amendment of article 329. 
37. Omission of article 329A. 
38. Amendment of article 352. 
39. Amendment of article 358. 
40. Amendment of article 358. 
41. Amendment of article 359. 
42. Amendment of article 360. 
4.3. IMertion of new article 36IA. 
44. Amendment of article 366. 
4&. Amendment of article 368. 
48. Amendment of article 37IF. 
47. Amendment of the Seventh Schedule. 
--- ~-48. Amendment of the Ninth Schedule. 
.4 __ ~ 
41. Amendment of the Constitution (Forty-second Amend~) 
Act, 1976. 

to 
IS 
:10 
As IN'l'RODVCED IN !.oK SA8HA 6N 
!'HE CONSTITUTION (FORTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978 
BILL 
further to a~ the Con..~titutioft 0/ 'tacItA. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic 
at India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Forty-fifth Amend- Sher& 
rnent) Act, 1978. title aDd 
(2) It lhall come into force 00 such date as the Central Government 
may. by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and cWrwent deta 
may, be appointed for different provisions of thill Act. 
Z. In article 19 of the Constitution,-
(0) in clause (1),-
(i) in sub-clause (e), the word "and" shall be inserted at 
the end; 
(to aub-clause (/) shall be omitted; 
(b) in clause (5), for the words, brackets and letters "1Ub<laute8 
(d), (e) and (f) ", the words, brackets and letters "su~laUWI (d) 
and (e)" shall be. substituted. 
commen-
cement. 
Amend. 
ment of 
article 1', 
3. In article 22 of the ConItitution,-
(a) for clause (4), the following 
name1y:-
Amead-
clause shall be substituted, =.~. 
• (4) No law providing for preventive d.tention shall autho-
r»e the det.,tioa of a peJ'llOn for a 10nter period thq twO' 

/ 
i 
/ 
AmencL. 
anent ot 
article SO. 
l' 
months unless an Advisory Board constituted in accordance with 
the recommendations .f the Chief Justice of the appfCiPriate High 
Court has reported before the expiration of the said periOO ,.! 
two months that there is in its .pinion sufficient cause fOir such 
detention: 
Provided that an Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairman 
and not less than two other members, aBd the Chairman shall be 
a serving Judge of the appropriate High Court and the other 
members shall be serving or retired Judges of any High Court: 
5 
Provided further that nothing in this clause shall authorise 10 
the detention of any person beyond the maximum period pres-
cribed. by any la N made by Parliament under sub-clausE" (a) of 
clause (7). 
Explanatio'l1.-In this clause, "appropriate High COUt· ... 
(i) in the caSe of the detention of a person in pursuance 
of an order of detention made by the Government of India 
or an officer or authority subordinate to that Government, 
IS 
~ ~.' tne H~p Court for the Union territory of Delhi; 
. .'~..:' 
(ii) ~ the case of the detention of a person in pursuanc~ 20 
, of an order'of detention made by the Government' of any 
State (other than a Union territory), the High Court for 
that State; and 
(iii) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance 
of an order . of detention made by the administrator of a 2; 
Union territory or an officer or authority subordinate to 
suCh administrator, such High Court as may be specifte. by 
or under any law made by Parliament in this behalf.'; 
(b) in clause (7) ,-
(i) sub-clause (a) shall be omitted; 30 
(ii) sub-clause (b) shall be re-Iettered as sub-Clause (/1); and 
"Yiii) sub-clause (c) shall be ~e-lettered as sub-clause (b) 
and in the sub-Clal1Se as so re-Iettered., for the words, brackets, 
letter and figure "sub-clause (a) of clause (4)", the word, brack~ts 
and fig\llI'e- "clalAse (4) ,. shall be substituted. 35 
4. In' arUcle 30 of theCoo.stitution, after Clause (1), the following 
t'}ause shall be inserted, namely:-
u(1A) In making a'ny law providing for the compulsory acquisi-
.t.W.n Qi::any RlP.per~y of an education~ ~~titution established and 
, ,~Dis_ed .by a minority, referx:ed to in clause (1), ,the St4te ~n 40 
ensure that the amount fixed by or de~rmin.ed under~uch law for 
tile acquisition of such property is such as would not restrict or 
atJ;ogate the right guarantt:ed under that. clause.", , . 
O~n'" 5. 'nle sub-beading "Right to Properly" occurring after articl~ 30 of 
Of •• -.:, 'thetoDltitution shall be omitted, . . 45 
'--beadinl 
aftII' 
arUcleau. 
," 
." . .. ~ ~ 
,. ,j'" ".. ..... , .. 

5 
10 
•. Artici e 31 of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
7. In ~ticle 31A of the Constitution, in clause (l), .for the werds and 
ftgures "article 14, article 19 or article 31", the words and figures "article 
14 or article 19" shall be substituted. 
8. In article 31C of the Constitution,-
(a) for the words and figures "all or any of the principles laid 
down in Part IV", the words, brackets, letters and figures "the 
principles laid down in clause (b) or clause (c) of article 39" shall 
be substituted; 
(b) for the words and figures "article 14, article 19 or article 31;", 
the words and figures "article 14 or article 19:" shall be substituted; 
(c) the words "and no law cGntaining a declaration that it Is 
for giving effect to such po!icy shall be called in question in any court 
on the ground that it does not give effect to such policy:" shall be 
omitted. 
9. Article 38 of the Constitution shall be renumbered. as clause (1) 
thereof and after the clause as so renumbered, the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise the 
20 inequalities 'n income, and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in 
status, faellities and opportunities, 'not only amongst individuals but 
alsoamangst groups of people residing in different areas or enga:ged 
in different vocations.". 
10. For article 71 of the Constitution, the following article shall be 
25 substituted, namely:-
30 
35 
"71. (1) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection 
with the election of a President or Vice-President shall be inquired 
into 8J1d decided by the Supreme Court 'Y'hOse decision shall be final. 
(2) If the e)(:ctlo;l of a perSOn as PresiOent or Vice-tJrcsident is 
declared void by the Supreme Court, acts done by him in the exercise 
and pertormance of the powers and duties of the office of President 
01' Vice-President, as the case may be, on or befDre the date of the 
decision of the Supreme Court shall not be invalidated by reason of 
that declaration. 
(3) Subject to thf! provisions of this Constitution, Parliament 
tnay by law regUlate any matter relating to or connected with the 
election of a President or Vice-President. 
(4) The election of a person as President Or Vice·President shall 
not be called .in question on the ground of the existence of any 
v.~ancy for whatever rellson among the. !Tlembers of the electoral 
','" 
eolJeee electing him.". ',. 1. 
Omiuion 
of article 
31. 
Amend. 
ment of 
article 
3lA. 
Amend. 
ment of 
article 
3lC. 
Amend· 
ment of 
article 38. 
Substitu. 
tion of 
new 
article 
for "' article 71. 
Matters 
relating 
to, Or 
connected 
with, the 
election 
of a 
President 
or Vice· 
Preoident. 

&neneL 
ment of 
article 74. 
Amend. 
mento! 
article '1'1. 
4 
11. In article 74 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the followi~ 
Froviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
"Provided that the President may require the Council of Ministers 
to reconsider such advice, either generally or otherwise, and the 
President shall act in accordance witlfthe advice tendered after such S 
reconsideration." . 
12. In article 77 of the Constitution, clause (4) shall be omitted. 
Amend. 13. (1) In 8ll'ticle 83 of the Constitution, in clause (2), for the words 
Iftent of "six yeal s" in both the places where they occur, the words "five years" 
article 83. ~hall be sUbstituted. 10 
(2) The amendments made by sub-section (J) to clause (2) of article 
83 shall apply also to the House of the People in existence on the date 
of coming into force of this section without prejudice to the power of 
Parliament with respect to the extension of the duration of that House 
under the proviso to that clause. 15 
Subatitu_ 14. For article 103 of the Constltution, the follClWing article shall be 
tion o! substituted, namely:-
new 
article 
for 
article 
103. 
Decision 
on 
questions 
uto 
disqualWl-
cations of 
members. 
Amend. 
ment of 
article 
105. 
Amend. 
mento! 
article 
123. 
Amend. 
lIlent of 
m1c:1. 
sa. 
"103. (1) It any question arises as to whether a member ot 
either House of Parliament has become subject to any of the c:l.isquali· 
tications mentioned in clause (1) c.i article 102, the question shall be 20 
referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be 
final. 
-(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Presi· 
dent shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall 
act according to such opinion.". 25 
15. In article 105 of the Constitution, in clause (3), for the words "shall 
be those of the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United 
Kingdom, and of its members aOO committees, at the commencement of 
this Constitution", the words, figures and brackets "shall be those of that 
H'Juse and of its members and committees immediately hefore the coming 30 
into force of section 15 of the Constitution (Forty-fifth Amendment) 
Act, 1978" shall be substituted. 
1&. In article 123 of the Constitution, 'clause (04) shall be amittecl. 
11. In article 132 of the Constitution,-
(a) in clause (1), for the words "if the Hip Court certiftea", the 35 
words, figures and letter "if the High Court eertiftes under article 
134A" shall be substituted; 
(h) clause (2) shall be omitted; 
(c) in clause (3), the words "or such leave is granted," and the 
words "mel, with the leave of the Supreme Court, on any other 40 
eround" sAall be omitted. ~' ._ 

18. In article 133 of the Constitution, in clause (1), tor the words "if 
t,tle High Court certifies-It, the words, figures and letter "if the High 
Court certiftes under article 134A-" shall be substitubed. 
19. In article 134 of the Constitution, in sub-clause (c) of clause (1), 
S lor the word "certifies", the words, figures and letter "certifies under 
article 134A" shall be substituted. 
28. After article 134 of the Constitution, the following artic1e shall be 
inserted, namely:-
If) 1t134A. Every High Court, passing or making a judgment, decree, 
final order, or sentence, referred to in claus£' (1) of article 132 or 
clause (1) of article 133, or clause (1) of alI'ticle 134,-
20 
(a) may, if it deems fit so to' do. on its own motion; anC: 
(b) shall, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of 
the party aggrieved, immedi~telv il fter the passin'g or making 
of such judgment, decree, final order or sentence, 
determine, as soon as may be after such passing or making, the 
question whether a certiflcnte of the nature IlIeferred to in clause "(1) 
of article 132, or clause (1) of article 133 or, as the case may be, sub-
clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134, may be given in respect of 
that case.". 
~. In article 139A of the Constitution. for clause (1), the foDowing 
dause shall be substituted, namely:-
It (1) Where cases involvinl! the sa moe or ~bstantiRllV' the same 
questions of law are pendine: before the Supreme Court and M'le or 
~5 more High Courts 01' before two or mo!,,(, Hir{h Courts and the 
Supreme Court is satisfied on its own m:-rtion or on an apl'lication 
made by the Attorney-General of Tndia or bv Ii partv to anv such 
e.!lse that such questions are substantial questions of Ileneral fmport-
ance, the Supreme Court mav withdr/lw the case or cases pendinR' 
30 before the High Court 01' thE Hi¢l Courts and disposf! of all the 
cases itself.". -
21. Tn ride 150 CYf the Constitution, foT' the words "after consultation 
with", the words "with the concurrence of' shall be substituted. 
13. Tn article 168 of the Constitlltion. c1RUS«" (4) !'lnR11 be omitted. 
35 24. (1) IJ;I article 172 of the ConstItution. In elau!llp. (1), for the word" 
"six years" in both the places where they occur. th, "words "flve yean" 
~ .. h~n be substituted. \ 
(~) The amendments made by subofJecti~ (1) to clau!le '(1) of 
aTtiele t 72-
40 (a) shall not apply to anv e1dsttn~ Sta~ Legislative Assembly 
the -period of existence wh~?'fOOf R~ computed from the date appofnted 
for itt &'It meetIil, fc the datI" I)f· comin~ iJ'lto fo~ of this secttol\ 
Amend. 
ment of 
article 
133. 
Amend. 
ment ot 
urticle 
13 •• 
Insertion 
ot new 
article 
134A 
Certificate 
tor 
appeal to 
the 
Supreme 
Court. 
Amend-
ment Of 
iu't1c1. 
13M. 
Amead-
ment 01 
article 
1IO~ 
Amend. 
ment Of 
article 
188. 
Amend-
ment Of 
article 
172. 

Subrtitu· 
tion Of 
new 
article 
for 
al'ltic~ 
192. 
Decision 
on 
question, 
as to 
disqualifi. 
cations.of 
members. 
Amend. 
ment of 
.al1ticle 
194. 
6 
---_ .. '-. -.\ 
(both dates inclusive) is more than four,years and eight montlls but 
every such Assembly shall, unless sooner dissolved, stand dissolved 
on the expiry of-
(i) a period of four months from the date of coming into 
force of this section; or 5 
(ii) a period of six years from the date appoiRted for ttl 
first: meeting, 
whichever period expires earlier; 
(b) shall apply to every other existing State Legislative Assem-
bly without prejudice to the power of Parliament with respect to the 10 
e..-<tension of durat' on of such Assembly under the proviso to the 
said clause (1). 
Explanation I.-In its application to the Legislative Assembly of 
the State of Sikkim referred to in clause (b) of article 371F of the 
Constitution, this sub-section shall have effect as If- IS 
(i) the date appointed for the first ~eeting' of. that Assem-
bly were the 26th day of April, 1975; and 
(ii) the references in clause (a) of this sub-!3ection to "four 
years and eight months" and "six years" were references to 
"three years and eight months" and "five years" respectively. 20 
Explanation II.-In this sub-section, "existing State LegiRlative 
Assembly" means the Legislative Assembly of a State in existence on 
the date of coming into force of this section. 
25. For article 192 of the Constitution. the following article shall be 
substituted, namely:- 2.5 
"192. (1) If anv question arises as to whether a m~ber of 8 
House of the Legislature of a State has become subject to any of 
the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of artide 191. the 
C1uestion shall be referred for the decision of the Governor and his 
decision shall be final. 30 
(2) Before ~ving any decision .on any such question, the Gov-
ernor shall obtain the opinioTl of the Election CNmmission and shaH 
act according to such opinion.". 
•. In article 194 of the Constitution, in clAuse (3). for the words 
"shall be those of the House of Commons of the Parliaml"nt of the United 35 
KiTHfd(\m. and of its members and committees, at thecom:rnenCf"'llent of 
this Constitution",tne words. figures . an(i brackets . "shal1..be those of 
that House and of its members and committees immedi.atelv before the . ~. "" ..... ,. '" 
('nminQ; into force of seetion 26 of the Constitution (Forty-fifth Amend· 
ment) Act; 19'78" shall be substituted. ' . . 40 
•. In article 213 of ilie Constitution. clause (4) shall be omitte<l 
" .. ~.... '" .. . . " , 
" 

10 
•. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (2) ,-
(a) in sub-clause (0), the word "or" occurring at the end shall 
be omitted; 
(D) sub-clause (c) shall be omitted; 
(c) in the Explanation. clause (a) shan be re-Iettered as clause 
(aa) and before clause (CUll as so re-Iettered, the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4) in computing the period during which a person has 
held judicial office in the territory of' India, there shall De 
included any period, after he has held any judicial office, dur-
ing which the person has been an advocate of a High Court 
or has held the office of a member of a tribunal or any post, 
under the Union or a State, requiring special knowl~e of 
law;". 
An\an4. 
men, of 
arUcle 
217. 
IS' 29. In article 225 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be knenci-
inserted at the end, namely:- ment. of 
20 
"Provided that any, restriction to which the exercise of ori8iBa1 
jurisdiction by any of the High Courts with respect to any matter 
concerning the revenue or concerning any act ordered or done in 
the collection thereof was subject immediately before the commence-
ment of this Constitution shall no longer apply to the exercise of 
such jurisdiction.". 
30. In article 226 of the Constitution,-
(a) in clause (1), for the portion beginning with the words 
"writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamUs, prohibition, quo 
warTanto and ce?'tioTari., or any of them" and ending with the 
words "suclr illegality has resulted in substantial failure of justice.", 
the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"writs in the nature of habeas corpu.s, mandamus, prohibi-
30 tion, quo warTanto and certiorari or any of them, for the 
enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and 
for any other purpose."; 
35 
4S 
(b) for clauses (3), (4), (5,) and (6), the following clause shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"(3) Where any party against whom an interim order, 
whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other manner, 
is made on, or in any proceedings relating to, a petition under 
clause (1), without-
(4) furnishing to such party copies of such petitioa 
and all documents in support of the plea for such interim 
order; and 
(b) giving such party an opportunity of being heard. 
makes an application to the High Court for the vacation of 
such order and furnishes a copy of such application to the party 
jn whose favour such order has been made or the counsel of 
artic:le 
??'!" ~-.). 
'-" ... 
Amend-
JIlI!IRlof 
article 
228. 

Amend-
ment of 
article 
22'7. 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
239B. 
Omis.. 
&ion of 
article 
'-5'1Ao 
Insertion 
of new 
Chapter 
IVln 
Part XII. 
Person!! 
not to be 
deprived 
~ pro--
perty save 
by au-
thority of 
law. 
Om1ss1on 
of Part 
XlVA. 
Amend-
ment of 
art1ele 
329. 
Om1salon 
of article 
329A. 
Amend-
ment of 
art1cle 
353. 
iiuch pirty, the High Court shall dispose of the applicatiorl 
within a period of two weeks from the date on which it is 
received or from the date on which the copy of such applica-
tion is so furnished, whichever is later, or where the High Court 
is closed on the last day of that period, before the expiry of the S 
next day afterwards on which the Higb Court is open; and if the 
application is not so disposed of, the inter.im order shall, on the 
expiry of that period, or, as the case may be, the expiry of the 
said next day, stand vacated."; 
.(c) dause (7) shall be renumbered as clause (4). 10 
31. In article 227 of the Constitution,-· 
(4) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(1) Every High Court shall have superintendence ove,:' all 
courts and tribunals throughout the territories in relation to 15 
whieh it exercises jurisdiction."; 
(b) clause (5) shall be omitted. 
32. In article 2i9B of the Constitution, dause (4) shall hq omitted. 
33. Article 257A of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
34. In Part XII of the Constitution, after Chapter III, the following 20 
Chapter shall be inserted, namely:-
"CHAPrER IV.-RIGHT TO PROPERTY 
300A. No person shall be deprived of his property save by 
authority of law!'. 
35. Part XIVA of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
36. In article 329 of the Constitution, in the opening portion, the words, 
figures and letter "but subject to the provisions of article 32.QA" shall be 
omitted. 
37. Article '329A of the Constitution shall bt?l omitted. 
38. In article 352 of the Constitution,- 30 
(4) in clause (1),-
Ii) for the words "internal disturbance", the words "armed 
rebellion" shall be substituted;. . 

(iii) the following E.rplanation shall .be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Explanation.-A Proclamation of Emergency declaring 
that the security of India or any part of the territory thereof 
is threatened by war or by ext.-nal aggression or by armed 
'rebellion may be made before the actual occurrence of war 
or of any such aggression or rebellion, if the President i!t 
satisfiE¥i that there is imminent danger thereof."; 
(b) for clauses (2), (2A) and (3), the following clauses shall be 
10 lubstituted, namely:-
"(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1) may be varied 
or revoked by a subsequent Proclamation. 
(3) The President shall not issue a ProclamatioQ. un~ 
clause (1) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamatiqn unless 
IS the decision of the Union Cabinet (that is to say, the Council 
consisting of the Prime Minister and other Ministers of Cabinet 
rank appointed under article 75) that such a Proclamation may 
be issued has been communicated to him in writing. 
(4) Every Proclamation issued under this article shall be 
20 laid before each House of Parliament and shall, except where 
it is a Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation, cease to 
operate at the expiration of one month unless before the expira-
tion of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both 
Houses of Parliament: 
25 Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a Pro-
clamation revoking a previous Proclamation) is issued. at a time 
when the House of the People has been dissolved, or the dissolu-
tion of the House of the People takes place during the period of 
one month referred to in this clause, and if a resolution approv-
30ing the Proclamation has been passed by the Council of States, 
but no r~olution with respect to such Proclamation has been 
passed by the House of the People before the eXpiration of that 
period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration 
of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People 
35 first sits after its reconstitution, unless before the expiration of 
the said period of thirty days a !'esolution approving the Pr0-
clamation has been also passed by the House of the People. 
(5) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked. cease 
to operate on the expiration of a period of six months from the 
40 dat~ of the passing of the second of the resolutions apprOving 
the Proclamation under clause (4): 
Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the 
continuance in force of such a Proclamation is passed by both 
Houses of Parliament the Proclamation shall, unless revoked, 
.. , continue in force for a further period of six months from the 
date on which it would otherwise have ceased to operate under 
this c1ause:~' 
Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the 
P~e takes place during any such period of six months and a 

AID_d· 
JMI1t ., 
utWe 
361. 
10 
resolution approving the continuance in force of such Proclama-
tion has been passed by the Council of States but no 'resolution 
with respect to the continuance in force of such Proclamation 
has been passed by the Housel of the People during the said 
period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration 5 
of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People 
first sits afte; its reconstitution unless before the expiration of 
the said period of thirty days, a resolution approving the con-
tinuance in farce of the Proclamation has been also passed by 
the House of the People. 10 
(6) For the purposes of clauses (4) and (5), a resolution 
may be passed by either House of Parliament only by a majority 
of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not 
less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and 
voting. 15 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 
clauses, the President shall revoke, a Proclamation issued under 
elause (1) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation if the 
House of the People passes a resolution disapproving, or, as the 
case may be, disapproving the continuance in force of, such 20 
Proclamation. 
(8) Where a notice in writing signed by not less than one-
tenth of the total number of members of the House of thE" 
People has been given, of their intention to move a resolution 
for disapproving, or. as the case may ~, for disapproving the 25 
continuance in force of, a Proclamation issued under clause (1) 
or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation,-
'(a.) to the Speaker, if the House is in session; or 
(b) to the President, if the House is not in session, 
a special sitting of the House shall be held within fourteen days 30 
from the date on which such notice is received by the Speaker, 
or, as the case may be, by the President, for the purpose of 
considering such resolution."; 
(c) clause (4) shall be renumbered as clau!le (9) and in th~ 
elause as so renumbered, for the words "internal disturbance" in both 35 
the places where they occur, the words "armed rebellion" shall be 
substituted; , 
(d) clause (5) shall be omitted, 
31. In article 356 of the Constitution,-
'(a) In clause (4),-
(f) for the words. brackets and figure "one year from the 
date of the pal!lBing of the second of the resolutions approving the 
Proclamation undeT clause (3)", the words "six months from the 
date of issue of the Proclamation" shall be substituted; 
40 
(ii> in the first proviso, for the words "one year", the wOJ'ds 45 
"six months" shall be substituted; 
(iii) in the second proviso, for the words "one year", the 
words "six months" shall be substitutedi 
, 

II 
(b) for clause (5), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:- / 
"(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (4), a 
resolution with respect to the continuance in force of a Proc1ama-
5 tion approved under clause (3) for any period beyond the ex pin-
tion of one year from the date of issue of such Proclamation shall 
not be passed by either House of Parliament unless-
. (a) a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, in 
the whole of India or, as the cue may be, in the whole or 
10 any part of the State, at the time of the passing of such 
resolution, and 
(b) the Election Commission certifies that the conti-
nuance in force of the Proclamation approvoeci under cllluse 
(3) during the period specified in such resolution is' neces-
! 5 sary on account of difficulties in holding general elections 
to the Legislative Assembly of the State conceirn~." . 
20 
30 
35 
45 
... Artide 358 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (1) 
of that article, and-
(a) in clause (1) liS so renumbered,-
(i) in the opening portion, for the words "While a Proclama-
tion of Emerg-ency is in operation", the wOf'ds "WhUe a Proclama-
tion of Emergency declaring that the security of India Of any 
part of the territory thereof is threaten~ by war or by :external 
aggression is in operation" shall be subatituW; 
{ti) in the proviso, for the words "where a Proclamation of 
Emergency". the words "where such Proclamation of !!meo.rgeney" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) after clause (1) as so renumbered, the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply-
(4) to any law which does not contain a recHal to the 
effect that such law is tn relation to the Proclamation of 
Emergency in operation when it is made; or 
"(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under 
a law containing such a recital.". 
41. Yn article 359 of the Constftution,-
(a) in clauses '(1) and (1A). for the words and figures "the rights 
conferred by Part ur', the words.fi~res and braekets "the rights 
conferred by Part III (except article 21)" shall be mbStftuted; 
(b) after clause (lA), the follOWing elauge shall be inserted. 
namely:- ,--, .......... .. 
"(lB) Nothing in clause (lA) shall apply-
(a) to any law which does not contain a recital to the 
effect that such law is in relation to the Proclamation of 
Emergency in operation when it is made: or 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
358. 
Aml\d-ment . ., 
article 
~9. 

ArueJ;ld-
ment 0' 
article 
380. 
Insertion 
of new 
article 
3S1A. 
Protection 
Of publi_ 
cation of 
proceed-
ings of 
Parlia-
ment and 
State Le-
,ialatur.. 
I2 
(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under 
a law containing such a recital.". 
42. In article 360. of the Constitution,-
(4) for clause (2), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1)-
(4) may be revoked or varied by a subsequent P~clama-
tioo; • 
(0) shall be laid before each House of Parliament; 
5 
'(e) shall cease to operate at the expiration of two 10 
months, unless before the expiration of that period it has 
been approved by' resolutions of both Houses of Parliament: 
Provided that if any such Proclamation is issued at a time 
when the House of the People has been disso1ved or the dissolu-
tion of the House of the People takes place during the period of 15 
two months referred to in sub-clause (c), and if a resolution ap-
proving the Proclamation has been passed QY the Council of 
States, but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation has 
been passed by the House of the :people before the expiration of 
that period, the Plroclamation shall cease to operate at the expi- ~ 
ration of thirty days from the date on which the Houseol the 
People first sits after its reconstitution, unless before the expt-
ration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving 
the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the 
People."; 
(b) clause (5) shall be omitted. 
43. After article 361 of the Constitution, the following article shall be 
inserted. namely:-
'361A. (1) No person shall be liable to any proceedings, civil or 
criminal, in any court in respect of the pUblication in a newspaper 30 
of a substantially true report of any proceedings of either House of 
! Parliament or the Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either 
House of the Legislature, of a State. unless the publication is preved 
to have been made with mallce: 
Provided that nothing in this clau8e shall apply to the publica- 35 
tion of any report of the proceedings of a secret sitting of either 
HoUle of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly, or, as the caae may 
be, either House of the Legislature, of a State. 
(2) Clause (1) shall apply in relation to reports or matters 
broadcast by means of wireless telegraphy as part of any programme 40 
or service provided by means of a broadcasting station as it applies 
in relation to reports or matters published in a newspaper. 
E~.-In this article, "newspaper" includes • Deft 
qency report containing material for iu~Ucation in a newspaper.'. 
J . I 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
i3 
«. AHicle 366 of the Constitution shall be !'ellumbered as clause (2) 
of that article, and before clause (2) as so renumbered, the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
.' . 
'(1) In the Preamble to this Constitution,-
(1) the expression "REPUBLIC", as qualified by the expres-
lion "SECULAR", means a republic in which there is equal 
respect for all religions; and 
(~) the expression "REPUBLIC", as qualified by the expres-
sion "SOCIALIST", means a republic in which there is freedom 
from all forms of exploitation, social, political and economic.' 
45. In article 368 of the Constitution,-
(4) in clause (2), after the proviso, the following proviso shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"Provided further that if such amendrnent- .: 
(a) seeks to make any change which, if made, would 
have the effect of-
I' 
(i) impairing the secular or democratic character of 
this Constitution; or 
(ii) abridging or taking away the rights of citizenS 
under Part Ill; or 
(iii) prejudicing or impeding free and fair elections 
to the House of the People or the LegIslative Assemblies 
of States on the basis of adult suffrage; or 
(iv) compromising the independence of the judiciary; 
or 
(b) seeks to amend this proviso, 
the amendment shall also require to be approved by the peopl~ 
ot India at a referendum under clause (4)."; 
(b) for clauses (4) and (5), the following clauses shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(4) The referendum for the purpose of seeking the approval 
of the people of India for any amendment of the natla'e referred 
to in the second proviso to clause (2) shall be through· a poll, 
and-
(i) all persons who are for the time being eligible to be 
voters under article 326 at elections to the Hou~e of the 
People shall be entitled to vote at such poll; and 
(Ii) any such amendment shall be deemed to have been 
approved by the people of India if such amendment is ap-
proved by a majority of the voters voting at such poll and the 
voters voting at such poll constitute not less than fifty-one 
per cent. of the voters entitled to vote at such poll. 
(5) The superintendence, direction and contNl of the pre-
paration of the rolls of voters for, and the conduct of, every 
referendum under this article shall vest in the £Lection Com-
mission and the result of such referendum as declared by the 
Election Commission shall not be called in question in any court. 
An1end-
ment of 
artiele 
388. 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
381. 

Amend-
ment of 
article 
371F. 
Ameftd-
ment of 
the 
Seventh 
Sehe~ 
clute. 
, . 
'(8) Subject to the provlslons of clauses (41) and. (5), Paflld-
ment may from time to time by law make provision with respect 
to all matters relating to, or in connection with,!'eferenda under 
this article, including the preparation of the rolls of voters.". 
41. In article 371F of the Constitution, in clause (e), for the words "six .') 
years", the words "five years" shall be substituted, and for the words 
"five years" in both the places where they occur, the words "four years" 
shall be substituted. 
47. In the ~enth Schedule to the Constitution,-
(4) in List I-Union List. entry 2A shall be omitted; 
(b) in List n-8tate List,-
Ii} til mtry 1, for the words "the use of any naval, military 
TO 
or air force or any other armed force of the Union or of any other 
force subject to the control of the Union or of any contingent or 
unit thereof", the words "the use of naval, military or air forces 15 
or any other armed forces of the Union" shall be substituted; 
(ij) for entry 2, the following entry shall be substituted. 
namely:-
"2. Police, including railway and village police."; 
(iii) after entry 10. the following entry shall be inserted. 20 
namely:-
"11. Education, including universities, subject to the 
provisions of t!II1tries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I and entry 25 
of List III."; 
:(i,,) after entry 18, the following entry shall be inserted, 25 
namely:-
"19. Forests."; 
(tlI) in entry 41, for the words "State public services", the 
words, figures and letter "State public sejl'Vices subject to the 
provisions of entry lIB of List III" shall be substituted; 30 
(c) in List I11-Concurrent List,-
(i) after entry; 11A, the following entry shall be inserted, 
narnely:-
"IlB. Adjudication or trial by tribtmals of disputes and 
complaints with respect to r~ruitment and conditions of ser- 35 
vice of persons appointed to public services and posts in con-
nection with the affairs of a State or of a local or other 
authority subject to the control of a State Government."i 
:M. entry 17A shall be omitted; 
(~) for entry 25, the following entry shall be substituted, 40 
~y:-
u25. Vocational anci technical trainina of labour .... 

IS 
48. In the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, entries 87, 92 and 130 
shall be omitted. 
4t. In the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, sections 
18, 19, 21, 22, 31, 32, 34, 35, '58 and 59 shall be omitted. 
Amend-
ment of 
the 
Ninth 
Schedule. 
Amend. 
ment of 
the Cons-
titution 
(Forty-
second 
Amend. 
ment) 
Act, 1978. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Recent' experience has shown that the fundamental rights, including 
those of life and liberty, granted to citizens by the Constit lltion are, cap-
able of being taken away by a transient majority. It is, therefore, neces-
sary to provide adequate safeguards against the recurrence of such a 
contingency in the future and to ensure to the people themselves an 
effective voice in determining the foon of government under which they 
are to live. This is one of the primary objects of this Bill. 
2. It is, therefore, proposed to provide that certain changes in the 
Constitution which would have the effect of impairing its secular or de-
mocratic character, abridg:ng or taking away fundamental rights, pre-
judicing or impeding free and fair elections on the basis of adult suffrage 
and compromising the independence of judiciary, can be made only if 
they are approved by the people of India by a majority of votes at a 
referendum in which at least fifty-one per cent. of the electorate parti-
cipate. Article 368 is being amended to ensure this. 
3. In view Oof the special position sought to be given to fundamental 
rights, the right to property, which has been the occasion f<or more than 
one amendment of the Constitution, would cease to be a fundamental 
right and become only a l'cgal right. Necessary amendments for this 
purpose are being made to article 19 and artcle 31 is being deleted. It 
would, however, be ensured that the removal of property from the list 
of fundamental rights would not affect the right of minorities to establish 
and administer educational institutions of their choice. 
4. Similarly, the right of persons holding land for personal cultivation 
and within the ceiling limit to receive compensation at the market value 
would not be affected. 
5. Property, while ceasing to be a fundamental right, would, however, 
be given express recognition as a legal right, provision being made that 
no person shall be deprived of his property save in accordance with law. 
6. A Proclamation of Emergency under article 352 has virtually the 
effect of amending the Constitution by converting it fctr the duration into 
that of a Unitary State and enabling the' rights of the citizen to move 
the courts for the enforcement of fundamental rights-including the right 
to life and liberty-to be suspended, Adequate safeguards are, therefore, 
necessary to ensure that this power is properly exercised and is not abused. 
It is, therefore, proposed that a Proclamation of Emergency can be issued 
only when the security of India or any part of its territory is threatened 
by war or external aggression or by anned rebellion. Internal distur-
bance not amounting to anned rebellion would not be a ground for the 
issue of a Proclamation. 
7, Further, in order to ensure that a Proclamation is issued only after 
due consideration, it is sought 'to be provided that an Emergency can be 
proclaimed only on the baSis of written advice tendered to the President 
by the Cabinet. In addition, as a Proclamation of Emergency virtually 
has the effect of amending the 'Constitution, it is being provided that the 
Proclamation would have to be approved by the two Houses of Parliament 
by the same majority which is necessary to amend the Constitution and 
such approval would have to be given within a period of one month. 
Any such Proclamation would 'be in force only fOor a period of six months 
16 

17 
and can be continued only by further resolutions passed by the same 
majority. The Proclamation would also cease to/be in operation if a res0-
lution disapproving the continuance of the ProclamatiOn. is passed by Lok 
Sabha. Ten per cent. or more of the Members of Lok Sabha can requi-
sition a special meeting for considering a resolution for disapproving 
the Proclamation. 
8. As a further check against the misuse of the Emergency prOVisions 
and to put the right to life and· liberty on a secure footing, it would be 
provided that the power to suspend the right to move the court for the 
enforcement of a fundamental right cannot be exercised in respect of 
the f.undametltal r;ght to life and liberty. The right to liberty is further 
strengthened by the provision that a law for preventive detention cannot 
authorise, in any case, detention for a longer period than· two months, \J&o 
less an Advisory Board has reported that there is sufficient cause for 8U(,.P 
detention. An additional safeguard would be provided by the reqUire-
ment that the Chairman of an Advisory Board shall be a serving Judge 
of the appropriate High Court and that the Board shall be constituted in 
accordance with the recommendations of the Chief Justice of that High 
Court. 
9. A special provision is being made guaranteeing the right of the 
media to report freely and without censorship the proceedings in Par-
liament and the State Legislatures. The provision with regard to the 
breakdown of the constitutional machinery iJ;l the States is being amended 
so as to provide that a Proclamation issued under article 356 would be 
in fOil'Ce only for a period otf six months in the first instance and that it 
cannot exceed one year ordinarily. However, if a Proclamation of Emer-
gency is in operation and the Election Commission certifies that the ex-
tension of the President's rule beyond a period of one year is necessary 
on account of difficulties in holding elections to the Legislative Assembly 
of the State concerned, the period of operation of the Proclamation can 
be extended beyond one year. This is subject to the existing limit of 
three years. These changes would ensure that democratic rule is restored 
to a State after the minimum period which will be necessary for holding 
elections. 
10. With a view to avoiding delays, it is proposed to amend articles 
132, 133 and 134 and insert a new alrticle 134A to prov:ide that a High 
Court should consdder the question of granting a certificate for:. appeal 
to Supreme Court immediately after the delivery of the judgment, 
decree, final order or sentence concerned on the basis of an oral appli-
cation by a party or, if the High Court deems fit so to do, on its own 
motion. Cases of special leave to appeal by Supreme Court will be left 
to be regulated exclusively by article 136. 
11. The other amendments proposed in the BiLl are mainly for re-
moving or correcting the distortions which came into .the Constitution 
by reason of amendments enacted during the period of the. Internal 
Emergency. 
12. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. The notes on clauses 
explain in detail the various provisions of the Bill. 
Nzw Dl:LHIj SHANTI BHUSHAN. 
The 9th May, 1978. 

Notes on cll1tLSe! 
1. Clauses 2, 4, 5. 6, 7, .rub-cZau.se (b) of clau.se '8 and clause 34.-1'be 
object of the amend.m.e!nts proposed in these provisions is to take away 
the right to property from the category of fundamental rights and make 
the same a right which can be regulated by ordinary law. Clause 
2(a) (ii) seeks to omit sub-clause (f) of clause (1) of articlE!! 19 which 
guarantees to citizens the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property. 
Clause 6 seeks to omit article '31 relating to the right to property. The 
saf~m'd contained in article 31 relating to acquisition of property of an 
educational institution established and administered by a minority is 
sought to be incorporated in article 30 by the amendment to that article 
proposed in clause 4. Clause 34 seeks to insert a new articlti 300A in 
Part XII of the Constitution to provide that no person shall be deprived 
of his property save by authority of law. The amendments proposed in 
claus~ 2(8)(i), clause 2(b), clause 5, clause 7 and clause 8(b) are of a 
consequential nature. 
2. Clause. 3.-This clause seeks to amend the provisions as to preven-
tive detention contained in article 22-
(a) for restricting the maximum period for which a person may 
be detained without obtaining the opinion of the Advisory Board from 
three months to two months; 
(b) for providing that an Advisory Board shall consist of a 
Chairman and not less than two other members, that the comp06i-
tibn of an Advisory B08'l'd shall be in accordance with the recom-
m~dations of the Chief JUlltice of the appropriate High Court (that 
is to say, the High Court for Delhi in the case of detention orders 
'made by the Central Government or officers subordinate to the Cen-
tral Goverrunent; the High Court for a Sta~ in the case of detention 
orders made by a State Government or officers subordinate to a State 
Government; and such High Court as may be specified by Parliament 
by law in the case of ord~s of detention made by the Administrator 
of a Union territory or officers subordinate to him), and that the 
Chairman of an Advisory Board shall be a sitting Judge of the ap-
propriate High Court and the other members of an AdviSOry Board 
shall be sitting or retired Judges of any High Court; and 
(c) for abolishing the system of preventive detention without 
reference to an AdviSOry Board provided in sub-clause (8) of clause 
(7) of article 22. 
:i. Clause. 4, 5, 6 and 7.-See paragraph 1 above. 
4. Cl.ause S.-The amendment proposed in su~lause (a) of this clause. 
is for confining the protection afforded by article 31C only to laws giving 
eftect to the policy of the State towards securing the directive principles 
specified in clauses (b) and (c) of article 39. This would have the effect 
of restoring the article, to the form in which it stood before the amend-
ment made to th~.'article by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) 
IS 

19 
. Act, 1976 came into force. The amendment proposed in sub-clause (Ii) 
is consequential to the omission of article 31 (see paragraph 1 above). The 
amendment proposed in sub-clause (C) 15 tor onuung tne portlon ft!!aung 
to dec.l.aration contained in article 31C which was strUCk down by tht! 
Supreme Court in Kesavananda Bharati vs. the SLate of KeraLa (!If/a 
supp. SeR H). 
5. Clause 9.-This clause seeks to insert a new directive principle in 
article ~8 to the eUect that the ::;tate ~hall stnve to mirumise mequal1ties 
in inco~e and endeavour to el!Ininat~ 1nequalities in status, faclli1.ies and 
opportunities not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of 
people residing in di1ferent areas or engaged in different vocatlons. 
6. CLause 1o.-Article 71 as original1y enacted gave jurisdiction to 
the Supreme Court to mqL1;.lfe into all doubts and d.lSpUtes arlSmg out 
of Of ill connection. with the election ot a PreSident or V Ice~l'rf-!sldent, 
'rhe ConsUtutlOn flhirtY-111IlLh Amepdrnent) Act, lIf/a, SUbstituted me 
article by a new article leaving it to .Parliament to determine the autno-
fity or body which may inqUlre into such dOUbts and dlsputes. ,ThiS 
clause seeks to restore tne position as it obtained b,¥ore the l.;onstltution 
(Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 197:>, came into force. 
7. Clause H.-This clause seeks to amend clause (1) of article 74 of 
the Constitution to provid«1 that the President may l'equire tbe (;ouncll 
of Ministers to reconsider any advice tendered by tbem and that the 
President shail act in accordance with the adVice tendered after such 
rCJConsidera tion. 
S. CLau.ses 12 and 23.-The Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) 
Act included a new clause (4) in article 77 and a new clause (4) in article 
166 to take away the power of courts to compel productIon of rules relat-
ing to transaction of the busin~s of the Government of India and the 
Government of a State. Clause 12 seeks to omit the said clause (4) of 
article 77 while clause 23 seeks to omit the said clause (4) of article 166. 
9. Clau.ses 13, 24 and 46.-These clauses seek to amend articles 83, 172 
and 371F respectively of the Constitution to restore the term of the Lok 
Sabha and the State Legislative Assemblies to five years with n¥essary 
saving provisiOns. 
10. Clauses 14 and 25.-These clauses seek to substitute articles 103 ~d 
192 (relating respectively to decisions on queBtiDns as to disqualification 
of Members of Parliament and State Legislatures) to provide that deci-
sions on questions as to disqualifk:ation of Members shall be in accord-
ance with the opinion of the Election Commission and thqreby restore 
the position as it obtained prior to the Constitution (Forty-second 
Amendment) Act. 
11. Clauses 15 and 26.-These clauses seek to amend article 105 a.nd 
article 194 (r~ating respectively to the privileges of Houses of ParlIa-
ment and of State Legislatures). The amenc:lIoonts are for the purpose 
of omitting the references to the House of Commons in these articles. 
12. Clau.ses 16, 27 and 32.-The Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amend-
ment) Act, 1975, inserted a new clause (4) in article ·123, article 
213 and article 239B (rel.at~g re~pectivel~ to . the powers of the 

":PreSident, Governor of a State and Administrator of a Union territory 
to promulgate Ordinances) to specify expressly that the satisfaction of 
the President, Governor or Administrator regarding the eXistence of the 
circumstances necessary for taking immediate action by promulgation of 
an Ordinance shall be final and conclusive. The said new clauses are 
proposed to be omitted. 
13. Clausell rl, 18, 19 and 20.-At present appeal lies under article 132 
of the Constitution to the Supreme Court in certain cases upon the High 
Court granting· a certificate under that articlEt Where the High Court 
has refused to give such a certificate, the Supreme Court may grant 
special leave. Under article 133, appeal lies to the Supre,me Court from 
any judgment, decree or final order in a civil proceeding of a High Court 
11 the High Court grants a certificate under that article. Under article 
134:(1)(c), an appeal lies to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final 
order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court if the High 
Court grants a certificate that the; case is a fit one for appeal to the 
Supreme Court. It is proposed to amend articles 132, 133 and 134 and 
insert a new article l34A 'to provide that the High Court should consider 
the questiLn of granting of certificate immediately on the delivery of the 
judgment, decree, final order, or sente~e concerned. on the basis of an 
oral application by a party or, if the High Court deems it fit so to do, on 
its own motion. It is also proposed to omit the provisions in article 132 
relating to grant of special leave by Supreme Court in cases where the 
High Court refuses to give a certifica.te. Cases of special leave to appeal 
by Supreme Court will thus be left to be regulated exclusively by article 
136 of the Constitution. 
14. Clause 21.-This relates to article 139A which was inserted by the 
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act. Under clause (1) of this 
,article, if the Supreme Court is sa:tisfied, on an application made by the 
, Attomey-General of India, that cases involving the same or substan-
tially the same questions of law are pending before it and one or 
more High Courts or before two or more High Courts and that such 
questions are substantial questions 0If general importance, the Supreme 
Court may withdraw the case or cases pending before the High Court 
or the High Courts and dispose of all the cases itself. The Suprem~ 
Court can take action under this provision only if an application is made 
by the Attorney-Geperal. Clause (1) of article l39A is sought to be 
amended so as to enable a party to any such case also to make a similar 
application 1n the Supreme Court. 
15. CZau.se 22.-Under article 150, as amended by the Constitution 
(Forty-seporid Amendment) Act, the form in which accounts of the Union 
'and the States shall be kept shall be such as may be pres£ribed by the 
President after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India. This clause seeks to ame,nd article 150 to provide that the form 
should be prescribed with the concurrence of the Comptroller and Audi-
tor-General and not merely after consultation. 
16; CLause 23;-See paragraph 8 above. 
17. qaU8e 24.-See paragraph 9 above. 
18. CIa",e 21>.-See paragraph 10 above. 
19. ClaUie 26.-See paragraph 11 above. 

21 
20. Clause ZT.-See paragraph 12 above, 
21. Clause 28.-Sub-clause (b) of this clause seeks to omit sub-claUSe 
(c) of clause (2) of article 217 of the Constitution which was inserted 
by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act for making persons 
who, in the opinion of the President, are distinguished jurists, eligible 
for appointment as JudgE¥! of High Courts. The amendment proposed 
in sub-clause (a) of this clause is of & consequential and drafting nature. 
Sub-clause (c) of this clause seeks to amend the Explanation to sub-
clause (2) of article 217 for the purpose of removing an anOMaly. Under 
clause (a) of the Explanation as it exists now, any period during which 
a person has, after becoming an advocate, held judicial office or the office 
of the member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, 
requiring special knowledge of law will b~ included in computing the 
period during which he has been an advocate for the purposes qf ueter-
mining his eligibility for appointment as a Judge of a High Court. There 
is no corresponding provision in the Explanation in relation to a person 
who started as a Judge without being an advocate and who subsequently 
became an advocate or a member of a tribunal or the holder of any post 
under the Union or a State requiring special knowlt!)dge of law. 
22. Clause 29.-The proviso to article 225 of the Constitution as 
originally enacted was intended to remove the bar that existed before 
the comm~ncement of the Constitution in respect of the original jurisdic-
tion of the High Courts in r~venue matters. The Constitution (Forty-
second Amendment) Act omitted this proviso. This clause seeks to res-
tore the said proviso. 
23. Clause 30.-Subject to a modification, this clause seeks to restore, 
a·rticle 226 to th~ form in which it was prior to its amendment by the 
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act. The modification is for 
the purpose of providing that in cases in which an interim order is made, 
ex parte, on or in any proceedings relating to a petition under artic1e 
226, the party against whom such order is made may make an application 
to the High Court for the vacation of such order and furni.<lh a copy of 
such application to the party in whose favour such order has been 
made or the counsel of such party. It is also being provided that if the 
High Court fails to dispose of the application within a period of two 
weeks from the d&t~ On which it is received by the High Court or from 
the date on which the copy of such application is furnished to the party 
against whom it is made, whichever is later, the interim order shall, on 
the expiry of the said period, stand vacated. Where the High Court is 
closed on the last day of the said period, the interim order will stand 
vacated only if the applicati.on is not disposed of before the expiry of 
the next day on which the High Court is open. 
24. Clause 31.-This clause seeks to restore article 227 of the Consti-
tution (relating to power of superintendence of High Court) tQ the form 
in which it was prior to its am~ndment by the Constitution (Forty-second 
Amendment) Act. 
25. Clause 32.-See paragraph 12 above. 
26. Clause 33.-This clause seeks to omit article 257A of the Consti-
tution relating to deployment of armed forces or other forces of the Union 
to States. The said article was inserted in the Constitution by the Constf-
tution (Forty-second Amendment) Act. 

22 
27. CtatLse 34.-See paragraph 1 above. 
28. Clause 35.-This clause seeks to omit Part XIV A of the Constitu-
tion 'relating to administrative tribunals and tribunals for other matters 
in place of High Courts. The said Part XIV A was inserted by the Consti-
tution (Forty-second Amendment) Act. 
29. Clauses 36 and 37.-Clause 37 seeks to omit article 329A relating 
to special provisions as to elections to Parliament in the case of Prime 
Minister and Speaker. The said article 329A was inserted by the Consti-
tution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975. The amendment to article 
329 proposed in clause 36 is of a consequential nature and is for the pur-
pose of omitting the 'reference therein to a·rticle 329A. 
30. Clause 38.-This clause seeks to amend article 352 relating to 
Proclamation of Emergency to provide for various safeguards agaillRt 
abuse of powers under the article. In the first place, the ~round of "in-
ternal disturbance" is being substituted by the ground of "armed re.bel-
lion" to exclude scope for Proclamation of Emergency in cases of internal 
disturbance not involving armed rebellion. In the second place., it is 
being provided that the President shall not issue a Proclamation of 
Emergency unless the decision of the Cabinet that such a Proclamation 
may be issued has been communicated to him in writing. In the third 
place, it is being provided that a Proclamation of Emergency would re-
quire to be approved within a period of one month (instead of two 
months as provided at present) by resolution of both the Houses of Par-
liament and that such rE¥lolution should be by a majority of the total 
membership of each House and not less than two-thirds of the majority 
of the members present and voting in ea('h House ins~ad ryf a simple 
majority provided at present. In th~ fourth place, it is being provided 
that for the continuance of the Emergency, approval by resolution of 
both Houses would be required evetry six months. In the fifth place, 
provision is being made that a Proclamation of Eme,rgency would cease 
to be operative whenever a resolution to that effect is adopted by the 
Lok Sabha by a simple majority of the members of the House pr~nt 
and voting. It is also being provided that not less than one-tenth of the 
total membership of the Lok Sabha may, by notice, requisition l'\ meeting 
of th~ Lok Sa·bha for the purpose of considering the continuance of a 
Proclamation of Emergency. 
Provision has also been made for the omission of clause (5) of article 
352, which was inserted by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) 
Act, 1975 and which makes the satisfaction of the President as to the 
existence of a grave Emergency necessitating the issue o1i a Proclamation 
of Emergency final. . 
31. Clause 39.-This clause seeks to amend article 356 of the Consti-
tution relating to the President's power to issue a Proclamation in case 
of failure of constitutional machinery in a State. The article is being 
amended to specify that such a Proclamation will. upon its being ap-
proved first by resolutions by both Houses. continue for six months fl['om 
tbp' aate of issue of Proclamation and that upon its being approved like-
wise on a second occasion, it would continue for a fuJ1ther period of six 
months. The article is also being amended to specify that a resolution 

23 
with respect to the continuance in force of a Proclamation under the 
article for any period beyond the expiration of one year from the date 
of issue of such Proclamation shall not be passed by either House of Parlia-
ment unless a Proclamation of Emerge~ is in operation at the time of 
the passing o:fi such resolution and the Election Commission certifies that 
the continuance in force of the Proclamation under the article during the 
period specified in such resolution is necessary on account of difficulties 
in holding elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned. 
32. CJ.a,use' 4O.-This clause seeks to amend article 358 relati.ng to the 
suspension of provisions of article 19 during Emergencies. By virtue of 
the amendments, the provisions of article 19 will become suspended only 
in the case of a Proclamation of Emergency issued on the ground of war 
or external aggression and not in the case 0: a Proclamation of Emer-
gency issued on the ground of armed rebellion. Further, the suspension 
of article 19 under article 358 will not apply in relation to any ~w whkh 
does not contain a recital to the effect that such law is in relation to the 
Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is made or to any exe-
cutive action taken otherwi~e than under a law containing such a" t:'ecital. 
33. Clau.se 41.-This clause seeks to make two amendments to article 
359 of the Constitution relating to ·suspension of the enforcement oii the 
rights conferred by Part III during Emergencies. The first amendment 
is for providing that the enforcement of the right to life and personal 
liberty under article 21 cannot be suspended. The second amendn)ent 
is for providing that the suspension of the enforcement of any right 
under the article will not apply in relation to any law which does not 
contain a recital to the effect that such law is in relation to the Procla-
mation of Emergency in operation when it is made or to any executive 
action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a recital. 
34. Clause 42.-This clause seeks to make two amendments in article 
360 of the Constitution. The first amendment is of a drafting nature 
and is for the purpose of making the provision of clause (2) of article 
360 self-contained. At present the said clause (2) incorporates by re-
ference the provisions of clause (2) of article 352. Since clause (2) o~ 
article 352 is being amended, it has become necessary to make clause (2) 
of article 360 self-contained. The second amendment is for omitting 
claU3e (5) of article 360 which was inserted by the Constitution (Thirty-
eighth Amendment) Act and which makes the satisi>action of the Presi-
dent as to the arising of a situation· whereby the financial stability or 
credit of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened, final and 
conclusive. 
35. Cla.we 43.-This clause seeks to insert a new article 361A in the 
Constitution. The new article provides for constitutional protection in 
respect of publication of proceedings of Parliament and of State Legis-
latures. The protection will not he available in respect of proceedinSl' 
of secret sittings. 
36. C141U.e 44.-This clause seeks to amend article 366 of the ConstI-
tution to include therein provisions for explaining the significance of the 
expressions "SECULAR" and "SOCIALIST" as used in the Preamble. 

• 24 
37. Clause 45.-This clause seeks to amend article 368 of the Constitu-
tion relating to the power of Parliament to amend the COllstitution. 
Apart from omitting clauses (4) and (5) which were inserted in the 
article by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Aet, 1976, for 
taking away the jurisdiction of the courts in respect of validity of cons-
tttulional amendments, this clause seeks to provide that amendments 
w!1ich would have the effect of-
(a) impairing the secular or democratic character of the Consti-
tution; or 
(b) abridging or taking away the rights of citizens under Part 
m;~ -
(c) prejudicing 'or impeding free and fair elections to the House 
of the People or the Legislative Assemblies of the States on the basis 
of adult suffrage; or 
(d) compromising the independence of the judiciary, 
would require to be approved by the people of India at a referendum. 
Any amendment for modifying or omitting the requirement as to such 
referendum would also require to be approved at such a referendum. In 
place of the existing clauses (4) and (5) of article 368, sub-clause (b) of 
clause 45 seeks to substitute three new clauses (4), (5) and (6). New 
clause (4) provides that every referendum will be through a poll All 
persons eligible to be voters at elections to Lok Sabha will be eligible 
to vote. If fifty one per cent. or more of the eligible voters vote at such 
a poll and a majority of the voters voting at such a poll approve an am-
endment, the amendment will be deemed to have been approved. New 
clause (5) seeks to vest the superintendence, direction and control of 
referenda in the Election Commission. The result of a referendum as 
declared by the Election Commission will be final. New Clause (6) 
seeks to empower Parliament to provide by law for ma~ters relating to 
or in connection with referenda. 
38. Clause 46.-See paragraph 9. 
\ 39. Clause 47 . ......aa....,.d:t4t&e seeks to amend the Seventh Schedule to 
the Constitution. Sub-clause (a) of this clause seeks to omit entry 2A 
at the Union List relating to deployment of armed forces of the Union 
to States. The omission is consequential to the omission of artIcle 257A 
(See paragraph 26 above). 
Sub-cla.u8e (b) seeks to amend the State List. The amendments pro-
posed. in items (i) and (ii) to entries 1 and 2 of the State List are con-
sequential to the proposed omission of entry 2A of the Union List. The 
amendments proposed in items (iii) and (iv) are for including the entries 
.,relating to education and forest in the State List and for restoring the 
pOSition as it obtained before the Constitution (Forty-second Amend-
ment) Act. . .:I'he amendment in item (v) to entry 41 of the State List is 
consequential to the insertion of a new entry llB in the Concurrent List 
under sub-clause (c) (i). 
Sub-ctat£le (c).-Item (i) of this sub-clause seeks to insert a new 
entry relating to adjudication or trial by tribunals of disputes and com-
plaints with r~spect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons 

25 
appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of a 
State or of a local or other authority subject to the control o~ a State 
Government. The proposed entry and entry 70 of the Union List win 
facilitate the creation 0: common tribunals for adjudication or trial of 
disputes and complaints with respect to reeruitment and conditions of 
serVice of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection 
with the a1fairs of a State or of a local or other authority subject to the 
control of a Central Government or a State Government. 
Item (ii) of sub-clause (c) seeks to omit entry 17A of the Con-
current List relating to forests and it is consequential to the inclusion of 
forests in the State List. 
Item (iii) of sub-clause (c) seeks to SUibstitute a new entry for entry 
25 of the Concurrent List and it is consequential to the inclusion of edu-
cation in the State List.' J 
40. Cl.a..use 48.-This clause seeks to amend the Ninth Schedule for 
omitting entries 87 [the Representation of the People Ae't, 1951, the 
Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1974, and the Election 
Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975], 92 (the Maintenance of Internal Security 
Act, 1971) and 130 (the Prevention of Publication of Objectionable 
Matter Act, 1976). 
41. Clause 49.-Sections 18, 19, 21, 22, 31, 32, 34 and 35 of the Consti-
tution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, have not been brought into force. 
In addition to omitting these sections, this clause seeks to omit section 58 
(special provisions as to pending petitions under article 226) and section 
59 (power of the President to remove difficulties) of the said Act. 

ProtectioD 
Of. 
certain 
rights 
regarciina 
freedom 
of 
speech, 
etc. 
Protection 
agaimt 
arrest 
and 
detention 
in 
certain 
caBel. 
.. 
ANNEXURE-
ExTRACTS nOM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
• • • • • 
19. (1) All citizens shall have the right-
• • • • 
ee) to reside and settle in any part 0.£ the tenitory of India: 
(f) to acquire, hold and dispose of property; and 
• • • • • 
(5) Nothing in sulH!lauses (d). (e) and (f) of the said clause shaD 
affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent 
the State from making any law imposing, reasonable restrictions on the 
exercise of any of the rights conferred by the said sub-clauses either in 
the interests of the general public or for the protection of the interests of 
any Scheduled Tribe. 
• • • • • 
12. (1) • • • • • 
(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the 
detention of a person for a longer period than three months unless-
(a) an Advisory Board consisting of persons who are, or have 
been, or are qualified to be appointed as, .Tudges of a HiJ!h Court has 
reported befO're the expiJratioQll of the said period of thr-ee months 
that there is in its opinion sufficient ('au~e for sUCn detention: 
Provided that nothing in this sllO-clau~e shan authorise the 
detention of any person beyond the maximum period prescribed by 
any law made by Parliament under sub-clause (h) of clause (7); or 
(h) such person is detained in accordance with -the provisions of 
any law made by Parliament under sub-claUses (a) and (0) of 
clause (7). 
• • • • • 
(7) Parliament may by law prescribe-
(a) the circumstances under wmch, and the class or classes ot 
cases in Which, a person may be det1\ined for a period lon~er tlian 
three months under any law providing for preventive detention 
without obtainin~ the opinion of an Advisory Board in accordance 
with the proviSions of sub-clause (a) of clause (4); 
(b) the maximum period for which any person may in an:y 
class or classes of cases be detained under any law providing for 
preventive detention; and 
(e) the procedure to be fonowed by an Advisory Board in .,. 
inquiry under sub-clause (a) of clause (4). 
• • • '" .. 
I ~6 

Right to Property 
31. (1) No person shall be deprived of his property save by authority 
(if law. - ------ .,~ '11f1 
(2) No property shall be compulsorily acquired' or requisitioned save 
for a public putrpose and save by authority of a law whi~h provides for 
acquisition. or requisitioning of the property for an amount which may 
be fixed by such law or which may be determined in accordance with 
such principles and given in such manner as may be specified in such law; 
and no such law shall be called in question in any court on the ground 
that the amount so fixed or determined is not adequate or that the whole 
or any part of such amount is to be given otherwise than in casli: 
Provided--fhat in making any law providing, for the compulsory 
acquisition of any property of an educational institution established and 
administered by a minority, referred to in clause (1) of ar~fcle 30, the 
State shall ensure that the amount fixed -bv or determined 'ur; :ler such 
law for the acqui'Sition of such property is ~ch as would n,ol restrict or 
abrogate the rlpt guaranteed under that clause. . 
(2A) Where a law does not pro!Vide for the transfer. of, ,the ownership 
or right to posseSSion of anv property to the State or to a corporation 
owned or controlled by the State, it shall not be deemed to provide for 
the compulsory acqUisition or requisitioning of ptoperty, notwithstanding 
that it deprives any person of hi's property. 
(2B) Nothing in sub-clause (f) of clause (1) of article 19 shall affect 
any such law as is referred to in clause (2). 
(3) No su~ law as is referred to in clause (2) made by the Legislature 
of a state shall have effect unless such law. havine: been treserrved for the 
consideration of the President, has received his assent. 
(4) If any Bill pending- at the commencement of this Constitution in 
the Legislature of a State has, after it hac; been passed by SUCD Legisla-
tnre, been reserved for the consideration rf the President and has received 
his assent, then, notwithstanding- anythinl! in this Constitution, the law 
so assented to shall not be called in quesUon in any court on the 'ground 
that it contravenes the provisfrns of clause (2). 
(5) Nothing in clause (2) shall affect~ 
(a) the provisions of any existing law other than a law to which 
the provisions of clause (6) apply, or 
(b) the provisions of any law which the State may hereafter 
make-
(i) for the purpose of imposing or levying any tax or 
penalty, or 
(ii) for the promotion of public health or the prevention of 
danger to life or property, or 
(itt) in pursuance of any agreement en~red into between 
the Gwernment of the Dominion of India or the Government 
of India and the Government of any other country, or otherwise, 
with respect to property declared by law to be evacuee property. 
(6) Any law of the State enacted not more than ei~htet'n months 
before the commencement of this Constitution may within three months 
from such commencement be submitted to the President for his certifica-
tion; and thereupon, if the President by public notification so certifies, 
1t shall not be called in question in any court on the ground that it CO'Il-
Compul-
sory 
acqulsl-
tion of 
property. 

Saving of 
laws pro-
viding for 
acquisi-
tion of 
-atates, 
etc. 
Savini 
of laws 
giving 
etrect to 
certain 
directive 
princi-
ples. 
travenes the provisions of clause (2) of this article or has contravened 
the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 299 of the Government of 
India Act, 1935. 
Saving of Certain Laws 
3lA. (1) Notwithstanding anylthing contained in article 3, no law 
providing for- . 
(a) the acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights 
therein or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights, or 
(b) the taking over of the management of any. property by the 
State for a limited period either in tne puBlic interest or in order to 
secure the proper management of the property, or 
(0) the amalgamation of two or more corporations either in 
the public interest or in order to secure the proper management of 
any of the corporatians, or 
(d) the extinguishment or modification of any rights of manag-
ing a'gents, secretaries and treasurers, managing directors, directors 
or managers of corporations, or of any' voting rights of shareholders 
thereof, or . . 
(e) the extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing 
by virtue of any a'~ement, lease or licence for the purpose of 
searching for, or winning, any mineral or mineral oil, or the pre-
mature termination or cancellation of any such agreement, lease or licence, . .' . ~. ". -.~, 
•• 11 be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, 
or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by article 1.4. article 
19 or article 31: 
Provided that where such law is a law made by tlie L~gjslature Of a 
State, the provisions Df this article shall not applv thereto unless such 
law, having been reserved for the consideratiDn ~f the President, has 
received his assent: 
Provided further that where any law makes any proviston fDr the 
Requisition by the State of anv estate and where anv land comprised 
therein is held by a penc;on under his pel"Sonal cultivation. it shall not 
he lawful for the State to acquire any portion of such land as is within 
the ceiling limit applicable to him under any law for the tilN? being in 
force '01' any buildin~ or structure shndintf thereon or appurtenant 
thereto, unless the law relatin~ to the acquisition of such land. buildinlir 
or structure, provides for payment of compensation at a rate which slla11 
not be- less than the market value thereof. 
• • • • 
31C. Notwithstanding' anvthinst contained i~ ar'tirle 13. no law ¢ving 
effect to the policy of the State towards sec'unn~ aU Dr any of the prin-
ciples laid down in Part IV shall be deemed to be voin on the ground 
that it is inconsistent with. or bikes awav or abridl!es any of the rights 
conferred bY' article 14. article 19 or article 31: and no law containing a 
df'f'laration that it is for giving effect to such policy shall be called in 
qustion in any court on the ground that_ iii: does not give effect to such 
policy:, I • • 
Provid~d that where such law is made by the Le~slature of a State, 
the provisions of this article shall not !tpplv thereto unless !lUch law, 
baving been reserved for the consideration of the President, has received 
his assent.. 
• • • • • 

29 
38. The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by 
securing and protecting as effectively as it maya social order in which 
justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the insUtutions 
of the national life. 
• • • • * 
71. (1) Subject to the prOVlSlons of this Constitution, Parliament 
may by Jaw regulate any matter relating to or connected with the election 
of a President or Vice-President, including the grounds on which Buch 
election may be questioned: 
Provided that the election of a person as President or Vice-President 
shall not be called in question on the gtt'ound of the existence of any 
vacancy for whatever reason among the members of the electoral college 
electing h1DI. 
(2) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the 
election of a President or Vice-President shall be inquired into and 
decided by such authority or body and in such manner as may be prwided 
for by or under any law referred to in clause (1). . .... 
(3) The validity of any such law as is referred to in. clause (1) and 
the decision of any authority or body under such law shall not be called 
:n question in any court. 
(4) If the election of a person as President or Vice-President is 
declared void under, any such law as is refeIU'ed to in clause (1), acts 
done by himj in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties 
of the office of President or Vice-President, as the case may be, on or before 
the date of such declaration shall not be invalidated by reason of that 
declaration. 
• • • • • 
74. (1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister 
at the head to aid and advise the President who shall, in the exen:ise of 
his functions, act i.n accordance with such advice. 
• • • • • 
77. (1)· • • ....... • • 
(4) No court or other authority shall be entitled to require the prro-
duction of any rules made under clause (3) for the more convenient 
transaction of the business of the Government of India. 
• • • • • 
. " 
83. (1) • • • • • 
-(2) The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue 
for six years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no 10IDget' 
and the expiration of the said period of six years shall operate as a 
dissolution of the House: 
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emer-
gency is in operation, be extended by Parliament by law for a period 
not exceeding one ye8ll" at a time and not extending in any case beyona 
• period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to -operate . 
• • • • • 
State to 
secure a 
special 
order 
for the 
promotion 
of welfare 
of the 
people. 
Matters 
relating 
to or con_ 
nected 
with the 
election of 
a Presi-
dent or 
Vice-
President. 
Council 
of Minis_ 
ters to 
aid and 
advise 
'President. 
Conductot 
busineaa 
of the 
Govern_ 
mentof 
india . 
Duration 
ot 
Housea 
Of 
Parlia_ 
ment. 

Decision 
on ques-
tions as 
to dis-
quali_ 
fication. 
Powers, 
priVi-
leges, 
etc, of 
the 
Houses 
of Parlia_ 
ment 
and of 
the 
membe1'8 
and Ctml-
mittees 
thereof. 
Power 
of 
President 
to 
promuL 
gate 
O~nan­
cesdurinl 
recess of 
Parlia-
ment. 
Appella,te 
jurisdic-
tion ot 
Supreme 
Court 
In appeals 
from 
mah~ 
CourtI 
in certain 
cases. 
-
t 
30 
183. (1) If any question arises-
(II) IS to whether a member of either House of Parliament has 
become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause 
( 1) of article 102, or 
(b) as to whether a person, found guilty of a corrupt practice 
at an election to a House of Padiament under any law made by 
Parliament, shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, 
a member of either House 'of ParHament, or of a House of the Legis-
lature of a State, or as to the period for which he shall be so disquali-
fied, or as to the removal of, or the reduction of the period of, such 
disqualification, . 
the question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his 
dec;ision shall be final. 
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President 
shall consult the Election Commission and the Election Commission 
may, for.this purpose, make such inquiry as it thinks fit . 
• • • • 
185. (1) • • • • • 
(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of each 
House· of Parliament, and of the members and the committees of each 
House, shall be such as may from time to time be defined by Parlia-
ment by law, and, until SO' defined, shali be those of the House of Com-
mons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its members and 
committees, at the commencement of this Constitution. 
• • • • • 
123. (1) • • ... ... 
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the satisfaction 
of the President mentioned in clause (1) shall be final and conclusive 
and shall not be questioned in any cowrt on any 'ground. 
• • • • • 
132. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Comot from any judgment, 
det'rlee or final order of a High Court in the territory of India, whether 
in a civil, criminal or other proceeding, if the High Court certifies that 
the- case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation 
of ,this Constitution. 
(2), Where the High Court has refused to give such a certificate, the 
Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the case involves a substantial 
question of law as to the interpretaticn of this Constitution, 'grant special 
leave to. appeal from such judgment, decree or final order. 
(3) Where such a certificate is given, or such leave is granted, any 
party in the case may appeal to th~ Supreme Court on the ground that 
any such question as aforesaid has been wrongly decided and, with the 
leave of the Supreme Court, on any other ground. 

tzpianation.-For the purposes of this article, the expression "final 
order" U:acludes an order deciding a~ issue which" if decided in favour of 
the appellant, would be sufficient for the final disposal of the case, 
, 
~ (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judg-
ment, decree or final order in a civil proceeding of a High Court in the 
territory of India if the High Court certifies--
(a) that the case involves a suiJstantial question ot law of 
general importance; and 
(&) that in the opmion of the High Court the said question 
needs to be decided by the Supreme Court. 
• • • • • 
134. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judg-
ment, ftnal order or sentence in a criminal proe~ing of a Hilh Court 
in' the territory of India if the High Court-
• * * • • 
(c) certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme 
Court: 
Provided that an appeal under sub..clause (c) shall lie subject to 
such provisions as may be made in that behalf under clause (1) of 
article 145 and to sUl:h conditions as the High Court may establish or 
requJre. 
• • • • 
139A. (1) If, on an application made by the Attorney-General of 
India, the Supreme Court is satisfied that cases involving the same or 
SUbstantially the same questions of law are pending before it and one 
or more High Courts or before two or mO'I'e High Courts and that such 
queFtions are substantial questions of general importance, the Supreme 
Court may withdraw the case or cases pending before the High Court 
or the High Courts and d1spose of all the cases itself. 
• * • • * 
150. The accounts of the Union and of the States shall be kept in 
such form as the President may, after consultation with the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India, prescribe. 
• • • • • 
I .. (1) • • • • • 
Appellate 
jurisdic-
tion of 
Supreme 
Court in 
appeals 
from 
Rich 
Courts 
Jnregard 
to Civil 
matter .. 
Appellate 
jurisdic_ 
tion ot 
Supreme 
Court in 
regard to 
criminal 
matters. 
Transfer 
otcertaiu 
cases. 
Formol 
account. 
of the 
Union 
and o! 
the State •. 
Conduct 
ot IbUli-
(4) No court or other authority shall be entitled to require the pro- ~~:I;!.. 
duCti')D of any rules made under clause (3) for the more convenient vernment 
transaction of the business of the G<lrvemment of the State. of • 
• • • • • 
State, 

l)uration 
of State 
Legisla-
tures. 
"! 
Decision 
on q.-, 
tio~ 
uta. 
disqUAli': 
ftcation. 
Powers, 
privileges, 
etc., of 
the 
Houses 
of Le~~ 
latuM 
and of 
the 
members 
and com-
mittees 
thereof. 
Power 
of Gover-
172. (1) Every Legislative Assembly of every' State, unless sooner 
dibblved, shall continue for six years trom the date appoin~for its first 
mee_. and no longer and the expiration of the said period'" of six year. 
shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly: 
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of .Emer-
gen.cy is in operation, be extended by Parliament by law for a pEtri'od 
Jlot'exCeeding one year at a time and not ex~ding in any' case' :be-
yond a period of SIX monUlS alter the Proclamation h8$ cased to 
operate. 
• • . . 1,. 
,~.'. 1~2. 11) If allY. question arises-
la) as to w4ether a member of a House of tpe Lejislature 
of a State has become subject to any of the disquaWications men-
tioned in clause (1) of article 1~1, or ' 
,(0) as to whether a person, .found gUilty of a corrupt Factice 
at an election to a House 01 the Leglsla~ure of a State under any law 
made by .Parliament, shall be disqualified for beJ.Di cJl~ as. ,ad 
,;f01: bei.Dg, a membe.L' ot elt.nec ~oUBe of :Parliament or Qf,a ij.OliSe.01 
the LegJ.S1ature ot a State, oc as to the period for wilic.b.~.be ,a4all be 
so disqualified, or as 19 the removal 01, or the reductlon 01 the penod 
of, such disqualuicauun, 
the question &hall be referred for the decision 01 the President and 
IDS aecision shall be final. 
.(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the president 
shllll conswt t1le l£!ection CommiMion and the .l!;lection CommuilSion 
may, for ttus purpose, make 8ucb inquiry as it thinks tit. 
• • • • • 
194. (1) ... ... • .' .. 
(3) In other respects, the powers, privlleges and immunities of a 
House of the Legislature of a State, and of the members and the com-
nutteE$ of a HoUie of such Legi.~lature, 8baJl be such as ma~ from,. ~ 
to.time be defined by the Le~lature by UlW, and, until. so dedD~;sha~t: 
be tJiIose of the House of Commons of the Parliamep.t" of the United, 
KiDp~ and. of ite mem.bers and committees, at ibe commencmneJ).t of 
this ·C~tution. 
• • • • • 
213. (1) ... • ... • • 
nor to (4) Notwiths~ding anything in this Constitution, the satisfaction 
promul- of the Governor mentioned in clause (1) shall be final and cOnch.lsiveand 
gate: l shall not be questioned in any court on ariy ground. ' : 
Ordinaft-
ces dur-
Ing reoesS 
of Leal .. 
lature. 
Appoint-
ment and 
conditions 
of the 
office of a 
Judge of a 
High Court. 
'. • • • • 
217. (1) ... ... ... • • • 
,~ 
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge ~i a 
High Court unless he is a citi.zen of India and-
I, 
• • • • 
(b) has for at Least ten years been an advocate of a High Court' 
or of two or more such Courts in succession; or 

- - 33 
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, a distinguished jurllt. 
!~tanatiot&.-For the purposes of this clause-
'(G) in computing the period during which a person has been an 
adwcate of a High Court, there shall be included any Period ~uring 
Which the pf!lrsen (has held judidal office or the office of Ii member 
of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a state, requiring spe-
cial Jmowledge of law) after he became an advocate; 
(b) in comp\lting the period during which a pe~n has held 
j~dfclal office in the territory of India or been an advocate of a 
,Hig~ Court, tJiere shall be included any period before the com-
mencement of this Constitution during which be has held judiclal 
office in any area which was comprised before the fifteenth day of 
August, 1947, within India as defined by the Government of India 
Act, 1935, or has been an advocate of any High Court in any such 
area, as the case may be . 
• • • • 
IS. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the 
provtsions of any law of the appropriate Legislature madE!! by virtue of 
powers conferred on that Legislature by this Constitution, the jurisdic-
tion of, and the law administered in, any existing High Court, and the 
reSpective powers of thE!! Judges thereof in relation to the administration' 
df justice in the Court, including any power to make rules of Court' and 
to regulate the sittings of the Court and of members thereof sitting alarie 
or in Division Courts, shall be tbe\ sa-me as immediately before the com-
mencement of this Constitution . 
• , (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 32. every High Court shall 
have power, throughout the territorie!'; in relation to which it exercises 
jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority. including in appropriate 
dUell, any Government, within those territories directions, orders or 
wrltS, including writs in the nature of nabf'.(LC: corpus, mandamus, prohibi-
tion, quo wa7Tanto and certi<mrri, ot' any of them,-
'(tJ) for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by the 
provisions of Part III; or 
'(b) for tie redress of any: injury of a substantial trature by 
reason of the contravention of any other provision of this Constitu-
tion or any provision of any enactment or Ordinance or any Meier, 
rule, regulation, bye-law or other instrument made thereunder; or 
(c) for the redress of any injury by reason of any illegaJi.ty in 
any proceedings by or before any authority under any provision 
refen!ed to in sub-elause (b) where such il1egality has resulted in 
. subltanttal failure of justice. 
• • • • • 
. '-(3r'!4'o petition for the redress of any injury referred to in sub-clause 
(11) ot~sul)..clau8e (e) of clause {1) shall be entertained if any other 
x $nedy for' web redreis Is provided for by ()'[' under any other .law, for , 
the time being in force. 
Jurisdic-
tion of 
existing 
High 
Courts. 
Power 
o'fHigh 
Courts 
to issue 
certain 
writ.. 
I, .' 

Power 
ef super-
inten-
dence 
over 
all courts 
by the 
Hiah 
Court. 
Power 
of admi-
nUtrator 
to pro. 
m\11late 
Ordi-
cUnances 
dUl'iq 
recea 
of Lelis-
lature. 
AulItallce 
to Statel 
byc!eploy-
mentot 
armed 
foreet 
Grotht!r 
~ 
•. f.o.f.r~ : Dion. 
>~N\ 
34 
(4) No interim order (whether by way of injunction 01 stay or in 
any other manner) shall be made on, or in any proceedings relating to, 
a petition undet clause '(1) unless--
~ ........ - ... ~==::..-:-~~ ~ .. --~--- -'_..-
(a) copies of such petition and of all docum~t9-in "sup-p;;;:t'"' ~f 
the plea for such interim order are fumishf'd to the party against 
whom such petition is flIed or proposed to be filed;' and 
(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter. 
(5) The Hip Court may dispense with the requirements of sub-clauses 
(a) and (b) of clause "(4) and make an interim order as an exceptional 
meaSU'l'e if it is satisfied for reasons to be recorded in. wrltin~ 'that it is 
necessary so to do for preventing any loss bedng caused to the petitioner 
which cannot be adequately compensated in money but any such interim 
order shall, if it is not vacated earlier. cpase to have effect on the expiry 
of a period of fourteen days from the nate on which it is made unless 
the saM requirements have been complied with before the expiry of 
that period and the High Court has continued the operation of the 
interim order. 
(6) Notwithstanding anythin~ in ('lause (4) or clause (5) no interim 
order (whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other manDf!lr) 
shall be made on, or in any proceedin~s relatinf! to, a petition. under 
clause (1) where such order will havp- the effect of delayp.,g any inquiry 
Into a matter of pUblic importance or any investigation or inquiry into 
an offence 'Punishable with imprisonment or any action for the execution 
of any work or proiect of public utility, or th~ acq'uisition of any property 
for such execution, by the Government or any corporation owned. or 
controlled by the Government. 
• • • • • 
22'7. (1) Every Hi~h Court shall have superintendence over all courts 
subject to its app~llJ}te jurisdlction. 
• • • • • • 
(5) Nothing in this article shall be construed 88 giving to a High Court 
any jurisdiction to question any judgment of any inferior court which 
Is not othe!'wise subject to appeal or revision. 
• • • • • 
2398. (1) • • • • • 
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, th.e satisfaction of 
th~ administrator mentioned in clause (1) shall be final and conclusive 
and shall not ~ questioned in any court on any ground. 
• • • • 
,M1A. (1) The Government of India may deploy any armed. force of 
the Union or any other force subject to the control of the UDlon for 
deallng with any grave situation of law and order in any State. 
(2) Any anned force or other force or any contingent or unit thereof 
deployed under clause (1) in any State shall act in accordance withluch 
dlreetions as the Government of India may issue and shall not, save u 
otherwileprovtded in such cUrectiona, be subject tD the 8Uperlnt.e~. 

or control of the or my ofticer or authority sub-
ordinate to the Sta.., o-iIIIrlnmlent. 
b~);*i')\J. 
(3) Parliament ~1 "law, specify the powers, functions, privileges 
and liabilities of ;:JJJZ.bers of any force 0< any contingent or unit 
thereof deployed {:" ~ ,,~se (1) during the period of such deployment. 
• , .. 
)':" (,i' J 
I' 
,I 
• 
PART XlVA 
TRIBUNALS 
• • 
32SA. (1) 
trial by 
1iiII"~ may. by jaw, provide for the adju,dication or Admin. 
',tribunals of disputes and complaints with respect trative 
.. ditions of service of persons appointed to pubUc tribunals. 
. cfonnection with the affairs of the Union or of any 
to 
or other authority within the teqitory of India 
or under 
owned or 
,f the Government of India or of any corporation 
the Government. 
Uhder clause (1) may-
N 
J>r the establishment of an administrative tribunal 
~ a separate administrative tribunal for each State 
more States; , 
ihe jurisdiction, powers (including the power to 
contempt) and authority which may be exercised by 
said tribunals; 
for the procedure (including provisions as to limi-
rules of evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals; 
(d) the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdic-
tion of Supreme Court under article 136, with respect to the 
disputes or complaints referred to in clause (1); 
(e) provide for the transfer to each such administrative tribu-
nal of any cases pending before any court or other authority imme-
diately before the establishment of such tribunal as would have 
been within the jurisdiction of such tribunal jf the causes of action 
on which such suits or proceedings are based had arisen after such 
establishment; 
<f) repeal or amend any order made by the President under 
clause (3) of article 371D; 
(g) eontain such su-pplemental, incidental and consequential 
provisions (including provisions as to fees) as Parliament may 
deem necesSary for the effective functioning of, and for the speedy 
, disposal of eases by, and the enforce~ent of the order of,: such 
tribunals. 
(3) The provisions of this prt;,::le shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything in any other provision of this Constitution or in any other law 
for the time being force. 

Tribunals 
for 
other 
matters. 
-. (11 nu. ~ote ~ lla .... pIOvilio .... tile 
adjudication or trial by tribunals of any disp ocmpiatu1ls, or ·offeDces 
with respect to all or any of the matters spec~'ed in: clause (2) with 
respect to which. such Legislature has power to fDake laws. 
(2) The matters referred to in clause (1) are ~e following. namely:-
(a) levy, assessment, collection and enltrcement of any tax; 
(b) mreign exchange, import and e~rt across customs 
frontiers; ( 
(e) industrial and labour disputes; 
(d) land reforms by way of acquisition by 
estate as defined in article 31A or of any,: '1ehts· 
exti.nguishment or modification of, any such righ~ 
ceiling on agricultural land or in any other W8y\ 
(e) ceiling on urban property; 
(f) elections to either House of Parliament 
either House of the Legislature of a State, but . 
referred to in article 329 and article 329A; 
(g) production, l)rocurement, supply and 
stuffs (including edible oilseeds and oils) and 
the President may, by public notification, 
goods for the purpose of this article and control 
goods; 
(h) offences against laws with 
specifted in sub-clauses (a) to (g) 
those matters; 
(i) any matter incidental to any of the matters 
clauses (a) to (h). 
(3) A law made under clause (1) may-
(a) provide for the establishment of a hierarchy 
State of any 
or the 
by way of 
House or 
the mattel'B 
in sub-
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to 
punish for contempt) and authority which may be exercised by 
each of the said tribunals; 
(e) provide for the procedure (including provisions as to UIDi-
tation and rules of evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals; 
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction 
of the SupreWle Court under article ·138, with respect to all or any 
of the matters falling within the jurisdiction at the said tribUnals; 
(e) provide for· the transfer to eaeh such tribunal of any cases 
pending before any 'court or any other authority immediately eefore 
the establishment of such tribunal as would have been witbih the 
jurisdiction of such tribunal if the causes of action 0l'1 which such 
suits or proceedings are based had arisen after such establishment; 
. (f) contain' such lJupplemental, incidental and 'Comequential 
provislOlS (including proviSions as to fees) 88 the appropriate Legis-
lature may deem necessary for the effective functtdDin. of; anel for 

the speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of the ()ltGerl 
of, such tribunala. 
(4) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstandin& 
mlythine in any other provision of this Constitution or in any other law 
for the time being in force. 
E:rplcnatioft.-In this article, "appropriate Legislature", in relation 
~ any matter, means Parliament or, as the case may be, a State Legis-
latvre competent to make laws with respect to such matter in accord-
ance with the provisions of Part XI . 
• • • • • 
329. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution but subject to 
the provisions at article 329A-
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of cons-
tituencies or the aliotment of, seats to such constituencies, made or 
purporting to be made under article 32'1 or article 32&, shall not be 
called in question in any court; 
(b) no election to either House of Parliament or to the House 
or either House of the Legislature of a State shall be called in 
question except by an election petition pres~ted to sucll authority 
and in such manner as may be provided for by or under any law 
made by' the appropriate Legislature. 
329A (1) Subject to the provisions of ChJpter II of Part V [except 
sub-clause (e) of clause (1) of article 102], no e1ection-
(a) to either House of Parliament of. a person who holds the 
office of Prime Minister ,at the time of such election or is appointed 
as Prime Minister after such election; 
(b) to the House of the People of a person who holds the office 
of Speaker of that House at the time of such election or who is 
chosen as the Speaker :£or that House after such election; 
shall be called in question, except before such authority [not being any 
such authorit}1t _ is referred to in clause (b) of article 329] or body 
and in such manner as may be provided for by or under any law made 
by Parliament and any such law may provide for all other matters 
xtiating to doubts and disputes in relation to such election including 
the grounds on which such election may be questioned. 
(2) The validity of any such law as is referred to in clause (1) and 
the decision of any authority or body under such law shall not be called 
in question in any court. 
(3) Where any person is appointed as Prime Minister or, as the case 
may be, chosen to the office of the Speaker of the House of. the People, 
while an election petition referred to in clause (b r of article 329 in 
respect of his election to either House of Parliament or, as the case 
may be, to the House of the People is pending, such election petition 
shall abate upon such person being a,ppointed as Prime Minister or, 
u the case may be, being chosen to the oftilce of the Speaker of the 
HOUle of tbe People, but such election may be cillied in qu£5tion unAAf, 
any such law 18 is referred to in clause (l).w,,!,; 
Barto 
inter-
ference 
by courts 
in eJec-
toral 
matt~rs. 
Special 
provision 
as to 
ejections 
to Pkrlia-
ment in 
the case 
ot Prime 
Minister 
and 
Speaker. 

Proclama_ 
tion 
of Emer-
gency. 
(4) No law made by Parliament before the commencement ot the 
Constitution (ThIrty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975; in so far as It re-
lates tQ el~tion petitions and matters connected therewith J shall apply 
or shall be deemed ever to have applied to or in relation to Ut, election 
of any such person as is reterred to in clause (1) to either House of 
Parliament and such election shall not be deemed to be void or ever 
to have become void on any ground em which such election C9uld be 
d:eclared to be void or has, bt!.fore such commencement, been declared 
to be void under any such law and notwithstanding any order made 
by any court, before such commencement, declarina such election to 
be VOid,' sudl ~on shall continue to be valid in all respects and any 
such order and any finding on which such order is based shall be and 
shall be deemed always to have been void and of no effect. 
(5) Any appeal or cross appeal against any such order of any court 
as is referred to in clause (4) pending immediately before the com-
mencement of the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, 
before the Supreme Court shall be disposed of in conformity with the 
provisions of clause (4). .~,.I ._ MI.:'::'.-:.I 
(6) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Constitution. 
• • • • • 
352. (lJ) If the President is satisfied that a grave emergency exists 
hereby the security of Indi.a or of any part of the territory thereof is 
threatened, whether by war or external aggression or internal distur-
bance, he may, by Proclamation, make a declaration to that effect in 
respect of the whole of India or of such part of the territory thereof 
as may be specified in the Proclamation. 
(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1)-
(a) may be revoked or varied by a subsequent Proclamation; 
(b) shall be laid. before each House of Parliament; 
(c) shall ceaSe to operate at the expiration of two months unless 
,before the expiration of that period it has been approved by reso-
lutions of both Houses of Parliament: 
Provided th~t if any such Proclamation is issued at a time when 
the House of the People has been dissolved or the dissolu tion of the 
House of the People takes place during the period of two months refer-
red to in sub-ciause (c), and if a resolution approving the Proclamation 
has been passed by the Council of States, but no resolution with respect 
to such Proclamation has been p3ssed by the House of the People before 
the expiration of that period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate 
at the expiration of thirty· days from the date on which the House of 
the People flrBt sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration 
of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclama-
tlbfl has been also passed by the House of the People. 
(2A) Where a Proclamation issued under clause (1) is varied by a 
subsequent Proclamation, the prOvisions of claUSe (2) shall, so far as 
may be, apply In relation to such subsequent Proc18ma~ as they 
apply in relation to a Proclamation issued under clause (1)/, 

39· 
(3) A Proclamation of Emergency declaring that the secuiity 'Of 
India or ~. any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or 
by external aggression or by internal disturbance may be made before 
the actual occurrence of war or of Rny such aggreSl!tion ot- distUrbance 
if the· President is satisfied that there is imminent da.ther~f. 
(4) The power conferred on the President by this article shall 
include the power to issue different Proclamations on different· grounds, 
beIng war or external aggression or ~nternal disturbance or immin!!,nt 
danger of war or external aggression or internal disturbance whether 
or not there is a 'Proclamation already issued by the President under 
clause (1) and such Proclamation is in operation, 
(5) Notwithstanding anything in this CoMtltution,-
(4) the satisfaction of the President mentioned in claW''! (1) 
and clause (3) shall be final and conclusive and shall not be ques-
tioned in any court on any ground; 
fb) subj~t to the prOVisions o~ clause (2); nelthel' u'ieSupreme 
Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any 
question, on any grotmd, regarding the validity of-
(0 a declaration made by Proclamation by the President 
to the effect stated in clause (1); or . 
(ii) the continued operation of such Proclamation . 
• • • ... • 
356. (1) • • • • • 
(4) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to· 
operate on the expiration of a .peri.od of one year from the date of the 
passing of the second of the resolutions· apprt>ving the Proclamation 
under clause (3): 
Provided that if and 1':0 of-ten as a resolution approving the continu-
ance in fOl'Ce of such a Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parlia-
ment, the Proclamation shall. unless revoked, continue in force for a 
furthet'period of one year from the date on which under this clause. 
it would otherwise have ce.ased to operate, but no such Proclamation 
'Shall in any case remain in force for more than three years: 
Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of· the People 
takes places during any such period of one year and a resolution 
approving the continuance In force of such Proclamation !.as been 
'')a<;sed by tbe Council of States, but no resolution with respect to the 
continuance in force of. such Proclamation ha!; been passed by the House 
of the People during the said period. the Proclamation shall cease to 
Gperate at the expiration of thirty days from. the date on which the 
House of the People first sits after its re~on9titutlon unle:si. before the 
expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the 
continuance in force of the Proclamation has been also passed. by the 
House of the People. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution. the satisfaction 
'If the President mentioned in clause U) shall be GRal aRd oondusive 
Qnd shall not be questioned in any court on any ground . 
.. • .. .. 
Provisiona 
in case 
o! failure 
Of constitu-
tional 
machinet'J' 
inStates. 

Suspension 
of pro-
visiQns 
of article 
19 dur_ 
ing emer-
lencies. 
Suspen-
sion of 
tne en-
forcement 
of the 
right. 
conferred 
by Part 
1lI during 
emergen-
cies. 
Provisions 
as to 
financial 
emer-
geney. 
40 
358. While a Proclamation of Emecgency is in operation, nothing 
tn article 19 shall restrid the power of the State ,as defined in Part In 
to make any law or to take any eXE!Cutive action which the State would 
but for the provisions contained in that Part be '!COmpetent- ,to make or 
to take, but an!: la_ ., made shall, to the extent of the incompetency, 
cease to have effect as soon as the Proclamation ceases to operate, 
except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the law 
so ceases to have effect: 
, , 
Provided that wnere a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation 
OIllY in any )?art ot the territory of' India, any such law may be made, 
or any such' executive actiOn may be taken, under this article in felation , 
to or in any State or Union territory in which or in any ,part of which 
the Proclamation of Emergency is not in operation, if and in so far as 
the security of India or any part of the territory thereof Is threatened 
by activities bl or i'n relation to the part of the territory of India in 
which the Proclamation of. Emergency is in operation. 
359, (I) Wliere , Proclam~tion of ~er.gency is in operation, the 
President may by' ordex: declare thaJt the r1ght to move any court for the 
enforcement of such of the rights cc;mferred by Part III as may be men-
tioned in the order and all proceedings pending in any court for the 
enforcement of the rights so mentioned shall l'emafn suspended for tIle 
period durin'g which the Proclamation is in fome or for such shorter 
period as may be specified in the or4er. 
(lA) While an order made under clause (1) mentioning any of the 
rights conferred by Part III is in operation, nothin~ in that Part confer-
rin~ those rights shan restrict the power of the state as defined in tlie 
said Part to make any law or to take any executive action which the 
State would but for the provisiOns contained in that Part be competent 
to make or to take, but anv law so made shall, to the extent of the 
incompetency, cease to have' effect as soon as the order aforesaid ceases 
to operate, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before th. 
law so ceases to have effect: 
Provided that' where a Proclamatlon of Emergency is in operation 
only in any part of the territory of India, anv such law may be made, or 
any such executive action may be taken. under this article in relation to 
or in any State or Union temtory in which or in any part of which the 
Proclamation of Emergency is not in operation, if and in 90 far as the 
,c;ecurity of India Dr any part of the territory thereof its threatened by 
activities in or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which 
the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation . 
• • • • . .' 
360. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The provisions of clause (2) of article 352 shall apply in relation 
to a Proclamation issued under this article as they apply in relation to a 
Proclamation of Emergency issued under article 352 . 
• • • • • 
(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,-
(ta) ttie satisfaction of the President; mentioned . in clause (1) 
shall be final and conclusive and shall not be qu.~io}\e'd in.,. 
court on any ground; , 
• 

41 
(b) subject to the provisions 'of clause '(2), neither the Supretrte 
Court nor any other Court shall have Jurisdiction to entertain any 
question, on any ground, regarding the valieiity of-
(i) a declaration' made fby: Proclamation by the President 
to the effect stated in clause (1); or 
Lii) the eontinued operation of such Proclamation . 
• • , . ,', . 
368. (1) • * • • * 
(2) An amendment .of this Constitution may be initiated. OIily bf the 
introduction o1i a Bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament, 
and when the Bill is pas~ed in each HouSe by a majority cd the total 
membership of that House and by a majority .of not less than two-thirds 
gf t.he members of that House present and voUn&', it shall be presented 
~ the President who. shall :give his assent to the Bill and thereupon 
the Constitution shall stand amended in accordance with the terms .of 
the Bill: 
Provided that if Suen amendment seeks to make any change in-
<a) article 54, article 55, article 73, article 162 or article 241, or 
(b) Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or Chapter I 
of Part XI, or 
.(c) ally' of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, or 
(d) the representatu)n 'of States' Ih 'Parliament, or 
(e) the provisions of this article. 
the amendment shall also require to be ratified by the LegislatUres of 
not less than one-half of the States by resolutions to that effect passed 
by those Legislatures before the Bill making provision for such amend-
ment is presented to the PreSident ~or assent . 
• • • • 
(4) No amendment of this Constitution (including the provisions of 
Patrt III) made or purporting to have been made under this article 
[whether before or after. \he ~omlJloenqement of section 55 of the Consti-
tution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976] shall be called in question 
in any court on any ground. I 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that there shall 
be no limitation whatever on the C()llstitue~ pow~ o,f ,Parliament to 
amend by way of addition, varia.tion or repeal the ,proVisions of this 
Constitution under this article., 
• • • • • 371F. Notwithsta;nding anything in this Constitution,-
Power Of 
Parlia-
ment to 
amend 
the Con_ 
stitution 
and pro-
cedure 
therefor. 
':>pecial 
• • • • • 
... proviaiona 
(c) in the case of the Assembly deemed to be the Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Sikkim under clause (1», the references to 
the period of six years in clause (1) of article 172 shall be construed 
81 references to' a period of five years and the sa1d period of five 
years shaU be deemed to commence from the appointed day; 
• • • • • 
with rM-
peet to the 
State of 
Sikkim. 
. , 

• • 
:41 
SBVENTH 8CII8DI.JLE 
[Article 246] 
List I-Union List 
• • • 
2A. Deployment of any armed force of ~J Union ·or 'any other feree 
subject to the control of the UnioD or ,n~ contingent ar unit thereof in 
any State in aid of the civil power; powers, jurisdiction, privileges and 
liabilities of the members of such forces while on such deployment . 
• • • • ... 
List I1-State List 
1. Public order (blit not including tbeuse of any naval, military or sit 
force or an)" other armed force of the Union or of any otha!' force subject 
tel the control of the 'Union or of any contingent or unit thereof in aid 
gf the civil power). 
2. Police (including railway and village police) subject to the provi~ 
sions of entry 2A of Lilt I. 
• • • • • 
41. State public services; State Public Service Commission. 
• ... ... • • ". 
Ust DI-Coneurrent Ust 
• • • • • 
17 A. Forests. 
• • ... • • 
25. Educatioo, including techni~al education, med~cal education .and 
universities, subject to the provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; 
vocational and technical training of labour. 
• • 
• • 
• 
NINTH ICIlEDVLE 
[Article 31B] 
• 
• • 
• • 
87. The RepresentatiOn of the People Aet, 1951 (Central Act 43 
of 1951), the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1974 
(Central Act 58 of 1974) and the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 
(Central Act 40 of 1975). 
• • • • • 
92. The Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971 (Central Act 26 
of 1971). 
• • • •• • 
130. The FTeventioR of Publication of Objectionable Mat. Act, 1978 
(Central Act· 27 of 1976). 
• • • • • 

43 
ExTMM ,iOM '1'KE CoNSTI'lUTION· ,CF{)RTY-SECONO' AuENDMDT) , 
ACT, 1976 
* * '. 
18. In article 100 of the Constituticn, clauses (3) and (4) shall be 
omitted. 
It~ I!1 article 102 of the Constitution, for sub-clause (01) of clause (1), 
the following sub-claus,e shall be substituted, name!y:- ' 
".(al i1! he aolds any such oflice of profit under the Government 
of' India or tile Government of any State as is declared byParlia-
ment by law to disqualify its holder;" . 
• • • 
21. In article 105 of the Constitution, for clause (3), the following 
clause shall be substituted, nam.ely:--
"(3) In other respects, the powers, ,privi~ges ,~ ~ities of 
each House of Pa·rliament, and of the members and the committees 
of each H0tUse, shall be those of that House, and of its members and 
committees, at the commencement of section 21 of the Constitution 
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, and as may be evolved by such 
House of Parliament from time to time.". 
22. In article 118 of the Constitution, in clause (1), .eAer the words 
"its procedure", the brackets and wordS! "(incl~ing the quorum to cons-
titute a meeting of the House)" shall .bIe inserted, 
• • • * • 
31. In article 189 of the Constitution, clauses (3) and (4) shaU be 
omitted. 
32. In article 191 of the ConstitUtion, for sub-clause (4) of clauseU), 
the following suh-clause shall be substltuted, namely:-
"(G,) if be holds any such otlice of ,prWit under tbeGQyerrunent 
of India or the Government of any State specified in the First Sche-
q\Ue as is declared by Parliament by law to di~uatify)ita,holderi" . 
• • • • • 
Amend_ 
ment of 
article 
100. 
Amend. 
ment of 
artiel" 
102. 
Amend. 
ment of 
article 
105. 
Amend. 
ment 'of 
article 
118. 
Amend. 
ment of 
article 
189. 
Amend. 
nlent of 
nrticl. 
191. 
34. In article 194 of the Constitution, for clause (3), the following AIMDi. 
clauSe shall be substituted, namely: - ment of 
article 
"(3) In other respects, the powers, privile~s and immunities of 194. 
a House of the Legislature of a State, and of the members and the 
committees oi a House of such Legislature, shall be th.~e of that 
House, and of its members and committees, at the commencement 
of ~ 34 of the Constitution (FOI'ty-sec.cmd. AmenPDilell1) Act, 
1916, and as may be evolved by sucli House of the Legislature of a 
State, 10 far as may be, in accordance with those of the House of the 
. People, and of its members and committees where such House is the 
Legislative Assembly and in accordance with those of the Cc;uncil of 
States, and of its members and conunittees wher, $UCP lJ~se is the 
Legislative Council.". 

Amend-
ment of 
article 
201. 
Special 
J:rovisiqna 
01 to 
pending 
petitions 
Under 
article 
226. 
'i 
3S. In article 208 of the Constitution, in ciause ,(1), after the words 
"its procedure", the brackets and words "(mcludmg the quorum to 
constitute a meeting of the House)" shall be inserted. 
• • • • • 
.. r/ . "oil .~, ~:;, .! 
58. (1) NotWithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, ev8(')' 
petition made under article 2~ti of the Consbtut!on before the appointee 
day and pending befc..re any High Court immediatel)' before that day 
, ($uch petition being referred to In this section :as '11' pendfng~~t1tion) and 
any interim order (whether by way of InjunctJon or stay or in any other 
. ·manner) made em, at in any proceedingJi re~t.lna. w... s~b ~tion before 
that day shall be. daaU with in accordance wit,b. the ,prov~i.Q&s of article 
226 as substItuted by sectlon 3~. 
(2) In part.cular, and without prejudice to the generality of the pro\'.1-
lions of sui>-sec\ion (1), every ~nding petition before ~ High Court which 
would not have been admitted by the Hlgh coUrt. under the ~oVisions ot 
article 226 as substituted by section 38 if such petition had been' made after 
the appointed day, shall abate and any interim order (whether by way 01 
injunction or stay or in any other manner) made on, or in any proceed-
'~lngs relating ~, such pettCon shall stand vacated: 
" c 
Provided that· nutbing contained in this sub-section shall aftect the right 
of the petitioner to seek relief under any other law for the time being in 
fcrce in respect of the matters to which such petition relates and in com-
. putlng the period o~ limitation, if any, for seeking sddh relief, the .perlod 
during Which th€l proceedings relating to sucb ,petItion. . ,were pending 
in the High Court shall be excluded, 
(3) Every interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay or in 
any.,other manner) which was made before the appomted day, on, or ill 
any proceedings relatmg to, a pending petition [not being a pendin, 
petition which has abated under sub-section (2)], and which is in 10rce 
on that day, shall, unless before the appointed day copies of such pend-
ing petition and of. documents in support of the ple.a ~or such interim 
order had been furnished to the party ~gainst whom such interim order 
was made and an opportunity had been given to such party U)'be heard 
in the matter, cease to have effect (if not vacated eadiet).---. , 
• .(4) ~ ~ expiry of a period of one month from the appointed 
day., if the oopie's of sUiCh pending petition and ·the· docUments in 
support of the plea for the interim order are not furnished to suell 
party' before the expiry of the said period of one month; or 
" .. ' i,'. 
(b) o~ the expiry of a period of fOUf months fro~ the appointed 
d:a~, if the copies referred to in clause (a) have been furnished to such 
party within the' period of one mc,nth refertred to in that clause but 
SUCll party has not been given an opportunity to be heard in the matter 
before the expiry of' the said period of four months, . 
(4) 'Notwithstanding anything contained in SU.b-IeCtW.n (3). every 
. interim order (whether by way of i.njunction or stay or in any other 
'. tnanner) which was made before the appointed de, OIl Ql' in a:ny proceed-
, ings relating to a pending petition [not being Ii peading petippn which 
has abated under sub-seetion (2)]. and which,. is in force, ontha~ day, 
. ~hall if such order has the effect of delayipg any inquiry intQ a matter 
at p~blic importance or an~ investigatlofl or inqUiry into, ~an offence 

45 
punishable with imprisonment or any action for the execution of any 
wlJrk or project of public utility, or the acquisition of any property for 
such execution, by the Government or any corporation owned or 
controlled by the Government, stand vacated. 
Explanation.-In this section, "appointed day" means the date on which 
sec-tion 38 comes into force. - , 
st. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the 
Ccnstitution as amended by this Act (including any difficulty in relation 
Lo the transition from the provisions of the Ccnstitution as they stood im-
mediately before the date of the President's assent to this Act to the pro-
visions of the Constitution as amended by this Act), the President may, by 
order, make such provisions, including any adaptation or modification of 
any provision of the Constitution, as appear to him to be necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty: 
Prrvhied that 110 such cl'der !;hull be made after ttoc .o'xpiry of t .... 0 yc:,r" 
from the date of such assent. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as may be 
after it is made, be laid before each House Parliament. 
Power of 
the Pres!. 
dent to 
remove 
difficul-
tiel. 

LOK SABHA 
'·s o.t 
,. 
1 
.j' 'j , :"t r' I , • ~ 
., '>', .'1 . 
, . J 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
, 
(Shri SMnti Bhushan, Minister of Law, 'JustW;e and Company Affair,) 