.. , 
t. IN'l'RODUCID IN LoK~' ~~ . 
But No. 88 of 1971 
THE LOKP AL BILL, 1977 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Misconduct by a public man. 
MACHINERY FOR IN'QUlRlES 
4. Appointment of Lokpal. 
5. Lokpal to be ineligible to hold other offices. 
6. Term of office and other conditions of service of Lokpal 
7. Removal of Lokpal. .. 
I 8. Special LoIlpals. 
.. ;J 
9. Staff of J.. ... ltpal. 
JURlSDJCTlON AND PROCEDURE IN RESPECT OF INQUIRIES -.. . 
10. Jurisdiction of Lokpal. 
1 
11. Matters not subject to jurisdiction of Lokpal. 
12. Complaints. 
13. Preliminary scrutiny of complaints by Lokpal. 
14. Procedure in respect of inquiries. 
15. Evidence. 
16, Search and seizure. 
17. Reports. 
18. Special provisions in respect of complaints against the Prime 
Minister. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
19. Expenditure on Lokpal and Special Lokpals to be charged on the 
Consolidated Fund of India; 
20. Secrecy of information. 
21. Intentional insult or interr~ption to, or bringing into disrepute, 
Lokpal. 
22. Power of Lokpal to try certain offences summari!y. 
23. Conferment of additional functions on Lokpals. 
24. Disposal of deposit. 
.. Protection. 
T. Power to delegate. 
27. Power to make rules. 
28. Saving. 
THE SCHEDULE. 
j I". 
I I 

45 oft880. 
"of 114'1. 
BU. No. 88 of 1177 
.. . ... ·THE LOKPAL BILL, 111'17 
A 
BILL 
to 'I'NNiOe 1M the appointment of a Lokpa.l to inqtJI.ire into allegcniOnR 01 
misconduct agaimt public men and f« m4tte9's eo-neeted thetllewfth. 
Bz 'it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-elghtb Yea,r of the 
ltepubltt or India as follows': - , 
PRELIMINARY' 
I. (1) This Act may be ca'lled the Lokpal Act, 1m. Short 
title, 
S (Z) It extends to the whole oflnata. extent 
10 
and (3) It sball .come bato for.ce on stich date as tbe CentJ:a1 Gov,erJlment com-
may, by notiftcation in the OfIic:ial Ga~tte, appo.m~. menea-
m .... 
J. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,":" De8nl-
(e) "competent authority"', in retatlonto a ,public man, means,- tiOOl. 
(i) in the case of a public man re- the Prime MiDister; 
ferred to in ,sub-clauae (i) or sub-clause 
(iii) of clause (g) 
(ii) in the case of ~.y other pubHc such authority as may 
man be preacribed; 
(b) "compIaint" means a complainot aUeging mUeonduct ~,,~fnlt 
a public man; .,' 
/ 
(c) "corruption" includes anytbing made punis}> " under 
Chapter DC of the Indian Penal e~ ~ ·under the PreYenu,n ~ 
Corr.uption /Id., ...,;; 

Mis-
conduct 
by. 
public 
man. 
2 
(d) uLokpal" means a person appointed under section 4 as the 
Lokpal and, where a Special Lokpal is appointed under section 8 for 
exercising jurisdiction in relation to any complaints or any classes 
of complaint"!, includes, for the purpose of such complaints or classes 
of complaints, such Special Lokpal; S 
(e) "misconduct" means misconduct (whether committed before 
or after the commencement of this Act or within or outside India) 
of the nature specifted in section 3; 
(f) uprescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(g) upublic man" means a person who is or has been- 10 
(i) a member (including a Deputy Minister) of the Council 
of Ministers for the Union; 
(ii) a member of either House of Parliament: 
(Ui) the Chief Minister of a State; 
(iv) a member (including a Deputy Minister) of the Coun- IS 
cil of Ministers for a Union territory;' 
(v) a member of the Legislative Assembly for any Union 
territory; 
\ ' ., ,·(at).a member of the Executive Council under the Delhi 
~- ... ftdlllhllt\fttion Act, 1966; 20 19 of 1966. 
(vii) the ':Mayor tit; a Muiniclpal ~'C~rporation in any Union 
territorY; 
(h) "public servant" shall! b.ve the same meaning as in section 
~1,,~,~.\,~e ~ndian P~nal Cod~. i 
S •. 42),\ AiPul;lJic, maneommits miacQAQuctt-: I'" . 
" , ~f) J,(.be is. fl~t~ted,in ~,he discharge of his ~un~ti~~sa~,qsuch 
public mali by motives of personal interes~ ,or other iIUPfOP~, ,?:r, c.Ql'-
rupt motives; or " 
(b) if he abuses or attempts to abuse his position as such public 
man to caU88Iharm,ol!'upd~ .h ... clab~ ,to, .nyothel"~~ OJ' • 30 
(c) if he directly or iruQ,o"tly a)iQws his pQSiijon.aa, SHC~,·,ublic. 
man to be, taJc:enadvantage of by any of his relatives or associates 
anCl 'by 1eBsOh'1 thereof iuch reJativeor assbeiate secures 'ahy : '-iindue 
gain or favour I 'to ''fitmse1f ot 'to anotfter person or ca~ harm" I or 
undue hardsh.~,; to anoijle~ p~rson. 35 
, Ea:pla*ltion.-Forthe. pLlrposes of" .UJjs. ~ "8II~ciate" in 
relation to a public man includes any person in whom' such public 
"mlM 11 iIltereated; or . 
(d) if he fails to act in any' case' o~rwiae Ith~ Ql. '~cordance 
'II With tbet ;norms of ~~ity. ~cQ"duct ,:which o~8~ to be followed 40 
~, ,by.the . class of public men to which he belongs: or . 
,(." if .. y act or oDriaalon by him· coastituq eorrup\lon. 
45 of 1860, 
" ")~~1ic man who- ; 
~ .,a) , ~beta (?,jIJWlin tQe, meaning -qf ftction .10:7 of the ~ ~al .. ~.,Qf. J,88Q. 
Code) the commission of, or i.; , 45 

I 
45 of 1860, 
" 
3 
(b) conceals. or. attempts to conceaHrom detecti9nthe commission 
of, 
misconduct of the nature specified in sub-section (1) by another public 
,:~Qq, ,~so commits ,misconduct. 
S (3) A public man, being a person who is or has been the Chief Minir;ter 
af,a SU!te ~ 
(a) abets (within the meaning of section 107 of the Indian Penal 
,Co<;le) the commission of" or 
(b) conceals or attempts to conceal from detection th" cornmis-
19.....{ sWp, of, .. 'j: 
misconduct of the nature spectfted in Bub-aeetion (1,), :by ,any,otherperson 
, ,wn9 jsor h!ls l:!~n a lTlember (incluQing a Deputy Minister) of the 
l ,~()W,lcu. of )~~inisters of the State, also' cOlPrhi~inisconduct and for this 
"purp~se referen~es to 'ipublic man" and "public men" in sub-section (1) 
1'1 sllaU b, .. con~trued as also inClUding a refete~ce to sucHothet pen.on. 
• • .' , .' • I ~ • • ' 
MAICHINERY FOR INQUlRIES 
,4. (1') Fpr ,the"purpose"Q( ,makiDl .iPq~iries. in ~spect of complaint. 
,wader tIik,4ct"Ule Pl'esicl1mt &ball, ,a~e,t;,.e~nsu,t8~ion ~ith t~e Chief 
,;"stke af.lDd.ia"tb, a.~ otthe ,(::otIncilftf ~tates,and the Speliker of 
20 the House of the People, appoint, by warrant under h;s baud and seal. 
' .. , ...... to,be.kAai,n .,dIe ~pal,. .' 
. , . ,',; . 
;" '; 
(2) Every person appointed AS the Lokpal shall, b~'?re enteri~ upon 
his 9ffice. make and subscribe before the President, or some person 
appointed in that 'behalf by the 'Preltdent, an' onttl or .5rmation in the 
2S form set out in the Schedule. . f '" • 
'" 
, l The' Lrikpal 'shall not bea Member of Parliament qr ,a Member 
or" the < LegilllMufe oOf,auy' State" and ! :f;h1M1. not .h91d any office. of 
trust or profit (other:tban'.his.~fIae 'aaLokpal), •. Of be connected. with 
,.~ ,po~~tiea1, pa~ty, or carryon any business, or practise any profession, 
30 ~d aQ~ord.irigly,before 'he enters upon his office, a person appointed as 
the Lokpal shall,- ' 
. (a). if he, is a Member of Parliament or of the Legislature of Rny 
'St'ate,.HSign :s\lch membef~ip; or 
(b,) if he h()lds any office of trust or I>roflt, resign from such 
35 officej or 
(c) if he is connected with any political party. sever .his eonnec-
. tlon' with it; or 
(ci): jf he is carrying on any business, sever his Connection (short 
Qf,divestill8 himself of ownership) ,with the conduct and mtlR8gement 
40 of."uc~!b""':. or 
(e) if he is practising any profession, ceaae, to practise ,uch 
profession. 
Appoint-
ment. 
of 
Lokpal. 
Lokpal 
to be 
ineligible 
to hold 
other 
offices. 

" 
Termor 
otBce 
and 
other 
con-
c;litioniJ 
ot. 
serv~ct, 
of 
tokpal. 
'Removal 
of 
".Lokpal. 
4 
6. (1) 'A Person appointed as the Lok»al shim h01d Office fot it tertll o~ 
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office: 
Provided that-
(a) the Lokpal may, by writing 'under rus hand .ddressed to ihe 
President, resign his omc~ S 
(b) the Lokpal may be removed from office in the maMer pro.:. 
vided in section 7. 
'(2) On 'ceasing to hold office, the LO~ai shall be ineligible for further 
employment to any office of profit under the Goverml\ent of :Mdfa or the , 
Government of a State. 10 
(3) There sball be paid to the Lokpal in respect of time sPflDt o"'8da.l 
iervice Alary at the rate of five thousand rupees per me...em: 
, . ~ovided that if ~he Lokpa. is, '~t ~,e tbe of hi. appom~".m 
receipt of a pension (other thaD a di88bilt~ 'Or wOUlld pensio .. ) ill '-I*t 
'oJ any previous sernce under the Government ~ India ;,r UDder tise IS 
~overnmellt of a State, his salary in respect 01. serviee as the Lokpal shall 
be reduced-
(a) by tb .. amount of that pension; and 
~ b ~ i,f he has,. before such appointment, received, iD n. of a 20 
portion of the penslOil due to hiwl in retilteet of sUeb previous seiovIte. 
the commuted'value thereof, by the liCmount of that portiOD of ftte 
pension; and 
(c) if he has, before such appoinbnent, received a retlr:ement 
gratuity in respect of lIuch pre'ViGUs service by the pension equivalent , , 
of that gratuitt. 2, 
("4) The !.okpal shall be entitled withoUt payment of l'ent to the .-
'Of an official residence. 
'(5) The ;.Iowances and pension payable to, and other 'conditions 01 
. service of, the 'Lollpal shall be such as may he determined 1ty the Presi-
dent having regard to the allowances and -pensioll pay .... e te, aud otiae .. 30 
conditions of serv1ce of the Chiet Jasttce of India: , 
'frovided that the allowances and pension payable to, and other 'COIl-
ditions of service of, the Lokpal shall not be varied to his disadvantage 
a.fter his appointment. 
7. (1) 'The Lokpal shall not be removed from his oftlce except by an 3S 
'Order of the President passed after an address by each HOuse of Parlia-
ment supported by a majority of the to.tal membership of that Houlle Rnd 
by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House 
present and voting has been presented to the President in the same sessio1'1 
for sl1ch removal on the grounci of proved misbehaviour or incapacity. 40 
(2) The procedure for the presentation of an address and for the 
investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of the Lokpal 
.under sub-sec-tioR U) shall be as provided in the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 
1968, in relation to the removal of a Judge and, accordingly, the pro- 51 ot 1~. 
,viSions of that Act shall, subject to necessary modifications, apply fa 4S 
",elation to the removal of the ~kp,al as ~~e.y J~l.y il.l rela.tlon to tJ;l~ 
J1'~g;1oyal of a Judge. 

i. (1) Notwithstanding anythi. contained in section 4, if the Presi- Speciai 
dent is satiSAed' 011 a ri!port from' the Lokpal that it' is 'lIe1Cess8ry so to do Lokpals. 
fOr the expeditious disposal of compiaiDts UDder this Act, he may, after 
cOasultation with 'the Chief Justice of India, the Chairman of the Counell 
S of States BDd ,the Speaker of the HOUSe of the People, appoint, by warrant 
under his hand and seal, one or more persons to be a Special Lokpal' ot 
Special Lokpals for exercising jurisdiction in relation to sueh coblptaints 
~ Buch cla88eS of complaints under this Act as may be .pecifled .... the 
warraat. . I • '. • ,,' 
10 (2) A Special Lokpal shall hold office for a term of five years or 
~ - for such shorter term as may be specified in the warrant of his appoint-
ment 'and'8 Special Loltpal' appointed' for a tEirm of less than five years 
sliaII be eligible fbrreappoiiltment: ! 
.\ '.~ 
Provided that the total period for which a person may hold the office 
IS of Special Lokpal shall in no case exceed five years. .. . 
I 
(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the provisions 
of this Att relating to the Lokpal. includiDg the ~rovisions "latin&, to' 
th~ i~ath Or aftirma'ti~ to be'mide by the Lokpal,' the ineligibiUty of tbe' 
LOkpal to hold other otIlces, the cOliditions of service of Lokpal and re .... ~ 
20 ... oval of Lokpal: the ftuietiOllS" powers' and duties of the Lokpal, aball 
, , 
apply in ""adon to' a Special Lokpal as they -apply -in 'relation to the, 
Lokpal but nothing in this sub-Benion shan be' construed to enable a.-
Special Lokpal to exercise jurisdiction in relation to any complaint or 
class Of com.pliiDtB Itot spkUled 1il the warrant by 'which he was 'appointed. 
t',1 . . • .... " f ~ _ ~. .' '.. <I •• ~.I .. : ." 
2$' , 9. (1) The Lokpal shall have a se.:~etarY and such otl- om~rs an~. 
-.' employees as may be prescri.d to assist him' in the disehar18 or 
hill fuadioDa (inclladiq veriScation and inqi¥ri.,. in f8Speet of complaints) 
_der, tht. Act.., , . ' ~ 
.' 
(2) Without prejudice to tb~ provisions of sub-section (1)~ the !.okpal 
30\JDay, (or.t .. ~p1IIPOIIe of deal"", wit~ anytompaliQia or.8f'!!Y ell., of 
""compialDts, ~ "J. 
31; ... 
'~ . (i) 'the serviee. of any o8Ic8l' or emp';yee or lnvestigatiD&' 81"CY 
of' the· C-~1 GOvernm.eDt or' a . State' doveram.eell witb the oom:ur~; 
, rente of '1bafGovel'IUIIent; '-.r ' ~. 
~ .. ,:\." '. . . . ,- ~.::"'~.~ '_. 
(ii) the, services of any other person or age_'y.;, , 'J 
" :.1, (~).; ~e ,terms and ~nditjon. of servi~e of the oftic~rs and employkes 
referred to in sub-section (1) and of the ofticers,employees, agencieS and 
pel'MDs referred to in sulHection (2) (including such special condition"! 
.. ~a;: DUly be considered necessary for enablin&, them to aet without f., ,in, 
40 th4" discharge of their faaetions) Shall be sueh .. may be prescribed in 
, consultation with the Lotpal. . '.1, 
t , (4) The officers and employ'ees .refen:cd to·m sub-section (1)' and the 
~.9fficers. elJlployees, agencies and persons referred to in sub-section (2) 
, . sball also assist the Special Lokpals (if any) in the discharge of their 
~ 4S functions. 
Staff 
of 
Lokpal. ' , 

jurisdlc .. 
tionof 
Lokpal. 
Mattera 
not 
lubject 
to 
juriadk:-
tion of 
Lokpal .. 
Com-
plaints. 
.j" .'j" .tUalsDi8HoN AN~'·l-R'\. u'.'nfitIlSPr.ci'or::aN~U~ ( ; ~;i~' ,"~" 41 f : . I\.~' ,' .. I 4ti •. , ,"!" t. ~;:I 1,'1,1' ~ I I. It ,-
,10. ,(J~. SIolbject to.!the.!.tber;,.,o\liaiollS' of tbiJ. . .A~. the.-L.pkpalimay 
inquir.e' ~ any. aattar !involved in;. or. ariling ,from,. oriConneoted I with, 
U1'~ aU.egatiQIH~.~isoqnd"ct against ai public, mali lIVlfle in; •. complaint 
un~r Uti. Act.. '. '.'. "..",.,' ,:,,,, 5 
(2), ,No matter tin;'1'e8pect'of''Wbteh' sliComplamt' may be 'Made'UDder 
this Act· shalhberefened fOil" 4nqulry under tbe Icrommtssiom'of Ih'\Uity 
Act, 1952, except on the recommendation or with the concurrencel't')lf:the' 60 of 1952. 
Lokpal. 
ll. (1) The Lokpal shall not inqUire into any m.atter concerning any I~ 
person '~~ h~ has any bias in, respect 'ot s~chiriiittel' or ~ersbn and'it,any' . ; 
dispute arises in this behalf, the· Pres~~len( ~hal1, on' an appU~~tion rrw,de 
by the party aggrieved, obtain, in such manner as may'be 'prescribed,' the 
opblion of tl;1e Chi~ Justice of India and decide the dispute inconformity 
with such opinioii. . .' . '.' ", ". 15 , 
(2) The ~kpal shall not inquire into any act, or conduct, of any 
pefson'other'tbarlli ptitil1c'iiulri"e,,~ept in' so'flit as he"t:6tlkitiers it~.'ry 
so; to 'c!(ddl' the 'ptrl1>d8e~ 'Hf hiS! tnlqHtry' 'tiitb' '!ny aHegattoti ttl mi~dtlct 
ag'litnltt lli 'P'U'bUt'fuatt!1 I ,: ",. 1;( •. "," .,' to, ;" 1:: ,,'i;, , ,I, .• , .. ' 
&1 I ; h.l '0\ "":1 ~ .'. ,. ," ,',.".;- .:, "f •• , '11:,. Id I';: \~i~ l 
~i ~3) ,Pl'lutuli.okpall'Shall',11&thinquijre.tQto. any,·matter) Vlth4:h. has. ~ 20 
reear.ai lfol"ibqui~ "'Deier .th~ CoJIlmUisidns, of·~RquillY Aot;,l962;,on,"'" 60 of 1952. 
rec.~a.tiGnI01'.wUh'.hisUpliorf.CKlftCUl\t8Dce;.I! ", ;:,.,',: .,' ; "; !n;.~., 
;.: .(~):,~~' ·.~k~\;~~; :~t:,~qu~~.'.iil~ ';~J' ~¥~",tio~)?f.m¥tc4~du~f 
against a public man if the complaint in respect thereof is made after the 
~~~ryb'~~ ,~~~ .:~~stlf~~m"the ?~t~. o~,.w~i~~,,~~~ misc~?,~~C~ ~.~\alll~ged, to 25, -r. ve e~n fom~h~: . .' '. . .' 
~' f,. ';.\-' L . .t, :! t : 't If,' II' -, 'I' '\'~ ,I.":" r"~ ·"'~'.~~';"l~,' 
i fltbWded; fhat 'the iLokpaioinay iewtertaitHMeh' a eoritplairit, tf ... ..,IClOI'DI"r' 
plainant satisties him that he had sufficient cause for not·.blaldag, .. , 
complaint within the said period of five years. 
, r.,·".l ·f'. ~.) t ~iJ .' I I ! '~J,':' " itt :"t'l ~ ~li' ~'" I~l ~ , 
!"1I .. 'O;! A1t! pe-rscm'mher,thp'8 ftiWiq,eewdntma".'" .ltolDplail1~,30 
under this Act to the Lokpal. .',.' , 1;'11:::;'1\111 
(2); i The ,coJnp~\nt .ah~U be,.ip. ~ ~~ib~ ,forql. ~4 s~ ls~t forth 
J.UticWara!pf,~ m.i'I~~tiaUued.lq\~ ;~AWi1!1'P', ~qC(n:Q~iRYh.an 
affidavit in support of the allegation of,}n~~~l.lGt. '~~~i!Jl.ell?a.~~WW8rs 
thereof and a certificate in the prescribed form in respect of the deposit 35 
under sub-section ·(i) •. ,,· .,. ,,:;,' I' ,.", .. ,!: ( • 
, (3). T~e ,comp~lli~t ~1 ~~~~it : in ,~u~p rna~er and. with such 
a\Jthority oragency,as may be ,l)~Uj~~ Ii siirlt of tJri@ tfiOti~ inJPees 
to be ,available for d1~po'salupi'~'seCtidii 24:" i . '", .1,. ii- ··.i I . j .... ', 
'" . : '[i,·t :-:i; ";;, '" -. ~ •.. ,:.~. "1' 1'; .. io ~ ,.,'ltt't'· !"~""I"ha 
"PNw<tea·a.at ItheLokpal maJi.{Qr eutR~t ,c;.USf:,;ta~,,"~J~,40 
wriUnghexempt,·\Il ,ewnplai.Darlt irom . !the '{f:Aqj,t;.~ti lUp,(ier,. ~t~;~ub.-i. .. 
section. ,'.r~ Cit, \ ·-,.1~: ); '·c \.H. ,~,i.: ;h;'"., .1" 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contain~ in the ~oregoing sub-sections, 
any . letter written to the LOkpal' by il 'Person' 'iri 'sny j'all or 'other :plaCeI of 
custody, or 'in any" 8syldni I ofoth~t pl~~e I.for insane 'Persons' 'may "if. . the, 4S 
Lokpal is satiSfled'thiit'itbJ necessary 80tb do; be treated as ar.omplamt 
made in accordance with the provisions of this section. i I 
I . 
~ ) 

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other enactment it . , 
shall be the duty of a police ofticer or other person in charle of ADY. jail 
or other place of custody or of any asylum or other place for insane per-
sons to forward, without opening, any letter addressed to the Lokpal by 
S a person imprisoned or detained in such jail, place of custody, asylum 
or other place, to the Lokpal without delay. 
13. (1) If the Lokpal is satisfied, after considering a complaint and Prell-after making such verification as he deems appropriate,- minary 
10 
IS 
(a) that the complaint is not made within the period of five years 
specified in sub-section (4) of section 11 and that there is no sufficient 
cause for entertaining the complaint; or 
(b) that he cannot make an inquiry in respect of the complaint 
by reason of the provisions of sub-section (1), (2) or (8) of section 
11; or 
(c) that the complaint is frivolous or vexatious ar is not made 
in good faith; or 
(d) that there are no sufficient grounds for inquiring into ,the 
complaint, 
the Lokpal shall dismiss the complaint after recording his re88DJlI therefor 
20 and communicate the same to the complainant ancl to the competent 
au\horlty concerned. 
(2) The procedure for verification in respect of a complaint under 
sub-section (1) shall be such as the Lokpal deems appropriate in the 
circumstances of the case and in particular the Lokpal· may, if he deems 
25 it necessary so to do, call for the comments of the public man concerned. 
30 
14:.(1) If, after the consideration and verification unGer section 13 in 
respect of a complaint, the Lokpal proposes to conduct any inquiry, he-
(a) shall forthwith forward a copy of the complaint to the com-
petent authority concerned; 
(b) may make such orders as to the safe custody of documents 
relevant to the inquiry as he deems fit; 
(c) shalL, at such time as he eonsic\ers appropriate, fofward a 
copy of the complaint to the public man concemed. and aftord him an 
opportunity to represent his case. 
3S ~Z) Every such inquiry shall, unless the Lo~pal. for reasons to be 
recorded in Wlliting, determines otherwise, be conducted in ca.mera.. 
(3) Save as aforesaid, the procedure for oonducUng any luoh iDqUiry 
shall be such as the Lokpal considers· appJ10pdate in the circumstancel 
of the case. 
scrutiny 
of 
com-
plaints 
by 
Lotpal. 
Proce-
durein 
respect 
of 
inquir1ea. 
40 15. (1) Subject to the provision~ of this seetion, for ·the pu.rpoIe tJI.. 
any inquiry (including the verification under section lJ!)~ the LoIDpal- Evidence. 
(a) may require any public servant or any other person, who, in 
his opinion is able to furnish information or produce documents 
re1evant to such inquiry. to ,furDilh ,any such informatiGil '01' produce 
4S any luch ctoeument; 

8 
(b) shall have all the powers ofa civi.l court while trying a suit 
under the Cone of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the foLlowing 5 of 1908. 
matters, namely:-
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person 
and examining, him on oath; S 
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(tit) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(iv) requisitioning any public recol\i or copy thereof from 
any court or office; 
(v) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 10 
documents; and 
(vi) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
, (2) A proceeding before the Lokpal shall be deemed to be a judicial 45 of 1880. 
proceeding within the meaning of section 193 of the IncUan Penal Code. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4) ,- IS 
(a) no obligation to maintain secrecy or other restriction upon 
the disclosure of information obtained by or furnished to Govern-
ment or any public servant, whether imposed by any enactment or 
by any provision of law whatever, shall apply to the disclosure 'of 
information, for the purposes of any inquiry (including the verifica- 20 
tion under section 13) under this Act; and 
(b) the Government or any public servant shall not be entitled, 
in relation to any such verification or inquiry, to any such privilege 
in respect of the production of documents or the giving of evidence 
as is allowed by any enactment or by any provision of law whatever 2S 
in legal proceedings. 
(4) No person shall be required or authorised by virtue of this Act 
to furnish any such information or answer any such question or produce 
so much of any document-
(a) as might prejudice the security, or defence, or international 30 
relations, of [ndia (including India's relations with the Government 
I)f any other country or with any international organisation), or the 
Investigation (lr detection of crime; or 
(b) as might involve the disclosure of proceedings or the Cabinet 
of the Union Government or of the Cabinet of the Government of 3S 
any State or Union territory or of the Executive Council under the 
Delhi Administration Act, 1966, or of any Committee of such Cabinet 
or Executive Council, 
aad for the purpose of this sub-section, a certificate issued by a Secretary 
to the Government certifying that any information, answer, or portion 40 
of a document, is of the nature specified in clause (<<) or clause (b) 
shalt,~ binding and conclusive: 
PrMid.ed that the Lokpal may require any infonnation or answer 
or pord. of a dN ument in respect of which a certificate is issued under 
19 of IIMM1. 

9 
this sub·f:;ection to the eft'ect that it is of the nature s.pecified in clause 
(0) to be disclosed to him in private for scrutiny and if on such scrutiny 
the Lokpal is satisfied that such certificate ought not to have been issued, 
he shan declare the certificate to be of no effect. 
S 11. (l) If the Lokpal has reason to believe that any documents which, 
in his opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to, any inquiry under this 
Act, are secreted in any place, he may authorise any officer subordinate 
to him, or any officer of an investiga ;ing agency referred to in sub-
section (2) of section 9, to search for and to seize such documents. 
10 (2) If the Lokpal is satisfied that any document seized under sub-
section (1) would be evidence for the purpose of any inquiry under this 
Act and that it would be necessary to retain the document in his cus-
tody, he may so retain the said document till the completion of such 
inquiry: 
IS Provided that where such document is seized before the commenc"," 
ment of such inquiry, the Lokpal shall return the document bef~re the 
expiration of a period of one year from the date on which it is seized 
unless such inquiry has been commenced before such expiration. 
Explanation.-For the purposes. of this sub-section, an inquiry in res-
20 peet of a complaint-
«(It) shall be deemed to have commenced on the date on which 
the Lokpal forwards a copy of the complaint tl) the competent 
authority concerned under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 
14; 
2S (b) shall be deemed to have been completed on the date on 
which the Lokpal closes the case under section 17. 
2 of 1974. (3) The provisions of the Code of Crimi~al Procedure, 1973, relating 
to searches shall, so far as may be, apply to searches under this section 
subject to the me dification that sub-section (5) of section 165 of the 
30 said Code shall have effect as if for the word "magistrate", wherever it 
occurs, the words "Lokpal or any officer authorised by him" were 
Bubstituted. 
Search 
and 
seizure. 
17. (1) If, after inquiry in respect of a complaint, the Lokpal is Reports. 
sLtisfted,-
3S 
40 
(0) that no allegation made in the complaint can be substan-
tiated either wholly Of partly, he shall close the case under in-
formation to the complainant, the public man end the competent 
authority concerned; 
(b) that all or any of the allegations madf:! in the complaint can 
be substantiated either wholly or partly, he shall. by report in 
writing, communicate his findings and recommendations to the com-
petent authority. 
(2) The competent authority shall examine the report forwarded to 
it under clause (b) of sub-section (1) and communicate to the Lokpal, 
4S within three months of the date of receipt of the report, the ac:tiap taken 
or proposed to be taken on the ba$ili pf 'the report. 

Special 
pro-
vilioDa 
in 
reapect 
of 
com-
plaints 
aplnat 
the 
Prime 
Minister. 
Expen-
ditureon 
Lokpal 
and 
Special 
Lokpals 
to be 
char,ed 
ontbe 
Consoli-
dated 
Fund of 
India. 
Secrecy 
of in-
formation. 
10 
(3) If the Lokpal is satisfied with the action taken, or proposed to 
be taken on the basis of his report under clause (b) of sub-section (1), 
he shall cl05e the case under information to the complainant, the public 
man and the competen't authority concerned, but where he is not 10 
satisfied and if he considers that the case so deserves, he may make a 5 
'special report upon the case 'to the President and also inform the com-
plainant concerned. 
(4) The Lokpal shall present annually to the President a consoli-
dated report on the administration of this Act. 
(5) As soon as may be after the receipt of a special report under sub- 10 
aeetion (3), or the annual report under sub-section (4). the President 
ahall cause a copy thereof together with an expl.anatory memorandum 
to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
1/8. If the Prime Minister receives a copy of any complaint against 
himself under clause (a) of sub-sedion (1) of section 14 or any inform a- IS 
tion or report in respect of a complaint against himself under sub-section 
(1) of section 17. he shall cause the same to be placed, without delay, 
before the other members of the Council of Ministers for the Union. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
It. The salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, or in respect of, 20 
tbeLokpal and the Special Lokpals shan be expenditure charged on the 
ConlOlidated Fund of India. 
ZOo (1) Any information obtained by the Lokpal, or by any officer, 
employee, agency Or person referred to in section 9, in the course of, or 
~or the purposes of. any verification or inquiry under this Act, and any 2S 
evidence recorded or collected in connection therewii.:h shall be t.reated 
88 confidential and, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act. i872, no court shall be entitled to compel a Lokpal, or 1 of 1872. 
any such officer, employee, agency or person, to give evidence relating 
to such information or to produce the evidence so recorded or col- 30 
lected. 
(2) Nothing in sub~ection (1) shall apply to the disclosure of the 
in1ormation or evidence referred to therein-
(a) for the purposes of this Act or for the purposes of any action 
or proceedings to be taken on any report under section 17; or 3S 
(b) for the purposes of any proceedings. for an offence of 
giving or fabricating false evidence, under the Indian Penal Code; 45 of 1860. 
or 
(c) for such other purpO!i«::! a.!! lIlay be preSCribed. 

2 of 1974. 
2 of 1974. 
II 
21. (1) Whoever intentionally offers any insult, or causes any inter-
ruption, to the Lokpal while the Lokpal is makiDg any verification or 
conducting any inquiry under this Act, shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment fGr a term which may extend to six months, or wi.th fine, 
5' 0r with· both. 
(2) Whoever, by words spoken or intended to be read, makes or 
publishes any statement, or does any other act, which is calculated ,to 
bring the Lokpal into disrepute, shall be punished with simple imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with 
10 both. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) of section 199 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply in relation to an offence under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) as they.apply in relation to an offence re-
ferred to in sub-section (2) of the said section 199, subject to the modifi-
51 eation that no complaint in respect of such offence shall be made by the 
Public Prosecutor except with the previous sanction of the Lokpal. 
zz. (1) If, at any stage of a proceeding before the Lokpal, it appears 
to the Lokpal that' any person appearing in such proceeding had know-
ingly or wilfully given false evidence or had fabricated false evide:1ce 
20 with the intenti'on that such evidence should be used in such proceeding, 
the Lokpal may, if satisfied that it is necessary and expedient in the 
interest's of justice that the person should be tried summarily for giving 
or fabricating, as the case may be. false evidence, take cognizance of 
the offence and may. after giving the offender a reasonable opportunity 
25 of showing cause why he should not be punished for such offence, try 
such offender summarily, so far as may be, in accordance with the 
procedure prescribed for summary trials under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, and sentence him to imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months or to fine which may extend to five hundred 
30 rupees, or to both. 
(2) When any such offence as is described in section 175, section 178, 
45 of 1860. section 179 CH' section ·180 of the Indian Penal Code is committed in the 
view or presence of the Lokpal, the Lokpal may cause the offender to 
be detained in custody and may, at any time on the same day, fake 
35 cognizance of the offence and. after giving the offender a reasona.ble op-
portunity of showing cause why he should not be punished under this 
section, sentence the offender to simple imprisonment for a term which 
MIlY eXfend to one month, or to fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees or to both. 
40 (.~) In every case tried under this section, the Lokpal shall record 
the facts constituting the offence with the statement (if any) made by 
the offender as well as the finding and the sentence. 
(4) Any person convicted on a trial held under this section may 
appeal to the High Court and the provisions of Chapter XXIX of the 
2 of 1974. 45 Code of. Crimi·nal Procedure. ],973, shall. PO far BS may be, apply to appeals 
under this section and the High Court may alter or reverse t'he finding, 
or retJl~'" or rev"'''se the sen~e appealed against. 
Inten-
tional 
insult 
or in-
terrup-
tion to, 
or bring-
ing into 
dis-
repute, 
Lekplli. 
Power 
of 
Lokpal 
to try 
certain 
offences 
summarily. 

12 
(5) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
(6) Words and expressions used in this section and not defined in 
2 of 1974. 
this Act shall ha.ve the same meaning as in the Code of Criminal Pro-. 
cedure, 1973. S 2 ot 19'14. 
Con -
fennent 
of ad-
ditional 
func-
tiona 
on 
Lokpals. 
Dis-
posalot 
deposit. 
Protec-
tion. 
13. (1) The President may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette and 
after consultation with the Lokpal, confer on the Lokpal such additional 
functlons in relation to the eradication of corruption as may be specified 
in the notification. 
(2) The President may, by ol'der in writing and subject to such con- 10 
ditions or limit'ations as may be specified in the order, .require the Lokpal 
to inquire into any allegations of misconduct specified in the order in 
respect of a public man and, notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the Lokpal shall comply with such order. 
(3) Where any additional functions are conferred on the Lokpal IS 
under sub-section (1), or when the Lokpal is to make any inquiry under 
sub-section (2), the Lokpal shall exercise the same powers and discharge 
the same functions as he would in the case of any inquiry made on a 
complaint under this Act and the prov;sions of this Act shall apply ac-
cordingly. 20 
24. The sum deposited by a complainant' under section 12 shall,-
(a) in a case where the complaint is dismissed under clause (c) 
of section 13, stand forfeited to the Central Government; 
(b) if the Lokpal, for reasons to be recorded in writing, so 
directs, be utilised for compensating the public man complained 25 
against; and " 
(~) in "Iny other case, be refunded to the" complainant. 
25. (1) No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding, shall lie against 
the Lokpal, or against any officer, employee, agency or person referred 
to in section 9, in respect of anything which ·js in good faith don'.!, or 30 
intended to be done, under this Act. 
(2) No proceedings of the Lokpal shall be held bad for WRnt of form 
and no proceedings or decision of the Lokpal shall be liable to be chal-
lenged, reviewed, quashed, or called in ques.tiort, in any court. 
Power to 216. The Lokpal may, by general or special order in writing, and sub- 35 
delegate. ject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified therein, direct 
that any powers conferred or duties imposed on him by or under this Act 
[except the powers under 'the proviso to sub-section (4) of section 11, 
and the proviso to sub-section (,~) of section 12, the power to dismisc; a 
complaint under sub-ser.tion (1) of section 13 and the p~wers to close 40 
cases and make reports under section 17] may also be exercised or dis-

Power to 
make 
rules. 
&Dof 1952. 
13 
charged by such of the officers, employees or agencies referred to in sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 9, as may be specified in the 
order. 
%1. (1) The President may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
5 make rules f.ar the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this 
Act. 
10 
IS 
20 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going provisions, such rules may provide for-
(4) the authorities required to be prescribed under sub-clause 
(if) of clause (a) of section 2; 
(b) the officers and employees who may be appointed under sub· 
section (1) of section 9; 
(c) the terms and conditions of service of the officers, employees, 
agencies and persons referred to in sub-section (3) of section 9; 
(d) the form in which complaints may be made under section 
12 and the fees, if any, which may be charged in respect thereof; 
(e) the manner in which and 'the authorities or agencies with 
whom deposits shall be made under sub~ection (3) of Fcction 12 and 
the form in which certificates shall be furnished in respect of such 
deposits under sub-section (2) of section 12; 
(1) the matters referred to in sub-clause (vi) of clause (b) of 
sub-Bection (1) of section 15; 
(g) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
25 be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the 
ses&ion immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any moditkat.i.on in the rule, or 
30 both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form Or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule. 
28. Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as a1fecting the 
35 constitution of, or the continuance of functiOning or exercise of powers 
by any Commission of Inquiry appointed under the Commissions of In-
quiry Act, 1952 before the commencement of this Act and no complaint 
shall be made under this Act in respect of any matter referred for in-
40 qulry to such Commission before such commencement. 

THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 4(2)] 
I, , having been appointed Lokpal, 
swear in the name of God 
do ----------, that I will ·bear true faith and allegiance • 
solemnly aftlrm 
to the Constitution of India as by law estabUIhed, that l' w-iD duly ·aad 
faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform 
tbeduties of my offtce withou't fear or favour, affection or ill-will. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In its interim report on the "Problem of Redress of Citizens' Grie-
vances" submitted in 1966, the Administrative Reforms Commission re-
commended, inter alia, the setting up of an institution of Lokpal. 
2. To give effect to this recorr.mendation of the A.R.C., a Bm called 
the "Lokpal and the Lokayuktas Bill, 1968" was introduced in the Fourth 
Lok Sabha in 1968. The Bill was considered by a Joint Committee of 
the two Houses of Parliament, and the Bill, as reported by the Joint Com-
mittee, was passed by the Lok Sabha in 1969. While this Bill was 
pending in the Rajya Sabha, the Fourth Lok Sabha was dissolved; and, 
consequently, the Bill lapsed. In 1971, the Bill 8S passed by the previous 
Lok Sabha was re-introduced in the Lok Sabha as the "Lokpal and 
Lokayuktas Bill, 1971". This Bill lapsed on the dissolution of the Fifth 
Lok Slabha. As explained in the Statement of Objects &nd Reasons 
appended to the 1971 Bill, that Bill differed from the draft Bill proposed 
by the A.R.C. in two major respects. Firstly, it did not extt',lld to public 
servants in the States. Secondly, it did not confine itself to Ministers 
and Secretaries alone. In other words, the 1971 Bill sought to provide 
a statutory machinery to inquire into complaints based on actions of 
Union Public Servants including Ministers. 
3. The matter has been re-examined having regard to the recommen-
dations of, the A.R.C., the provisions of the 1971 Bill and other laws on the 
subject enacted in various States from time to time and the experience 
of the functioning of such institutions in the States where they have been 
set up. In the light of this re-examination, it is proposed to alter the 
scheme of the Lokpal as incorporated in the 1971 Bill in material respects 
for making the institution of Lokpal an effective instrument to combat 
the problem posed by corrllptjon at higher political levels. 
4. Under t'le scheme now proposed, the jurisdiction of Lokpal will 
cover any complaint of misconduct (pertaining to a period not t'xceeding 
five years prior to the date of the complaint) against a person who is or 
has been a public man as defined in clause 2(g) of the Bill. The Prime 
Minister, Members of Parliament and Chief Ministers of States are being 
brought within the purview of the Lokpal. Allegations against civil 
servants will not come within the purview of the Lokpal; and gri~ances, 
as distinct from allegations of misconduct, will be excluded from his 
jurisdiction. The Lokpal will have under his direct admi.nistrative con-
trol an independent investigating machinery to assist him in the dis-
charge of his functions. 
5. The Bill seeks to glve effect to the Lokpal Scheme as proposed in 
the preceding paragraph. The Notes on clauses explain the various 
provisions of the Bill. 
Nmw DELHI; CHARAN SINGH. 
The 23rd July. 1977. 
:I.S 

PRlSIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[.copy of letter No. 6/1/77-Lokpal, dated the 25th July. 1977 from 
Shri Cbaran Sinih, Minister of Home Affairs to the Secretary, Lok 
Sabha.] 
The PNsident having been informed of the subject matter of the pro-
poled BW. to provWe for the appointment of a Lokpal to inquire into 
aDegatioDS of misconduct ~ public men and for matters connected 
therewith, recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 of the 
C .. tttutic:s1 of India, for introduction and consideration of the Bill in 
Lok Sebha. 
10 

Notes on claw~s 
ClaWI2 2: Sub-cZawe (a) .-The definition of "competent authority" 
is relevant for the purposes of clause 13(1), clause 14(1) and clause 
17 (1), (2) and (3). : 
Sub-clause (e) .-This sub-clause makes it clear that "misconduct" for 
the purposes of the proposed legisla.tion iDcludes also misconduct com-
mitted before the commencement of the proposed legislation and mi~­
duct committed outside India. 
S<ub-clG1LSe (g) .-This sub-clause defines the expression "public man". 
The other definitions in the clause are self-explanatory. 
Clause 3.-This c1ause seeks to spell out the various categories of mis-
conduct by public men which will include not only offences punilhable 
wuter Chapter IX of the Indian Penal Code and the Prevention of Corrup-
tion Act, but also other irregularities and improprieties as indicated in 
sub-clause (1) of the clause. Parts of this sub-clause, e. g., (a), (b) and. 
(e), follow in substance the definition of allegation contained in clause 
2 (b) of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Bill, 19'71 (hereinafter referred to 
as the 1971 Bill). Part (e) provides for situations where a public man, 
directly or indirectly, aLlows his position as public man to be abused by 
his relatives or associates. _ Part (d) seeks to provide for cases where 
the conduct of a public man is not in conformity with the norms of inte-
grity expected of him. 
Clause 4.-This clause provides for the appointment of Lokpal The 
method of appointment of a Lokpsl is in I!PUbstence the same as provided 
in sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the 1971 Bill, with the variation that 
instead of consulta-aon with the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sebha, 
consultation with the Chairman of Rajya Sabha and the Speaker of-the 
Lok Sabha has been provided. 
ClCWH 5.-This clause is aelf..explanatory and eorresponda to c:laJJle 4 
of the 1971 Bill. ' 
Clause 6.-This clause provides for the term of office and other coruIi-
tions of service of the Lokpal and is based on clause 5 of the 1971 Bill. 
at provides for the salary payable to the LokpaJ.. It &lao _ providel that 
:the allowances and pension payable to and other conditions ~ service of 
the Lokpal shall be such lIS may be deteanil1ed by, the Preaident hav~ 
regard to the allowances and pension payable to and otller conditioDs of 
service of the ctUef Justice of 'India. 
Clause 7·-Tbis clause deals with the removal of ~pal aRd is. in..abtI-
tance the same as provided in clause 6 of the 1971 Bill. It, however, seeks 
to make it clear that the growads and procedure w ~ of Lotpal 
will-be the same ..,. thOle applicable in the caee of Ju4 .. of Sulnae 
Cout. ! 
11 

18 
Clause 8.-This is a new provision. This clause provides for the 
appointment of one or more Special Lokpals when on a report from the 
Lokpal the President is satisfied that it is necessary to have additional 
Lokpal (s) for the expeditious disposal of complain·~. A Special Lokpal 
may be appointed for a term of 5 years or for a shorter period. 'l'he 
procedure for appointment of Special Lokpal, the salary payable to a 
Special ,Lokpal and all other conditions of service of a Special Lokpal, 
are the saine as those of the Lokpal with the exception that 1£ a Special 
Lokpal is appointed for a term shorter than I) years, he will be eligible 
for re-appointment provided the total period does not exceed 5 years. 
Clause 9.-This clause provides for an independent investigating 
machinery and other staff to as'~ist the Lokpal which will be under his 
direct administrative con'~rol. It also provides that the Lokpal 
can secure the services of other officers and investigating agencies of the 
State and the Central GQvcrnment with the concurrence of the Govern-
ment concerned or any other persOn or agency considered necessary by 
him. This clause also provides that the matters relaang to salary, allow-
ances and other conditions of service of persons working under the 
Lokpal wilL be regulated by rules framed ,in consultation with him. There 
is a provision that special conditions of service will be prescribed for 
them with a view to enabling them to £v::t without fear in the discharge 
of their functions. 
Clause 10.-This clause deals with the jurisdiction of the Lokpal. 
Sub-clau!ie (1) provides ,that the Lokpal may inquire into ally allegation 
of misconduct against a public man, made in the complaint. Sub-clause 
(2) provides that matters in respect of which complaints may be made 
Ehall not be referred for inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 
1952, withou't the concurrence of the Lokpal. 
Clause n.-This clause deals with matters which are not subject to the 
jurisdiction of the Lokpal. Sub-clause (1'), which is a new provision, 
provides tha't the Lokpal shall not inquire into any matter concerning 
\any person if he has any bias in respect of such matter or person. Sub-
clause (3) provides that the Lokpal shall not inquire into any matter 
which has been referred for inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry 
Act, 1952, on his recommendation or with his prior concurrence. Sub-
clause (4) provides for the same period of limitation (five years from the 
commission of misconduct) as in sub-clause (5) of clause 8 of the 1971 
Bill. 
CZltUSe 12-This clause follows, in substance clause 9 of the l!nl Bill 
and provides that any person other than a' public servant may make a 
complaint ~o 'the Lokpal. It provides that the complaint will have to be 
in writing in the prescribed form accompanied by an affidavit. There is 
an additional provision in this clause for a deposit of RI. 1,000 by the 
complainant. The Lokpal is being empowered to exempt for sufficient 
cause a complainant from ·the requirement as to deposit. 
'. ;,,;C,"uae' 18;-This elause provides for preliminary scrutiny of complaints 
-by"lIiGkpal and 'for dismissal of complaints which on verification are found 
to be frivolous or vexatious or not subject to the jurisdiction"of the 
Lokpal or not made within the period of limitation. This clause incorpo-
rates prOVisions of sub-clauses (4) and (5) of clause 10 of the 1&'11 Bill. 
Ii,. • 
, I 

19 
Clause 14.-This clause provides for the procedure to be adopted by 
the Lokpal in respect of inquiries. The clause provides inter alia for 
the fo~warding of a copy of the complaint to the conc~ned com~tent 
authority and the public man and for givjng the latter an opportunity to 
represent his case. This corresponds to sub-clauses (1), (2) and (3) of 
clause 10 of the 1971 Bill. 
Clause 15.-This clause corresponds to clause 11 of the 1971 Bill. Sub-
clause (1) of this clause seeks to confer on the Lokpal the powers Of a 
civil court in regard to matters such as summoning of witnesses, dis-
covery and production of documents, receiving evidence on affidavits, 
.etc. The public servants will be obliged, notwithstanding the provisions 
m other laws about secrecy, etc., to disclose any information or docu-
ments required by the Lokpal for purposes of an inquiry except when 
such information or documents relates to the proceedings of the Cabinet 
and Cabine't Committees. The information or document required by the 
Lokpal may be withheld also when its disclosure or production is likely 
to prejudice the security, defence or international relations of India, but, 
unlike the prOVisions in the 1971 Bill, the Lokpal will be entitled to be 
satisfied about the correctness of such a claim. 
Clause l6.-This is a new provision and it seeks to confer powers of 
search and seizure on the Lokpal. 
Clause 17.-This claUse is based on sub-clauses (3), (4), (5), (6) and 
(7) of clause 12 of the 1971 Bill. This clause provides that on the con-
clusion of an inquiry in respect of a complaint, the Lokpal will communi-
cate his findings ana recommendations to the concerned competent 
authority which will have to intimate, to the Lokpal, within three months 
of the receipt of his report, the action taken, or proposed to be taken, on 
the basis of his report. If the Lokpal is not satisfied with the action 
taken, or proposed to be taken, he will be entitled to make a special 
report about it to the President and it will be laid before each House of 
Parliament. In addition, the Lokpal will present to the President an 
annual report Of his work which will also be laid before Parliament. 
Clause IS.-This clause provides that when a complaint of misconduct 
is. made against the Prime Minister, a copy of such complaint and of 
the Lokpal's report in respect of such a complaint when received by the 
Prime Minister shall be placed before the Members of the Council of 
Ministers for the Union. 
Clause 19.-This clause provides that, as in the case of Judges, the 
salary, allowances and pension to Lokpal and SpeCial Lokpals shall be 
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. 
CZa1U\Z 20.-This clause provides for secrecy of information obtained 
by the Lokpal and his officers and employees, and is self-explanatory. 
This corresponds to clause 14 of the 1971 Bill. 
Clause 21.-This clause provides for punishment for intentional insult 
or interruption to, or bringing into disrepute, the Lokpal and corresponds, 
in substance, to clause 15 of the 1971 Bill. 
Clat£se 22.-This clause empowers the Lokpal to try himself and punish 
witnesses for giving or fabricating false evidence and for offences under 
sections 175, 178, 179 and 180 of the Indian Penal Code. There was no 
such provision in the 1971 Bill. 

20 
-ClGuee 23.-SuD-dause (1), which corr.es)Mlllds to sub-cla ..... (1) of 
ela10llle 17 of the 19'11 Blll, provides for conferment of additional functions 
011· Lokpal in relatioll w eradication ciIi CQlTu,ption. Sub-clause (2), which 
carrapgnda to sub-clause (3) of clause 17 ., the 1971 Bm seeks te enable 
the Preaicilmt to refer 10 the Lokpal aay alleptiOIl& of miaevndu.ct in 
respect of a public man. 
Ckule 24.-Thia,claWie providelfor·tbe ~al Qfdeposita made by 
complameta 1.incier ~\Ue 13. 
Cluuse 25.-.Thisclause is self-explanatory and follows clause 16 of 
the 1971 Bill. 
Clause 26.-"nlis clause corresponds to clause 19-of the IfnI 'Bill and 
It provides for delegation of powen by theLokpal tQ hiB'staff. 
Cl4we 27.-This clause provides for the power to make rulea. 
CZawe 28.-This clause makes it clear that complaints cannot b~ made 
to the Lokpal in respect of matters referred to any Commission of 
Inquiry under the Commissions Of Inquiry Act, 1952, before the com-
mencement of the proposed legislation. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
~au'Se 4 (1) and clause 8 (1) of the Bill provide respectively far the 
appomtment of the Lokpal and Special Lokpal or Special Lokpals. Clause 
6(3) provides for1he salary payable to Lokpal. Clause 6 (4) lays down 
that the Lokpal shall be entitled without payment of rent' to the use of 
an O'fticial residence. Clause 6 (5) of the Bill envisages that the al-
lowances and pension payable to, and other conditions of service of, the 
Lokpal shall be such as may be prescribed by rules having regard to ~e 
allowances and pension payable to, and other conditions of servi~e qf, 
the Chief Justice of India. By virtue of. clause 8 (3), the provisions of 
clause 6(3), (4) and (5) apply in relation to the Special Lokpals also. 
2. Sub-clauee (1) of cla\1le9 provides that the Lokpal shall have the 
Secretary and such other officers and employees as may be prescribed by 
rules to assist tHm in the lIiscbal1ge of his functions. Sub-clause (2) 01 
clause 9 empowers the Lokpal to secure, for the pUrposes of deai:mg with 
any complaints or any classes of complaints, the services of any 
officer 'Or employee or investigating agency of. the Central Govern-
ment or a Stllte Government or the services of any other penon or 
agency. Sub-clause (3) of clause 9 provides that the terms and condi-
tions of service of. the officers and employees of the Lokpal and of the 
officers, employees, agencies and persons referred to in sub-clause (2) of 
that clause, shall be such as may be prescribed by rules in consultation 
with the Lokpal. 
3. It is not possible to visualise at this stage whether any need will 
arise for the appointment of one or more Special Lokpals. Further, the 
salaries and other conditions of service of the staff of the LokpaJ are to 
be prescribed by rules after consuaation with the ~kpa~. It is, therefo~e, 
n t possible to give precise details of the expendIture mvolved. It IS, 
h Over estimated that the Bill when enacted, will involve a non-re-owe , '. d't f Rs 20 ~ g expenditure of Rs. 2 lakhs and a recurrmg expen 1 ure 0 . 
curun t t b 'lding t ,1akhs a year. In case it become3 necesnry to cons ruc a Ul 0 
house the es,tablishment of the Lokpal, additional expenditure, of a non-
recurring nature, of the order of Rs. 25 lakhs will also be involved. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
for the purpose of carrying into eff~ct the provisions of the proposed en-
actment. The various matters in relation to which such rules may be 
made have been enumerated in detail under various it~ms of sub-clause 
(2) of that clause and relate ma'inly to prescribing of competent autho-
rities in respect of public men oth~r than the Prime Minister and other 
members of the Council of Ministers for the Union and Chief Ministers 
of States, the conditions of service of the staff and officers who shall 
constitute the Secretariat for the Lokpal (in consultation with the 
Lokpal) , the form in which complaints may be made and the fees, if any, 
which may be charged in respect thereof, the form in which certificates 
shall be furnished in respect of deposits under clause 12, the manner in 
which and the authorities or agencies with whom such deposits shall be 
made and the additional matters in respect of which powers of a Civil 
Court may be exercised by the Lokpal. These are matters of detail, 
necessary for the effective administration of the provisions of the Bill 
and it is difficult to 'provide for all the situations in the Bill itself. The 
delegation of legislative power is, .. therefore, of a normal character. 

LOIt SABRA 
.. 
IPLL 
to provide for the appoba __ t ef a Lokpal to Inquire into all.,. .... til 
milCOnduct against j,uWc ·mea :and for matten connected t1wtewJtIL 
(Shri Ch4NtI ..."., lIift.iBte" of HOme A,ai" •. ) 