As INTR1::lDUCED IN LoK SABHA 
Bill No. 88 of 1976 
THE KERALA LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY (EXTENSION OF 
DURATION) SECOND AMENDMENT BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the further extension of the duration of the present 
Legislative Assembly of the State of Kerala. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Kerala Legislative Assembly (Extension Short 
of Duration) Second Amendment Act. 1976. title. 
5 2. The period of five years [being the period for which the Legislative 
Assembly of a State may, under clause (1) of· article 172 of the Constitu-
tion, continue from the date appointed for its first meeting] in relation to 
the Legislative Assembly of the State of Kerala, which was extended for a 
period of six months by the Kerala Legislative Assembly (Extension of 
10 Duration) Act, 1975 and for a further period of six months by the Kerala 
46 of 1976. Legislative Assembly (Extension of Duration) Amendment Act, 1976. is 
hereby extended for a further period of six months and accordingly in 
section 2 of that Act, for the words "one year", wherever they occur, tlie 
words "eighteen months" shall be substituted. 
Further 
extension 
of duration 
of the 
Kerala 
Legis-
lative 
Assembly 
and 
amend_ 
ment 
of Act 
33 of 
1975. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The duration of the Kerala Legislative Assembly, as extended by the 
Kerala Legislative Assembly (Extension of Duration) Amendment Act, 
1976 (46 of 1976), is due to expire on the 21st October, 1976. The cir-
cumstances in which the dur'ation of the Kerala Legislative Asst!mbly 
was extended as aforesaid still continue to prevail. It is, therefore, felt 
that it is not desirable to hold the elections now. It is proposed that 
the duration of the existing Legi'slative Assembly of Kerala may be 
extended for a further period of six months with effect from the 22nd 
October, 1976. 
2. Under the proviso to clause (1) of article 172 of the Constitution, 
Parliament has the power to extend by law, while a Proclamation of 
Emergency is in operation, the duration of the Legislative Assembly of 
a State for a period not exceeding one year at a time and not extending 
in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has 
ceased to operate. 
3. The Bill seeks to give effect to the object mentioned above. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 23ird August. 1976. H. R. GOKHALE. 
2 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACT FROM THE KERALA LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY (EXTENSION OF 
DURATION) ACT, 1975 
(33 OF 1975) 
III III II< III III 
2. The period of five years [being the period for which the I legislative 
Assembly of a State may, under clause (1) of article 172 of the Consti-
tution, continue from the date appointed for its first meeting] in relation 
to the present Legislative Assembly of the State of Kerala shall, while 
the Proclamations of Emergency issued on the 3rd day of December, 1971 
and on the 25th day of June, 1975, are both in operation, be extended for 
a period of one year: 
Provided that if both or either of the said Proclamations cease or 
ceases to operate before the expiration of the said period of one year, 
the present Legislative Assembly of the State of Kerala shall, unless 
previously dissolved under clause (2) of article 174 of the Consatutio'l, 
continue until six months after the cesser of operation of the said Pro-
clamations or Proclamation, but not beyond the said period of one year. 
3 
ExtensiOn 
of dura-
tion of 
the present 
Kerala 
Legisla-
lative 
Assembly. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the further extension of the duration of the present 
Legislative Assembly of the State of Kerala. 
(H. R. Gokhale, Minister oJ Law, Justice and Company Affair.~.) 