As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 88 of  2024
THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (AMENDMENT)  
BILL, 2024
By
Shri D.M. Kathir Anand, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement.
5

2.  In section 3 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (hereinafter refer to as the 
principal Act),—
(a) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(ba) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of 
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;";
(b) after clause (c) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ca) "child" means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of eighteen years;";
(c) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(ga) "Council" means the Nutrition Council constituted under section 17A;"; and
(d) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ha) “educational institution" includes—
(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate Government 
or a local authority; or
(ii) a school receiving aid or grants from the appropriate Government or the 
local authority to meet whole or part of its expenses; 
(iii) a school belonging to specified category; or
(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to meet its 
expenditure; or
(v) an educational institution managed by a private entity, society or a trust, 
which imparts elementary education;".
   3. After Chapter II of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections thereunder 
shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER   IIA
Nutrition Council
   17A. The Central Government shall, by notification in the official gazette, establish 
a Council to be known as the Nutrition Council to regulate sale and advertising of food 
products which cause obesity amongst children.
   17B. The Council shall consist of — 
(a) the Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare, Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) not more than three members having expertise in medicine with at least 
fifteen years of experience in handling issues related to nutrition and child health;
(c) one expert each in the field of labelling and claims, advertisement, food 
additives, processing aids; and
(d) one member from the Union Ministry of Women and Child Development not 
below the rank of Joint Secretary.
   17C. The Council shall —
(a) lay down policies and principles to regulate sale and advertising of food 
products cause obesity amongst children;
2
10
5
Amendment of 
section 3.
15
20
Establishment 
of Nutrition 
Council.
34 of 2006.
Composition 
of Nutrition 
Council.
Functions of the 
Council.
25
30
35
Insertion of new 
Chapter IIA.

(b) determine its procedure in the performance of its functions;
(c) admit any complaints regarding non-implementation of  its policies; and
(d) initiate action for violating provisions of this Chapter.
   17D. The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and other 
employees to the Council as may be necessary for efficient discharge of its functions.
   17E. All food products containing high sugar, calories, sodium, saturated fat or any 
other ingredient present in food products beyond limits stipulated and detrimental to health 
of children shall bear label warning about the presence of excess ingredient in black bold 
letters.
   17F. All food products labelled under section 17E shall not be sold within a radius of 
one kilometre of educational institution.
   
   17G.  All food products labelled under section 17E shall not be advertised in print, 
television or any other form targeting children below the age of eighteen years.
   17H. Whoever sells a labelled food product in contravention of the provisions of this 
Chapter shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years 
and fine which may extend upto rupees ten lakhs.
   17I. Whoever advertises a labelled food product in contravention of provisions of  this 
Chapter shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto two years 
and fine which may extend upto rupees five lakhs.". 
 
.
3
5
10
Central 
Government to 
provide Officers 
and employees.
Labelling of 
food products 
by the Council..
Prohibition of 
sale of labelled 
food products 
near educational 
institution.
Prohibition on 
advertising of 
labelled food 
products.
Punishment for 
sale of  labelled 
food products.
Punishment for 
advertisement 
of labelled food 
product.
15

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Increasing exposure to variety of fast foods has led to rise in consumption of food 
products which are largely detrimental to the health of the persons. While adults can 
recognise the harmful effects the targeted advertising of such unhealthy food products 
towards younger population has led to poor lifestyle standards amongst youth. The need is 
to regulate the sale and advertising of such food products so as to save children from their 
harmful effects.
 Childhood obesity is a major challenge in the battle against rising rate of non-
communicable diseases in India. While India is already facing challenges in providing 
affordable healthcare access to its citizens, the effects of poor lifestyle habits among its 
urban citizens adds further burden on the country’s resources. The establishment of 
Nutrition Council under the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare with adequate 
representation of professionals will be vital in regulating use of ingredients resulting in 
obesity. A warning label on food products having more than permissible limit of certain 
ingredients would caution the consumers about their ill-effects. 
 It is also necessary to place restriction on advertisement of food products which cause 
obesity and sale of such food products near educational institutions.  The Bill, accordingly,  
seeks to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 with a view to reduce consumption 
of unhealthy food products by children.
 Hence this Bill.
       New Delhi;                                                               D.M. KATHIR ANAND   
    July 9,  2024.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute a Nutrition Council to regulate the sale and 
advertising of food products which cause obesity amongst children. It also provides for 
appointments of experts, officers and employees to the Nutrition Council. The Bill, therefore, 
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated 
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per annum would be involved from 
the Consolidated Fund of India.
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved.
 
5

ANNEXURE 
[Extract from Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006]
(No. 34 of 2006)
*                         *                             *             *                *
  3.   (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, – 
 *                            *                            *                *                         *
(b) “advertisement” means any audio or visual publicity, representation or 
pronouncement made by means of any light, sound, smoke, gas, print, electronic 
media, internet or website and includes through any notice, circular, label, wrapper, 
invoice or other documents;
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Food Authority;
 *                            *                            *                *                         *
(g) “contaminant” means any substance, whether or not added to food, but which 
is present in such food as a result of the production (including operations carried 
out in crop husbandry, animal husbandry or veterinary medicine), manufacture, 
processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding of 
such food or as a result of environmental contamination and does not include insect 
fragments, rodent hairs and other extraneous matter;
(h) “Designated Officer” means the officer appointed under section 36;
 *                            *                            *                *                         *
6
Definitions.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 
————
(Shri D.M. Kathir Anand, M.P.)