AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 88 of 2021
THE UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
By
SHRI RAJENDRA AGRAWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the University Grants Commission (Amendment)
Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
2.  After section 22 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:–
“22A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or regulation
for the time being in force, no University shall be prohibited from–
(a) offering Apprenticeship Embedded Programmes under Open and
Distance Learning or online mode; and
(b) collaborating with private institutions with the objectives of utilising
their resources for offering Apprenticeship Embedded Programme under Open
and Distance Learning or online mode.
(2) Any University offering Apprenticeship Embedded Programme under
Open and Distance Learning or online mode shall regulate the attendance and
assessment of such programme in such manner as it may deem appropriate.”.
Insertion of
new section
22A.
Apprenticeship
Embedded
Programme
under Open and
Distance
Learning and
online mode.
5
10
3 of 1956

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
     The Government of India notified University Grants Commission (Open and
Distance Learning Programmes and Online Programmes) Regulations, 2020 on
September 4, 2020 under the powers conferred by sub-sections (1) and (2) of section
26 read with clause (j) of section 12 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956
(3 of 1956) to regulate the programmes under Open and Distance Learning (ODL)
mode and online mode.
The Regulations conferred the University Grants Commission (UGC) the
responsibility to regulate the online and distance programmes by the Indian
Universities. However, many of these regulations are proving restrictive in the
expansion of Higher Education and limits their ability to embed employability into
Higher Education Degree Programmes.
Given the fact that the Government aims to increase Gross Enrollment Ratio
in Higher Education to above 50% (as specified in National Education Policy), opening
up of apprenticeship embedded programmes under online and distance education
mode would prove crucial in achieving this goal. The need is to create an ecosystem
that will provide employable higher education to the aspiring youth and create an
employer funded education model.
The present Bill seeks to liberalise apprenticeship embedded education to
allow all universities to offer online degree apprenticeship programmes, in which
students ‘earn while learning’ and ‘learn by doing’. Under these programmes, the
students are given monthly stipends and get on-the-job training, learning and
mentoring.
Therefore, these degree apprenticeship programmes will not only help to
increase Gross Enrollment Ratio in higher education but also increase the employability
of the students.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                     RAJENDRA AGRAWAL
March 5, 2021.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
.
————
(Shri  Rajendra Agrawal, M.P .)