1
Short title and
extent.
THE COMPULSORY ESTABLISHMENT OF MEDICAL CENTRES IN
SCHOOLS BILL,  2018
By
SHRI SHIVAJI ADHALRAO PA TIL,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory establishment of medical centres in schools to promote
positive health, prevention and treatment of common diseases among
students and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Establishment of Medical Centres in
Schools Act, 2018.
 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless for context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "doctor" means a medical practitioner registered with the Medical Council of
India;
Definitions.
Bill  No. 88 of  2018
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) "prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "school" means a school run by the Central Government or a State Government
or a local authority or by an authority designated or sponsored by the appropriate
Government and includes Government aided school and recognised private school.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Medical Council of India,
within a period of six months from the commencement of this Act, formulate a universal
health policy for students in schools.
(2) The Central Government shall issue guidelines and directions to the State
Governments for providing medical facilities in schools from time to time.
4. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure that every school,
within its jurisdiction, is fully prepared to follow medical health scheme as prescribed.
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to,—
(a) appoint a registered medical practitioner and a qualified nurse in every
school;
(b) make provision of a health checkup of students and blood sample collection
centre in every school;
(c) maintain data of health status of students in schools;
(d) screen for deficiencies, diseases and disabilities amongst students in
schools;
(e) make provision of counseling and treatment of students wherever deficiencies
and diseases are detected;
(f) make provision for referral of students wherever required to district First
Referral Unit or tertiary hospitals;
(g) create health awareness and inculcate healthy habits among students in
every school;
(h) facilitate continuum of healthcare of students in schools by creating data
base; and
(i) provide facilities of pathological tests and medical treatment to the students
for the following diseases:—
(i) anemia;
(ii) refractive errors;
(iii) dental problem;
(iv) respiratory infections;
(v) gastrointestinal problems;
(vi) skin diseases;
(vii) fever;
(viii) headache;
(ix) injuries;
(x) nutritional deficiencies;
(xi) urinary tract infection;
(xii) jaundice;
Central
Government to
formulate
health policy
for students in
schools.
Schools to be
prepared for
medical
emergency.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
certain
facilities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(xiii) eye ailments;
(xiv) gynecological problems;
(xv) worm infestations;
(xvi) behavior problems;
(xvii) ear ailments;
(xviii) weakness or fatigue;
(xix) obesity;
(xx) burns;
(xxi) thyroid;
(xxii) others (animal bites, assault, drug addiction, epilepsy, mental
retardation).
6. It shall be the duty of the every school to,—
(a) provide adequate space in school premises for medical facility room where a
doctor and a qualified nurse shall screen, take blood samples, treat children and shall
provide consultation to students; and
(b) provide facility like computer and internet connectivity to maintain and
communicate data to appropriate Government and parents of the students.
7. It shall be the duty of every parent to apprise the school administration of the
special medical needs of his child and keep a slip in the school bag of the child mentioning
the kind of medical treatment being taken by such child.
8. The appropriate Government shall take steps to ensure that no school charges any
amount from the parents of students for arranging medical facility for students or refuses
admission to any child, who is suffering from any disease which is not life threatening.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for the purposes of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to medical preparedness
in schools or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Schools to
provide
certain
facilities.
Duty of the
parents.
Schools not
to charge
extra amount
for arranging
medical
facilities.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Children of today are tomorrow's citizen, thus it is extremely important to ensure
good health for children. Child health plays a vital role in the development of a country.
Children are the assets for tomorrow's productivity. The growth of any country depends
on the availability of healthy human resource. Healthy children ensures a healthy adult
who in turn ensure a sound growth and development of the economy.
According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), forty-three per cent. of Indian
children are underweight. Our country is home to the largest child population in the
world. A substantial forty-one per cent. i.e. around 450 million of total population are
children. India accounted almost forty-three per cent. underweight children against thirty-
two per cent. in Pakistan, nine per cent. in South Africa. Nutritional level among the
children is the basic element of their overall mental and physical development.
Malnutrition among the children reduced significantly over the time, but still the number
of malnourished children is very high in the country. Thus, there is a need, to be more
focused on the child health issues to early detect and cure disease for better health
opportunity and support to build a better and healthy India.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for compulsory establishment of medical
centres in schools to promote positive health in children, provide prevention including
screening of school children for common diseases, deficiency, early diagnosis and
treatment.
N
EW DELHI; SHIV AJI  ADHALRAO  PATIL
February 22, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appropriate Government to ensure that every
school, within its jurisdiction, is fully prepared to follow medical health scheme. Clause
5 provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint a doctor and a nurse in every
school. It also provides for provision of health check up, blood sample collection for
pathological tests and treatment of students suffering with common diseases in every
school. Clause 9 provides that the Central Government, shall after due appropriation,
provide adequate funds to the State Governments for the purposes of this Act. The
expenditure relating to States shall be borne from their respective Consolidated Funds.
The expenditure relating to Union territories shall be borne from the Consolidated Fund
of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred
crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory establishment of medical centres in schools to promote
positive health, prevention and treatment of common diseases among
students and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4438LS(S3)—09-03-2018.