Bill No. 88 of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
DR. SUJAY RADHAKRISHNA VIKHEPA TIL, M.P.
A
BILL
 to amend the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence
(Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act),—
(a) in clause (a), after the words "domestic relationship", the words "or a live-in
relationship" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 2.
5
43 of 2005
10

(b) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ha) ‘live-in relationship” means the domestic relationship between two
persons cohabiting for reasonable period of time without marriage and who are
adults as per the Majority Act, 1875 and having legal age to marry;”;
(c) in clause (q),—
(i) for the words “any adult male person”, the words “any adult person”
shall be substituted; and
(ii) in the proviso, for the words “relative of the husband or the male partner”,
the words “relative of the husband or the male partner including female relatives of
the respondent husband or the male partner” shall be substituted; and
(d) after clause (s), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the term ‘shared household’ shall extend to the house of relatives
of the respondent male-adult, to which neither aggrieved person nor respondent
have right, title or beneficial interest, if the aggrieved person and the respondent
have shared the said household for any period of time for the purposes of domestic
relationship or live-in relationship.”.
3. In section 17 of the principal Act, after clause (2) the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(3) The aggrieved person shall be provided alternate and equivalent
accommodation  by the respondent if the aggrieved person refuses to live in the
shared household or any part of it.”.
5
9 of 1875
Amendment
of section 17.
2
10
15
20

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 aimed at providing more
effective protection of the rights of women guaranteed under the Constitution to those
women who are victims of violence of any kind occurring within the family. However, in many
instances the legislation has not been of use as there have been loopholes and lacunas in the
legislation. It was also an observation that amidst the pandemic of COVID-19, there was a rise
in the cases of Domestic Violence, which led to issuance of a nationwide WhatsApp number
by the National Commission of Women. Furthermore, in the year 2021, the National
Commission of Women received its highest number of complaints since 2014 which was
31,000. These are the cases which brought before the Commission, however, many voices are
still suppressed and lie in darkness.
There is also a phenomenon where the Mother-in-law and Sister-in-Law of the women
or any female member of the family could be involved in the acts of domestic violence,
however, the law of domestic violence holds only adult male person responsible and  assigns
him as respondent. This is a major lacuna as well as it violates the principles of Article 14.
This was recognized by the Apex Court in a landmark judgement. In the case of Hiral P.
Harsora vs. Kusum Narottamdas Harsora (2016) 10 SCC 165, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
struck down the phrase ‘any adult male person’ for being violative of article 14 of the
Constitution as the respondent in the cases of domestic violence is not merely an adult male
person and the aggrieved person must be free to bring case against mother-in-law and sister-
in-law of the respondent. However, there have no steps taken to simplify the law through
amendment and make the respondent as gender neutral.
It  is also noted that the residence and shared household is also a common issue for
women as they are ousted from their place of residence which was once their shared household.
Furthermore, in the case S.R. Batra vs. Taruna Batra (2007) 3 SCC 169, it was held by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court that, section 17(1) of the principal act, that the residence in the name
of other relatives of the family is not under the ambit of shared household. However, this
decision is contrary to the spirit of the principal Act as the aim of the legislation to protect the
women and their right to the household. This decision of the Hon’ble court can lead to a lot
of women suffering through lack of homes. It is imperative to note here that the women often
have domestic relationship and shared household with male adult person and the said residence
belongs to his family members. Thus, ouster from such home also must and should amount
to cruelty.
This Bill seeks to ensure the aforementioned situations do not arise and the safety,
security of the women in the society is not compromised. Therefore, by the means of reasons
provided above and in the interest of women empowerment and welfare and protection of
rights of women these amendments are required which is applicable across the country.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;                                         SUJAY RADHAKRISHNA VIKHEPATIL
28 February, 2022
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005
*  *  *  *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “aggrieved person” means any woman who is, or has been, in a domestic
relationship with the respondent and who alleges to have been subjected to any
act of domestic violence by the respondent;
*  *  *  *
(h) “dowry” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 2 of the
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961);
*  *  *  *
(q) “respondent” means any adult male person who is, or has been, in a domestic
relationship with the aggrieved person and against whom the aggrieved person has
sought any relief under this Act:
Provided that an aggrieved wife or female living in a relationship in the nature of
a marriage may also file a complaint against a relative of the husband or the
male partner;
*  *  *  *
(s) “shared household” means a household where the person aggrieved lives or at
any stage has lived in a domestic relationship either singly or along with the respon-
dent and includes such a household whether owned or tenanted either jointly by the
aggrieved person and the respondent, or owned or tenanted by either of them in
respect of which either the aggrieved person or the respondent or both jointly or
singly have any right, title, interest or equity and includes such a household which
may belong to the joint family of which the respondent is a member, irrespective of
whether the respondent or the aggrieved person has any right, title or interest in the
shared household;
*  *  *  *
17. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every woman in a domestic relationship shall have the right to reside in the shared
household, whether or not she has any right, title or beneficial interest in the same.
(2) The aggrieved person shall not be evicted or excluded from the shared
household or any part of it by the respondent save in accordance with the procedure
established by law.
*  *  *  *
4
Definitions.
Right to reside
in a shared
household.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to amend the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005
————
(Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil, M.P.)