1
THE ELECTRICITY (PRIORITY SUPPLY TO METROPOLITAN AREAS)
BILL, 2017
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory supply of electricity to metropolitan areas and
for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Electricity (Priority Supply to Metropolitan Areas)
Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Definitions.
Bill No. 88 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
Power to
make rules.
Priority
supply of
electricity to
metropolitan
areas.
(b) "competent authority" means such officer or authority who is, appointed by
notification in the Official Gazette, by the Central Government as competent authority
for the purposes of this Act;
(c) "metropolitan areas" means areas or regions which are or have been declared
as metropolitan areas by the appropriate Government; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall ensure that eighty per cent. of the total electricity generated
under its territorial jurisdiction, including the electricity generated by foreign companies, be
earmarked for the metropolitan areas.
(2) The quantum of electricity to be supplied to the metropolitan areas within the
territorial jurisdiction of appropriate Government shall be determined in such manner as may
be prescribed:
Provided that within every metropolitan area, electricity shall be supplied—
(a) to the backward areas at least five hours every day at half the rate;
(b) to Katras and densely populated areas at least two hours every day at half
the rate; and
(c) free of cost to the weaker sections of the society and to the people living
below the poverty line at least for three hours during morning and evening every day.
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in theOfficial Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this  Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central  Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made,  before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
5
  10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There is a great scarcity of electricity in metropolitans particularly in katras and mohallas
of Mumbai with a high density of population. The citizens living in these places have to face
a lot of problems due to scarcity of electricity. The situation becomes worse during the
summer season. The people living in these katras and higly dense places feel suffocated due
to absence of electricity as there are no open places and parks etc. around these places.
Electricity is the basic necessity of the man, without which modern life cannot be
imagined. As a matter of fact, our dependency on electricity has been so much that even a cut
for just one hour in the supply of electricity becomes a problem. As such, a lot of cut on the
supply of electricity occurs as soon as the temperature rises which naturally puzzles the
people. The worsening state of power supply during summer can be known from the fact that
the power supply remains interrupted for several hours due to non-availability of adequate
electricity on account of technical faults in the power grids. The life of citizens become
pitiable due to shortage of power in Metropolitans.
Therefore, it is proposed to provide adequate power in the Metropolitan areas of the
country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL  CHINAYYA  SHETTY
March 14, 2017.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide electricity to
the backward areas of metropolitan cities for at least five hours daily at half rate and also
provide free of cost electricity to the weaker sections of the society and persons living below
poverty line for at least three hours daily in the morning and evening. The expenditure
relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States.
However, the expenditure in respect of Union Territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated
Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees thirty crore will be
involved annually from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore  is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory supply of electricity to metropolitan areas and
for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—579LS(S3)—23-06-2017.