AsINTRJODUCED IN LOK SABRA ()~
THE DELHI MILK CORPORATION BILL,1976
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAFfER t
..•
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title,extent and commencement.
2. Definition'S.
CHAPTER II I
,-:
DELHI MILK CORPORATION
3. Establishment of Delhi Milk Corporation.
4. Head office,officesana agencies.
5,.Capitalof the Corporation.
6.Power of Corporation to borrow money.
7.Vesting of propertiesin Corporation.
B. Substitutionof Corporation in suitsor proceedings.
CHAPTER III
POWERS AND BUSINESS OF THE CORPORATION
9.Powers and business of the Corporation.
10. General powers of Corporation.
J i •
CHAPTER IV
MANAGEMENT
11. Management of affairsand business of Corporation.
12. The Board.
13. Members to receive remuneration, etc.
14. Fillingup of casual vacancies.
15.Resignation of members.
16.Meetings.
17.Members not to vote in certain cases.
lB. Vacancies, etc.,not to invalidate proceedings of Board.
, ~.
CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
19.Funds of Corporation.
20. Closureof accounts.
21. Accounts and audit.
22·.Surplusprofits.


CHAPTER VI
TRANSFER OF EMPLOYEES TO THE CORIPORATION
23. Special provision for transferof employees to Corporation.
CHAPTEH VII
MISCELLANEOUS
CLAUSES
24. Reference to Delhi Milk Scheme.
25.Declaration of fidelityand secrecy.
26.Indemnity.
27.Protection of action taken in good faith.
28.Employees 'Of the Corporation to be public servants,
29.Offences.
30. Provision relatingto income-tax, etc.
31. Winding up of Corporation.
32. Power to remove difficulties.
33. Annual report.
34. Power to make rules.
35. Power to make regulations.
THE' SCHEDULE.


Bill No. 819of 1976
THE DELHI MILK CORPORATION BILL, 1976
A ..
r"
BILL
to pl1'ovidefor the establishment oj a Corportuum. jor the purpose of
producing, manufacturing, ctcquiring, distributing and selling milk
and m11k products in the Union territory of Delhi and other areas
so that wholesome milk and milk products rYlfLybe available to the
general public, at a reasonable price, and [or matters connected there-
with or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year
Republic of India as follows:-
of the
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Milk Corporation Act,19'76.
(2) Itextends to the whole of the Union territoryof Delhi and also
to the Statesof Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan and
UttarPradesh.
(3) Itshallcome into force in a State or Union territoryto which it
10 extends On such date or dates as the CentralGovernment may, by noti-
fication,appoint and differentdates!may be appointed for the Union
territoryof Delhi or for differentStatesor partsthereof or for different
provisions of thisAct and any reference in any provision to the com-
mencement of thisAct shallbe construed as reference to the coming into
IS force of thatprovision in the Union territoryof Delhi or the concerned
Stateor partthereof.
Short title,
extentand
commence-
ment.


Definitions.
Establish_
ment of
Delhi
Milk Cor-
poration.
Head office,
officesand
agencie•.
2
2. In thisAct,unlessthe context otherwiserequires,-
(a) "Board" means the Board of Directorsreferred to in sub-
section (1) of section 11;
(b) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Board;
(c) "Corporation" means the Delhi Milk Corporation established 5
under section 3;
(d) "Delhi Milk Scheme" means the scheme made by the ad'
hoc Milk Board constitutedby the resolution of the Government
of India in the then Ministry of Food and Agriculture,No. 2.7-74/56-
L.S., dated the 17th August,1956 (published at page 283, Part I,10
Section 1 of the Gazetteof India of the 25th August,1956) for
ensuring an adequate supply of milk and milk products of good
qualityin Delhi at a reasonable price;
(e) "member" means the member of the Board and includes the
Chairman thereof; 15
(f) "notification" mean'S a notification published in the Official
Gazette;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rulesmade under this
Act;
(h) "scheduled bank" means a bank for the time being included 20
in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act,1934, 2 of 19'34.
and includes a corresponding new bank as defined in the Banking
Companies (Acquisitionand Transfer of Undertakings) Act,1970;
(i) "year" means the financial year.
CHAPTER II
." DELHI MILK CORPORATION
:t(1) With effectfrom such date as the CentralGovernment may, by
notification,specify in thisbehalf, there shall be established,for the
purposes of thisAct,a Corporation, to be known as the Delhi Milk
Corporation.
(2) The Corporation shallbe a body corporate with the name afore-
said.having perpetualsuccessionand a common sealwith power, subject
to the provisions of thisAct,to acquire,hold and dispose of property
and to contract, and may, by thatname sue and be sued.
4. (1) The head officeof the Corporation shallbe at New Delhi or at 35
such other place a'S the CentralGovernment may, by notification,specify.
(2) The Corporation may establishofficesor agencies at other places
Inoroutside the Union territoryof Delhi.•


3
5. (1) The authorised capital of the Corporation shallbe such sum,
not exceeding rupeestwenty-fivecroresas may be fixed by the Central
Government in thisbehalf, but itshall,in no case,be lessthan rupees
four croresand the capitalso fixed shallbe provided to the Corporation
5 by the Central Government from time to time afterdue appropriation
made by Parliament by law for the purpose and subject to such terms
and conditions as may be determined by that Government.
(2) All non-recurring expenditure incurred by the Central Govern-
ment for,or in connection with,the Delhi Milk Scheme up to the date
10 of establishment of the Corporation, and declared by that Government
to be capitalexpenditure, shallbe treatedas a partof the capitalto be
provided by the Central Government to the Corporation under sub-
section (1).
(3) The capitalof the Corporation shallbe divided into such number
15of fullypaid-up sharesas the Central Government may specify in this
behalf and all such sharesshall stand vested in, and allotted to, the
CentralGovernment.
(4) The Central Government may provide, by way of loan, grant,
subsidy or otherwise,any furtheramount thatmay be requiredby the
20 Corporation for carryingon the business of the Corporation or for any
purpose connected therewithon such termsand conditions as the Central
Government may determine.
(5) The Central Government may reimburse to the Corporation
25 such lossesas may be incurred by iton any activityundertaken by it
in pursuance of any direction made bv that Government.
6. (1) The Corporation may, for the purpose of carrying out its
functions under thisAct,take advances againststocks of milk or milk
products held by it,or borrow money, from-
(a) any scheduled bank; or
30 (b) any other bank, banking irrstitution or any other institution
approved by the Central Government in thisbehalf.
(2) The CentralGovernment may guaranteethe advances taken or
monies borrowed by the Corporation under sub-section (1), as to the
repayment of principal and the payment of interestthereon and other
35 incidental charges.
7. (1) Allassetsowned or acquired by the Central Government for
the purposesof the Delhi Milk Scheme before the establishment of the
Corporation shall,on such establishment,stand transferredto, and shall
vestin, the Corporation.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), assetsacquired by the Cen-
40 tralGovernment for the purposes of the Delhi Milk Scheme shall be
deemed to include all assets,rights,powers, authoritiesand privileges
and all property,movable and immovable, cash balances, reservefunds,
investments,book debts and all other rightsand interestsin or arising
out of, such propertyas were, immediately before the establishment of
45 the Corporation, in the ownership, possession,power or control of the
Central Gov~rnm~nt for the purpo'Se:;;of the Delhi Mil~ Schema, and
Capital of
the Cor-
peration.
Power of
Corpora-
tion to
borrow
money.
Vestingof
properties
in Cor-
poration.


Substitu,
tion of
Corpora-
tion in
suitsor
proceed-
ings.
Powers
and busi-
ness of
the Cor.
poration,
4
all books of account, registers,records and all other documents of what-
ever nature relatingthereto,and shall also be deemed to include all
borrowings, liabilitiesand obligations of whatever kind then subsisting
of the CentralGovernment in relationto the Delhi Milk Scheme.
(3) If any questionarisesas to whether any assetswere owned, 5
possessed,.held or controlled by the CentralGovernment for the purposes
of the Delhi Milk Scheme. or whether any right, power, authority,
privilege,obligation or liabilitywas acquired or incurred by the Central
Government for the purposesof the Delhi Milk Scheme, the same shall
be decided by the Central Government. 10
8.If,on the date of establishment of the Corporation, any suit,appeal
or other proceeding of whatever nature,ispending by or against the
Central Government for, or in connection with the Delhi Milk Scheme,
the same shallnot abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially
affected by reason of the transferto the Corporation of the assetsor 15
liabilitiesrelatingto the Delhi Milk Scheme, and the Corporation shall,
in every such suit,appeal or proceeding, become substitutedin place
of the Central Government and aftersuch substitution,the suit,appeal
or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or
againstthe Corporation, and not againstthe Central Government. 20
CHAPTER III
POWERS AND BUSINESS OF THE CORPORATION
9. (1) Itshallbe the duty of the Corporation to carryon all or any
of the following business,namely, acquisition,distribution,manufacture,
movement, production, sale,storage,supplyor transportof milk or milk 25
products,or both.
(2) In particular,and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, the Corporation shallhave power to-
(a) ensure an adequate supplyof wholesome milk and miJk pro-
ducts at a reasonable price; 30
(b) promote and encourage, by such means as itmay think fit,
the production, manufacture or supplyof milk and milk products;
(c) ensure,by such means as itmay think fit,thatthe milk or
milk product'S sold or supplied by itconforms to the standards of
puritylaid down by or under any law for the time being in force; 35
(d) fixthe pricesat which milk or milk products may be pur-
chased or sold by itor by itsbranches or agencies;
(e) fix commissions, salariesor other remuneration payable
to the persons employed by it;
(f) acquiremilk or milk products from such sourcesas itmay 40
think fit;
(g) enter into and perform all such contracts as are calculated
to furtherthe efficientperformance of itsobligations under this
Act;
(h) setup, or assistin the
handling and processingmilk or
tureof any milk products;
setting up of, any industry for 45
milk products or for the manufac-


(i)~perform any functions as agent or contractor in relation
to any milk or milk products distributedor sold by any other person;
(j)provide for the preservation,storage and transport of milk
acquired by itfrom the differentcollecting centres;
5 (k) sanction, without prior reference to the Central Govern-
ment, capitalexpenditure of a sum not exceeding rupees twenty-
fivelakhs;
(l) discharge such other functions as may be prescribed or as
are supplemental, incidental or consequential to any of the busl-
10 ness specified in thisAct.
10. (1) The Corporation may do anything which may be necessary
or expedient for the purposes of carryingout itspowers and business,
under section 9.
(2) Without prejudice to the generalityof the foregoing provisions,
15 such power shallinclude the power,-
(i) to acquire,hold and dispose of property;
(ii) to investitsfunds, which may not be, for the time being,
requiredby it,in such shares,stocks,debentures or other securities
as the CentralGovernment may specifyfrom time to time;
(iii) to aid in the establishment or promotion of any company,
firm or other organisation having objects which are calculated to
assist,whether directlyor indirectly,in the achievement of the
objects of the Corporation;
20
(iv) to administer or run any undertaking having objects similar
to those of the Corporation, if the management of such undertaking
is entrustedby the Central Government to the Corporation;
(v) to take over, or amalgamate with itself,
sent,the whole or any part of the undertaking
firm or other organisation having objects similar
Corporation.
by mutual con-
of any company,
to those of the
CHAPTER IV
MANAGEMENT
11. (1) The general superintendence, direction and management of
the affairsand business of the Corporation shallvestin a Board of
35 directors,which may exerciseall such powers and do all such actsand
thingsas may be exercised or done by the Corporation under thisAct.
(2) In discharging itsfunctions, the Board shallact on business
principleshaving regard to the interestsof the Corporation and the con-
sumer and shallbe guided by such instructionson questionsof policy
40 as may be given to itby the CentralGovernment.
12. (1) The Board shallconsistof the following, namely:-
(a) a Chairman; -~,
(b) two members to represent the Ministry of the Central
Government dealing with Animal Husbandry and Dairying;
General
powers of
Corpora-
tion.
Manage-
ment of
affairs
and busi-
ness of
Corpora-
tion.
The Board.


Members
to receive
remunera-
tion, etc.
Fillingup
of casual
vacancies.
Resigna-
tion of
members.
Meeting-.
(;
(c) one member to representthe Ministry of the
Government dealing with Finance;
(d) two members, to be nominated by the Central Government,
to representthe Union territoryof Delhi or such of the States
to which thisAct extends or in which thisAct has come into force;
5
(e) one member to representany of the national institutions
dealing with dairying;
,
Central
(f) two members to representthe interestsof producers and
co-operative organisationsengaged in the production, supply or pro-
curement of milk for the Corporation; 10
(g) not more than two members, to be nominated by the
Central Government, to representany other interestwhich may be
necessary to representfor furtheringthe objects of the Corporation;
-also hold office as the
IS
(2) Allthe members of the Board shallbe appointed by the Central
Government and shall hold office during the pleasureof that Govern-
ment.
(h) one Managing Director,who may
Chairman.
(3) The Managing Director shall-
(a) exercisesuch powers and perform such dutiesas the Board 20.
may entrustor delegate to him;
(b) receive such salaryand allowances and be governed by
such terms and conditions of service,as the Board may with the
previousapproval of the Central Government, determine:
Provided thatthe firstManaging Director,shallreceive such salary25
and allowances as the Central Government may fix.
13. The members,
to receive,by way
prescribed:
other than the Managing Director,shallbe entitled
of remuneration or fees, such sums as may be
Provided thatno member who isan officerof Government shallbe 30.
entitled to receive any remuneration other than any allowance admissi-
ble to him under the rulesregulatinghisconditions of service.
14. Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 12, the
manner of fillingcasual vacancies among the members shallbe such as
may be prescribed. 35
15.A member may resignhisofficeby givingnotice thereofin writing
to the Central Government and on such resignationbeing accepted, he
shallbe deemed to have vacated his office.
16. (1) The Board shallmeet at such times and places and shall
observe such rulesof procedure in regard to the transactionof businessat 40
itsmeetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by
regulationsmade by the Corporation under thisAct.


7
(2) The Chairman or, if for any reason he isunable to attend any
meeting, any other member elected by the members presentat the meet-
mg, shallpreside at the meeting,
(3) All questionswhich come up before any meeting of the Board
5 shallbe decided by a majority of the votesof the members present and
voting,and, in the e'vent of an equalityof votes,the Chairman, or in
his absence the person presiding,shallhave a second or castingvote.
17.A member who has any direct or indirect pecuniary interestin
any mattercoming up for consideration at a meeting of the Board, shall,
10 as soon as possible afterrelevantcircumstances have come to his know-
ledge, disclose the nature of his interestat such meeting and the disclo-
sureshallbe recorded in the minutes of the meeting of the Board and
the member shallnot take any partin any deliberation or decision of the
Board with respectto thatmatter.
IS 18.No act or proceeding of the Board shallbe invalid merely by rea-
son of the existenceof any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution
of the Board.
CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
20 19. (1) The Corporation shallhave itsown funds and all receiptsof
the Corporation shallbe credited theretoand all payments of the Cor-
poration shallbe made therefrom.
(2) Such funds shall be applied for meeting all administrativeex-
penses of the Corporation and for carryingout the provisionsof thisAct.
25 20.The Corporation shallcause itsbooks to be closed and balanced
on the 31stday of March, of each year.
21.(1) The Corporation shallmaintain proper accounts and other rele-
vant records and prepare an annual statementof accounts, including the
profitand lossaccount and the balance sheet in such form as may be
30 prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India.
(2)' The accounts of the Corporation shallbe audited annually by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed by
him in thisbehalf, and any expenditure incurred by him in connection
35 with such audit shallbe payable by the Corporation to the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the
Corporation shan have the same rightsand privilegesand authorityin
40 connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General has
in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular,
shallhave the rightto demand the production of books, accounts, con-
nected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect all or
any of the offices,of the Corporation.
Members
not to
vote in
certain
cases.
Vacancies,
etc.,not to
invalidate
proceed_
ings of
Board.
Funds of
Corpora-
tion.
Closure~
accounts.
Accounts
and audit.


Sur~lus
profits.
Special
provision
for trans-
fer of em-
ployees to
r'lypora-
tton,
(4) The accounts of the Corporation as certifiedby the Comptroller
'and Auditor-General of,India or any other person appointed by him in
thisbehalf togetherwith the audit report thereon shall be forwarded
annually to the Central Government and -thatGovernment shall cause
the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament. -5
22. (1) Aftermaking provision for bad and doubtful debts, deprecia-
'tion in -assets,contributions to staff-and superannuation furffisa~ aH
'other mattersfor which .provisionis-necessaryunder any law, 0Tw-hich
'kreusuaUy .provided !.forby the companies -uriderthe Companies Ac~
!19'5£'the Corporation -shalltransferthe balance 01 itsprofitsto a reserve10 1 of
~und "to b€ establishedby it.
~2)'The rese-rverunJi't6b'e ~stablishedunder sub-section (1) shall
lbe ilt-iliseJisoletyfor :s\ichpurposes as the Board may by regulation
f!ipeCii,'Y'
CHAPTER VI 15
TRANSFER ,OF EMPLOYEES TO THE CORPORATION
23. (1) On the establishment of the Corporation, itshall be lawful
for the Central Government to transfer,by order and with effectfrom
such date or dates as may be specified in the order, to the Corporation
any person employed by thatGovernment for the purposesof the Delhi 20
Milk Scheme:
Provided thatno order under thissub-section shallbe made in rela-
tion to any person employed by the Central Government for the pur-
poses of the Delhi Milk Scheme, who has,in respectof theproposal of the
Central Government to transferhim to the Corporation, intimated, with-25
in such time as may be specifiedin thisbehalf by thatGovernment, his
intention of not becoming an employee of the Corporation:
Provided furtherthatsuch of the persons employed by the Central
Government for the purposesof the Delhi Milk Scheme who do not
express,within the specified time, theirintention of becoming the em- 30
ployees of the Corporation, shallbe dealt with iruthe same manner and
in accordance with the same rulesas would apply ,tothe employees or
the CentralGovernment in the event of the reduction of the strengthof
the establishment in which such persons have been employed.
(2) An officeror other employe-e transferredby an order made under 35
sub-section (1) shall,on and from the date of transfer,cease to be an
employee o£ the Central Government and become an officeror other
employee of the Corporation with such designation as the Corporation
may determine and shall,subject to the provisions of sub-sections(3)
(4) and (5), be governed by the regulationsmade by the Corporation 40
under thisAct,as respectsremuneration and other conditions of service
including pension, leave and provident fund, and shallcontinue to be an
officeror other employee of the Corporation unlessand untilhis employ-
ment isduly terminated by the Corporation.
(3) Every officeror other employee transferredby an order made 45
under sub-section (1), shall,within sixmonths from the date of trans-
fer,exercisehis option in writingto be governed,-
(c) by the scale of pay applicable to the post held by him under
the Central Government immediately before the date of transferor
by.the scale of pay applicable to the post under the Corporation to 50
which he istransferred,


9
(b) by the leave,provident fund, retirementor other terminal
benefitsadmissible to officersor other employees of the CentralGov-
ernment in accordance with the rulesand orders of the Central
Government as amended from time to time or the leave,provident
5 fund or other terminal benefits admissible to the officersor other
employees of the Corporation under the regulationsmade by the
Corporation under thisAct,
and such option, once exercised shallbe final:
Provided that the option exercised by an officeror other employee
10 under clause(a)!shallbe applicable only in respectof the post to which
such officeror employee is transferredto the Corporation and in the
event of his appointment to a higherpost under the Corporation, he
shallbe eligibleonly for the scale of pay applicable to such higherpost:
Provided furtherthatif immediately before the date of his transfer
IS any such officeror other employee isofficiatingin a higher post under
theCentralGovernment eitherin a leave vacancy or in any other vacancy
of a specifiedduration, his pay, on transfer,shallbe protected for the
unexpired period of such vacancy and thereafterhe shallbe entitled to
draw, at his option, pay in the scale applicable to the post under
20 the CentralGovernment to which he would have revertedor to the scale
of pay applicable to the post under the Corporation to which he istrans-
ferred:
Provided also thatwhen an officeror other employee servingin the
Department of the Ministry of the CentralGovernment dealing with the
25 Delhi Milk Scheme ispromoted to officiatein a higherpost in thatDe-
partment subsequentto the transferto the Corporation of any other offi-
cer or employee senior to him in thatDepartment 'before such transfer,
the officeror other employee who ispromoted to officiatein such higher
post shall,on transferto the Corporation, be entitledonly to the scale of
30 pay applicable to the post he would have held but for such promotion or
the scaleof pay applicable to the post under the Corporation to which he
istransferred,whichever he may opt.
(4) No officeror other employee transferredby an order made under
sub-section (1),-
35 (a) shallbe dismissed or removed by an authoritysubordinate
to thatcompetent to make a similaror equivalentappointment under
the Corporation as may be specified in the regulationsmade by the
Corporation under thisAct;
(b) shallbe dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except af-
40 teran inquiryin which he has been informed of the charge against
him and given a reasonable opportunityof being heard in respectof
those chargesani where itisproposed, aftersuch inquiry,to impose
on him any such penalty,untilhe has been given a reasonable op-
portunityof making a representationon the penalty proposed, but
45 only on the basisof the evidence adduced during such inquiry:
Provided thatthisclauseshallnot apply,
(i) where an officeror other employee is dismissed or re-
moved or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has
led to his conviction on a criminal charge:or
50 (ii) where thsauthorityempowered to dismiss or remove an
officeror other employee or to reduce him in rank issatisfiedthat
for some reason, to be recorded by thatauthorityin writing,itis
not reasonably practicable to hold §l1c;hinquiry;01:


Referen~
to Delhi
Milk
Scheme.
Declara-
tion of
fidelity
and
secrecy.
Indemnity.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith
10
(iii)to an officeror other employee who, aftertransferto
the Corporation, isappointed to a nigher post under the Corpo-
ration in response to an open advertisement and in competition
with outsiders.
(5) If,in respectof any such officeror other employee as aforesaid,a 5
questionariseswhether itisreasonably practicable to hold such inquiry
as isref.erredto in sub-section (4), the decision thereon of the authority
empowered to dismissor remove him or to reduce him in rank shallbe
final.
(6) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply 'to the mem- 10
bers of the CentralSecretariatService or any other Service or to persons
on deputation to the Department referredto in thatsub-sectionor to any
of itsattached or subordinate officesfrom any Ministry of the Central
Government or from any State Government or from any organisation.
(7) Where any undertaking or partthereof isamalgamated with the 15
Corporation under section 10,the agreement for such amalgamation shall
provide for the transferto the Corporation of the persons employed in
connection with such undertaking or part thereof and the terms and
conditions of the employment of such persons in the Corporation.
CHAPTER VII zo
MISCELLANEOUS
24. Any reference to the Delhi Milk Scheme in any law, other than
thisAct,Or in any contract or other instrument in force, or having effect
immediately before the commencement of thisAct,shallbe construed, on
the establishmentof the Corporation, as a reference to the Corporation. 25
25.EveryChairman, member, auditor,officeror other employee of the
Corporation, shall,before entering upon hisduties,make a declaration of
fidelityand secrecy in tne form setout in the Schedule.
26. (1) Everymember shallbe indemnified by the C'orporation against
alllossesand expenses incurred by him in, or in relationto,the discharge30
of his dutiesexcept such as have been caused by his own wilfulact or
default.
(2) A member shallnot be responsible for any action taken or any-
thing done by any other member or by any officeror other employee of
the Corporation or for any lossor expense resultingto the Corporation 35
from the insufficiencyor deficier:.cyof the value,or titleto,any property
or securityacquired or taken on behalf of the Corporation in good faith,
or by the insolvency or wrongful act of any person under obligation to
the Corporation or by anything done in good faith,in the execution of
the dutiesof hisofficeor in relationthereto. 40
27. (1) No suitor other legalproceeding shalllie againstthe Central
Government or the Corporation or any member, or any officeror other
employee of the Corporation or any other person authorisedby the Cor-
poration to dischargeany function under thisAct,for any lossor damage
~aused or likelyto be caused by anything which isin good faithdone or 45
intended to be done under or in pursuance of thisAct,


45 of 1860.
43 of196~.
11
- (2) No suit,prosecution or other legalproceeding shalllie against
the CentralGovernment or any person employed before such commence-
ment in connection with the Delhi Milk Scheme for anything done, or
omitted to be done, or for any liabilityincurred before the commence-
S ment of thisAct,except with the approval of the Central Government.
28. Everymember, auditor,officeror other employee of the Corpora-
tion shallbe deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
29. (1) Whoever, without the consent in writingof the Corporation,
10 usesitsname in any prospectusor advertisement,shallbe punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to sixmonths, or with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees,or with both.
(2) No courtshalltake cognizance of any offence under sub-section (1)
except on a complaint in writingby an officerauthorisedin thisbehalf
IS by the Corporation.
30. For the purposesof the Income-tax Act,1961, or any other enact-
ment for the time being in force relatingto income-tax, super-taxor any
other tax on income, profitsor gains,the Corporation shallbe deemed to
be an Indian company and a company in which public are substantially
20 interestedand shallbe liable to tax accordingly on itsincome, profits
and gains.
Employees
of the
Corpora-
tion to be
pUblic
servants.
Offences.
Provision
relating
to in-
come-tax,
etc.
31. No provision of law relatingto the winding up of companies or
corporations shallapply to the Corporation and itshallnot be placed in
liquidationsaveby order of the CentralGovernment and in such manner
25 as thatGovernment may direct.
32. Ifany difficultyarisesin givingeffectto the provisionsof thisAct,
the CentralGovernment may by order, do anything,not inconsistent with
such provisions,for the purposes of removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made afterthe expiration of
30 two yearsfrom the date of commencement of the said Act.
33·. (1) The Corporation shall,as soon as possible afterthe end of Annual
each year,submit to the Central Government an annual reportin such report.
form asmay be prescribed on the working and affairsof the Corporation.
(2) The CentralGovernment shall,as soon as may be afterthe receipt
3S of such report,cause such reportto be laid before both Houses of Parlia-
ment.
34. (1) The CentralGovernment may, by notification,make rulesfor
carryingout the provisionsof thisAct.
(2) In particular,and withoutprejudice to the generalityof the fore-
40 going powers, such rulesmay provide for-
(.a)the term of office of the members and the manner of filling
vacancies among the members of the Board;
(b) the remuneration or feeswhich the members, other than the
Managing Director,shallbe entitledto receivefrom the Corporation;
Winding
up of
Corpora-
tion.
Power to
remove
difficul-
ties.
Power to
make
rules.


12
(c) the form in which accounts may be kept;
(d) the form in which the annual reportmay be prepared;
(e) such other mattersas may be, or are requiredto be, pres-
cribed.
Power to
mak~ re.,
gUlations.
(3) Everyrulemade by the CentralGovernment under thisAct shall5
be laid, as soon as may b e afteritismade, before each House of Parlia-
ment while itisin sessionfor a totalperiod of thirtydays which may be
comprised in one sessionor in two or more successivesessions,and if,be-
fore the expiryof the sessionimmediately following, the sessionor the
successivesessionsaforesaid,both Houses agree in making any modifi- 10
cation in the ruleor both Houses agreethatthe ruleshould not be made,
the ruleshallthereafterhave effectonly in such modified form or be of
no effect,as the case may be; so,however, thatany such modification or
annulment shallbe without prejudice to the validityof anything previ-
ouslydone under thatrule. 15
35,.(1) The Corporation may, with the previoussanction of the Cen-
tralGovenment, by notification,make regulationsnot inconsistent with
the provisionsof thisAct and the rulesmade thereunder, to provide for
allmattersfor which provision isnecessaryor expedient for the purpose
of givingeffectto the provisionsof thisAct. 20
(2) In particular,and withoutprejudice to the generalityof the fore-
going powers, such regulationsmay provide for-
(a) the method of appointment, the conditions of serviceand the
scalesof pay of ths officersand other employees of the Corporation;
(,b)the dutiesand conduct of officersand employees of the Cor- 25
poration and disciplinarycontrol;
(c) the functions and dutieswhich may be entrustedor delega-
ted to the Managing Director;
(d) the times and places at which meetings of the Board shall
be held and the procedure to be followed thereat; 30
(e) the purposesfor which the amounts in the reservefund may
be utilised;
(f) generally,the efficientconduct of the affairsof the Corpora-
tion.
(3) The Central Government may, by notification.modify or rescind 35
any regulationmade or sanctioned by itand the regulationso modified
or rescinded shallhave effectonly in such modified form or be of no
effectas the case may be; so however, thatsuch modification or rescision
shallbe without prejudice to the validityof anything done under the
regulationbefore itsmodification or rescision. 40
(4) The firstregulationsof the Corporation shallbe made by the
Central Government within threemonths from the establishment of the
Corporation and the regulationsso made shallhave effectas if they had
been made by the Corporation.
(5) The regulationsmade by the CentralGovernment under sub-see-45
tion (4), may be altered or rescinded by the Corporation.


13
THg SCHEDULE
(See section 25)
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY
I, , do hereby declare thatIwill faithfully,truly
and to the best of my judgement, skilland abilityexecute ana perform
the dutiesrequiredof me as Chairman, member of the Board, auditor,.
officeror other employee (as,the case may be) of the Delhi Milk Corpo-·
ration and which properlyrelateto the officeor position in the said Cor-
poration held by me.
Ifurtherdeclare thatIwillnot communicate or allow to be communi-:
cated to any person not legallyentitled theretoany informatiorurelating"
to the affairsof the said Corporation or to the affairsof any persunhaving
dealing with the said Corporation;nor will I allow any such person to
inspect or have access to, any books or documents belonging to, or in
the possession,of the said Corporation and relatingto the business of
any person having dealing with the said Corporation.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Delhi Milk Scheme has been running as a departmental undertak-
ing of the Ministry of Agricultureand Irrigation(Department of Agri-
culture)since itsinception in 1959'.Except for a shortspellof two years
(i.e.1969-70and 19'70-71).when the Scheme earned a profit,the Delhi
Milk Scheme has been incurringlossesyear afteryear. These lossesare
mainly due to the fact thatDelhi Milk Scheme, with the presentsetup,
isunable to take quick market decisions based on sound commercial prin-
ciplesand alsocannot develop permanent linkswith theproducers without
assistingthem in obtaining inputsand enhancing production. With a view
to meeting the situationand to providing greaterflexibilityand autonomy
in itsday-to-day dealings and to liberatingitfrom the departmental pro-
cedures financial as well as personnel management matters,ithas been
proposed to convert the Delhi Milk Scheme into a statutoryCorporation.
The Billseeksto achieve the said object.
2. The functions IQfthe Corporation willbe mainly to ensure adequate
supplyof wholesome milk and milk products,conforming to the standards
of puritylaid down under any law for the time being in force,ata reason-
able price, The Corporation isproposed to be empowered to borrow
money from any scheduled bank-or any other banking institutionapprov-
ed by the Central Government. Repayment of any money borrowed by
the Corporation willbe guaranteed by the CentralGovernment.
3. The paid-up capital of the Corporation will be such sum, not less
than rupees4 crores,as the Central Government may determine. This
sum willbe equal to the value of the assetson the date of conversion of
Delhi Milk Scheme into a statutoryCorporation, which are estimated at
rupees3.25 crores. In addition, the CentralGovernment may provide, by
way of loan, a sum of Rs.2 croresto serveasworking capitalfor carrying
on the businessconnected with the activitiesof the Corporation.
ANNASAHIB P. SHINDE.
NEW DELHI;
The 21st August, 1976.
i
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letterNo. 3.:2./7D-LD.I.,dated the 26thAugust,1976from Shri
Annasahib P. Shinde, Minister of Statein the Ministryof Agricultureand
Irrigationto the Secretary-General,Lok Sabha.]
The President having been informed of the subject matterof the Bill
to provide for the establishment of a Corporation, for the purpose of ac-
quiring,distributingand sellingmilk and milk products in the Union
Territoryof Delhi and other areasand for mattersconnected therewith
Or incidental thereto,recommends under article117(1) and (3) of the
Constitutionof India read with article274 thereof,the introduction of the
Delhi Milk Corporation Bill,1976,in Lok Sabha and also the consideration
of the Billby Lok Sabha.
14 ,./


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
TheJ initialpaid-up capitalof the Delhi Milk Corporation shallbe an
amount not exceeding Rs. 25 croresas the CentralGovernment may de-
termine [clause5(1) of the Bill].This amount willbe equal to the
value of the assetson the date of conversion of Delhi Milk Scheme into
a StatutoryCorporation (estimated as Rs. 3.25, crores as on 20-3-19176).
The Central Government may on thatbasis provide an equityof Rs. 4
crores as a paid-up capital. In addition, the Central Government may
provide a sum of Rs. 2 croresby way of loan to enable the Corporation
to ca.z'yon the businessof the Corporation or any other matterconnect-
ed therewithon such terms and conditions as the Central Government
may determine.
2. All assetsand non-recurring expenditure of capital nature incur-
red by the CentralGovernment for or in connection with the Delhi Milk
Scheme upto the actual date of the establishment of the Corporation
shallbe treatedas a partof the paid-up capitalprovided by the Central
Government to the Corporation [clause5(2) and clauses7(1) and 7(2)
of the Bill].
3. The Central Government may also guarantee the advances taken
or monies borrowed by the Corporation from any scheduled bank or any
other bank or banking institutionsapproved by the Central Government
as to the repayment of the principal and the payment of the interest
thereon and other incidental charges[clause6(2) of the Bill].The ulti-
mate liabilityarisingout of such a guaranteecannot be estimated at this
stage.
4. In as much as the Corporation isto take over completely the assets
and liabilitiesof the Delhi Milk Scheme and consequently that of the
Central Government on the date of itsconversion into Corporation, no
liabilityon thisaccount will accrue to the Central Government (clause
7 of the Bill). Similarly,pay and allowances of the staffand pensionary
and provident fund liabilitywillalso be borne by the Corporation, except
in the case of those employees who d-o not opt to servethe Corporation
in terms of the provisionscontained in ChapterVI of the draft BilL On
the assumption that90 per cent. of the staffwould opt to come under the
Corporation, the liabilityof the Central Government in respectof the
remaining 10 per cent. of the staffwillnot exceed Rs. 90 lakhs being the
capitalisedvalue of the liabilityon account of pension and provident fund
for theirpastservicesplus Rs. 18 lakhs per annum on account of their
pay and allowances.
15


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause34 of the Billseeksto confer on the CentralGovernment power
to make rulesfor mattersrelatingto the term of officeand conditions of
serviceof the members of the Board (other than the Managing Director)
and the remuneration or feesto be paid to them and the functions of the
Board.
2. Clause35 of the Billseeks to confer on the Corporation power to
make, with the previousapproval of the CentralGovernment, regulations
(not inconsistentwith the provisionsof the Billand the rulesmade there-
under) to provide for method of appointment, conditions of serviceand
scalesof pay of the employees of the Corporation and functions and
dutieswhich may be delegated to the Managing Director.
3. Mattersin respectof which power isconferred on the CentralGov-
ernment to make rulesor on the Corporation to make regulations,relate
to mattersof detail and procedure. Itishardly practicable .toprovide
for them in the Billitself.The delegation of legislativepower is,there-
fore,of a normal character.
16


LOK SABRA
A
BILL
to provide jor the establishment of a Corporation for the purpose oj pro-
ducing, manufacturing, acquiring, distributing and selling milk and
milk products in the Union territory of Delhi and other areas so that
wholesome milk and milk products may .be available to the qenere;
public, at a reasonable price and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
(Shri Annasahib P Shinde, Minister of State
in the M1.nist7-yof Ag7'iculture and Irrigantion.)
