21 of 1976. 
61 of 19RI. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
28 AUG 1987 
Bill No. 89 of 1987 
THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1987 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976. 
BE it ena~ted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Yeai' of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the. Regional Rural Banks (Amend- Short title 
rnent) Act, 1967. and com-
Illcncc-
5 (2) It shall eome into force on such date as the Central Government men:. 
10 
may, by notification in the Official Gazet,te, appoint. 
2. In section 2 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 197.6 (hereinafter 
referJ:ed to as the principal Act), after clause (c), the following clause 
!' hall b~ inse,rte.d, namely:-
'(ea) "National Bank" means the National Bank for Agriculture 
and ~ur.al Development established under section 3 of the National 
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1961;'. 
3. In section 3. of the principal Act, for 8ub-section (3.), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
15 "(3.), It shall be the duty of the Sponsor Bank to aid and assi~t 
the Regional Rural Bank, sponsored by it, by-
(a) subSCribing to the share capital of such ae~onal Rural 
Bank; 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2, 
Amend-
ment of 
secrion 3. 

Amend-
mentof 
section ... 
Amend-
mentllf 
section 5. 
Amend-
ment IIf 
section 6. 
Amend-
ment Df 
section 9. 
2 
(b) training personnel of such Regional Rural Bank; and 
(C) providing such managerial and financial assistance to 
such Regional Rural Bank during the first five years of i.ts 
functioning, as may be mutually agreed upon between the 
Sponsor Bank and the Regional Rural Bank: 5 
Provided that the Central Government may, either on its own 
motion or on the recommendation of the National Bank, extend the 
said period of five years by such further period, not exceeding five 
years at a time, subject to such conditions as it may deem fit to 
impose.". 10-
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words 
·'Reserve Bank", the words "National Bank" shall be substituted. 
5. In section 5 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "one crore of rupees, divided into one lakh", 
the words ''five crores of nlpee5 divided into five lakhs" shall be 15 
substituted; 
(b) in the proviso, for the words "Reserve Bank", the words 
"National Bank" shall be substituted. 
6. ID Metiea 6 of the priacipftl Act,-
(a), for sub-section (1), the following sulHiectioa shan be 2(). 
substituted, namely:-
"(a) The issued capital of. each Be&ional Rural Bank shall, 
in the first instance, be SUch as may be fixed by the Central 
Govemmeat ia this beha«, but it shall ia no case be less than 
twenty.five Iakhs of rupees Or exceed one crore of rupees."~ 25. 
(b) in sub-section (3), fGr the words "Reserve Bank", the worcls 
"National Bank" shall ~ substituted. 
1. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for clauses 
(a). (b) and (c), the following clauses shall be substiuted, namely:-
'. (a) two directors, who are not officers of the Central Govern- 3<>-
ment, State Government, Reserve Bank, National Bank, Sponsor 
Bank Or any other bank, to be nominated by the Central Govern-
ment; I 
(b) one director. who is an officer of the Reserve Bank. to be 
nominated by that Bank; 
(c) one director, who is an officer of the National Bank, to be 
nominated by that Bank; 
Cd) two directors, who are officers of the Sponsor Bank, to be 
nominated by that Bank; and 
35 
(e) two directors, who are officers of the concerned State Gov- 40 
ernment, to be nominated by that Government.". 

5 
8. In section 11 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1),-
(a) for the words ''The Central Government", the words 
"The Sponsor Bank" shall be substituted; 
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that no appointment of such an individual 
shall be made,-
(a) if such an individual is an officer of the Sponsor 
Bank except after consultation with the National Bank; 
10 and 
(b) in any other case, except with the prior approval 
of the Central Government."; 
(ii) for SUb-section (lA), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
15 "(lA) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(1),-
(a) the Sponsor Bank shall have the right to terminate 
the term of office of the Chairman at any time before the 
expiry of the period specified in sub-section (1): 
20 Provided that no such tennination shall be made,-
(a) if the Chairman is an officer of the Sponsor 
Bank, except after consultation with the National Bank; 
and 
(b) in any other case, except with the prior apprB-
25 val of the Central Government: 
Provided further that where the Chairman is not an 
officer of the Central Government, State Government, Re-
serve Bank," National Bank, Sponsor Bank or any other 
bank, he shall be given notice of not less than three months 
30 in writing or three months' salary and allowances in lieu of 
such notice; and 
(b) the Chainnan shall have the right to resign his 
office at any time before the expiry of the period specified in 
sUb-aection (1) by giving to the Sponsor Bank, notice of 
35 not less than three months in writing."; 
(iii) in sub-section (4).,-
(a) for the words "The Central Government", the words 
"'nle Sponsor Bank" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "Provided that", the following shall be 
.. 0 substituted, namely: -
45 
Provided that no such removal shall be made,-
(a) if the Chairman is an officer of the Sponsor 
Bank. except after conSUltation with the National Bank; 
and , 
(b) in any other case, except with the prior appro-
val of the Central Government: 
(iv) in sub-section (5), for the words "the Central Governmen'.", 
the words "the Sponsor Bank in consultation with the National 
Bank" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
ment.r 
section If. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 13. 
Amend-
ment Df 
section 16. 
Amend-
ment IIf 
section 17. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 20. 
Insertion 
of new 
OIapter 
VA, 
Amalga-
mation of 
Regional 
Rural 
Banks. 
9. In section 13 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the follow-
ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
.. (2) A director may resign his office by giving notice thereof 
to the authority by which he was nominated; and, on such resig-
nation being accepted, the director shall be deemed to have vacated 5 
his office.". 
19. In section 16 of the principal Act, after the words "Reserve Bank,", 
at both the places where they occur, the words "National Bank," shall 
be inserted. 
11. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) after the words "necessary or desirable", the words "in such 
manner as may be prescribed" ihall be inserted; 
(b) in the first proviso, the words ", during the first five year!! 
of the functioning of a Regional Rural Bank," shall be omitted. 
10 
12. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words IS 
"sixty days from the date of closure of its accounting year", the words 
"three months from the date of the closure of its accounting year, or 
such further period, not exceeding three months, as may be permitted by 
the Reserve Bank" shall be substituted. 
13. Alter Chapter V of the principal Act, the following Chapter 20 
~hall be inserted, namely:-
'CHAPTER VA 
AMALGAMATION m' REGIONAL RURAL BANKS 
23A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the 
Central Government, after consultation with the National Bank, the 25 
concerned State G,overnment and the Sponsor Bank, is, of the opinion 
that it is necessary in the public interest or in the interest of the 
development of the area served by any Regional Rural Bank or in 
the interest of the Regional Rural Banks themselves, that two or 
more Regional Rural Banks should be amalgamated, that Govern- 30 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, provide for the 
amalgamation of such Regional Rural Banks (hereafter in this Chapter 
referred to as the transferor Regional Rural Banks) into a single Regional 
Rural Bank (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the transferee Regional 
Rural Bank) with such constitution, property, powers, rights, inter- 35 
ests, authorities and privileges; and with such liabilities., duties and 
obligations, as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall indicate 
the date. with effect from which the amalgamation shall become 40 
effective. 

5 
14 of 1947. 
10 
14 of 1947. 1 j 
4 of 111112. 
Iii (lfI90R. 
20 
25 
30 
35 
(3) Every notification issued under sub-se:!tion (1) may also 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the continuance in service of all the employees of 
the transferor Regional Rural Banks (excepting such of them as 
not being workmen within the meaning of the Industrial Dis-
putes Act, 1947 are specifically mentioned in the notification) in 
the transferee Regional Rural Bank at the same remuneration 
and on the same terms and conditions of service, which they 
were getting or as the case may be, by which they were being 
governed, immediately before the date on which the amalga-
mation takes effect; 
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a), where 
any of the employees of the transferor Regional Rural Banks, 
not being workmen within the meaning of the Industrial D~­
putes Act, 1947 are specifically mentioned in the notification, or 
where any employee of the transferor Regional Rural Banks 
has by notice in writing given to the transferee Regional Rural 
Bank at any time before the expiry of a period of three months 
next following the date on which the amalgamation takes effect, 
intimated his intention of not becoming an employee of the 
transferee Regional Rural Bank, the payment to sueh employee 
of compensation, if any, to which he is entitled under the IndmltriaI 
Disputes Act, 1947, and such gratuity, provident fund and other 
retirement benefits ordinarily admissible to him unde.r the rules 
authorisations of the concerned transferor Regional Rural Banks 
!mmediately befote· that date; 
(c) the other terms and conditions for the amalgamation of 
Regional Rural Banks; and 
(d) the continuance by or against the transferee Regional 
Rural Bank of any :pending legal proceeding by or against any 
transferor Regional Rural Banks and such oonsequential, inciden-
tal and supplemental provisions, as may, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, be necessary to give effect to the 
amalgamation. 
(4) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, as soon 
as may be after it has been made, be laid befoFe each House of 
Parliament. 
23B. (1) A notification issued under sub-section (1) of section 23A. 
shall constitute sufficient notice of the provisions thereof to all the 
parties concerned and shall be binding on the transferor Regional 
Rural Banks and the transferee Regional Rural Bank and to the de-
posito.t's, creditors, employees and all other persons having dealings 
with such banks. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Transier of 
Property Act, 1882 or the Registration Act, 1908, any notification 
issued under sub-section (1) of section 23A shall be sufficient 
conveyance, in accordance with the prOvisions of the notification, of 
the business, properties, assets and liabilities. rights, interests, powers. 
No!iflca-
lion under 
section 
23A to be 
suffidcnl 
notice 10 
('(IllccTlled 
par!ie~. 

Cessation 
of busines-~ 
of trans-
feror 
Regional 
Rural 
Banks. 
Liquid a-
tionof 
Regional 
Rural 
Banks. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
24A. 
Inspection 
audit and 
scrutiny 
by the 
Sponsor 
Bank. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 28. 
A mend-
mentof 
section 29. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 3~ 
(j 
privileges, benefits and obligations of whatever nature of the trans-
feror Regional Rural Banks to the transferee Regional Rural Bank. 
(3) On and from the date on which the amalgamation takes 
effect under section 23A, any reference to the transferor Regional 
Rural Banks in any agreement, conveyance, assurance, power of 5 
attorney or any other document of whatsoever nature, shall be deemed 
to be a reference to the transferee Regional Rural Bank and the rights 
and obligations of the transferor Regional Rural Banks shall be 
deemed to be the rights and obligations of the transferee Regional 
Rural Bank to the extent specified in the said amalgamation. 10 
23C. On and from the date on which the amalgamation takes 
effect under section 23A, the transferor Regional Rural Banks shall 
cease to carryon business, including that of making of any payment 
to any depositors or discharge any liability or obligation to the credi-
tors except to the extent as may be necessary for the implementation 15 
of the provisions of the said amalgamation. 
23D. Where a notification is issued for the amalgamation of 
Regional Rural Banks under sub-section (1) of section 23A, the 
Central Government may, by a further notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that on such date, as may be specified therein, the 20 
traJl6feror Regional Rural Banks, which by reason of amalgamation 
will cease to function, shall stand dissolved and such direction shall 
take effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
section 26.'. I 
14. After section 24 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 25 
inserted, namely:-
"24A. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 19 and 
without prejudice to the provisions of section' 35 of the Banking 
Regulation Act. 1949, the Sponsor Bank shall, from time to time, 
monitor the progress of the Regional Rural Banks sponsored by it and 30 
cause inspection, internal audit and scrutiny to be made by one or 
more of its ofticers and suggest co.rrective measures to be taken by 
such Regional Rural Bank.". 
15. In section 28 of ~he principal, Act, in sub-seetion (2), after the. 
words "the Reserve Bank", the words "or the National Bank" shall be 35 
inserted. 
16. In section 29 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "Reserve Bank", the words 
"National Bank" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), after clause (b), the following clause shall 40 
be inserted, namely:-
"(ba) the manner in which the officers and other employees 
of the Regional Rural Banks shall be appointed;". 
17. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words 
"Reserve Bank", the words "National Bank" shall be substituted. 45 
10 of 1949. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 provides fo.r the incorporation, 
J'egulation and winding up of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) with a 
view to developing the rural econemy by providing, for the purpose 
of development of agricultw.re, trade, commerce, industry and other 
productive activities in the rural areas, credit and other facilities, 
particularly to the small and marginal farmers, agricultural labourers, 
artisans and small entrepreneurs. 
2. In the light of the experience gaiiled in the administration of the· 
RRBs during the last over ten years, a need was felt to amend the Act 
• to improve the functioning of the RRBs and fo.r strengthening their orga-
nisational structure and improving their overall c&,pabilities. 
3. The Bill, inter alia, seeks to m~ke the following amendments as 
indicated below: 
(a) the authorised capital of the RRBs is being enhanced from 
Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 5 crores; 
(b) the issued capital of a RRB is also being enhanced which 
shall in the first instance, be such, as may be determined by the 
Central Government not being less than Rs. 25 lakhs and not more 
than Rs. 1 crore; 
(c) the composition of the Board of Directors of a RRB is being 
restructured. Under Ithe ~ended provision, the Central Govern-
ment will nominate only two non-official Directors. The remaining 
I?irectors will be the officers of the Reserve Bank of India, the 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, the Sponsor 
Bank and the State Government concerned, nominated by them. 
The Chairman of the Regional Rural Bank shall be appointed by the 
Sponsor Bank in consultation with the National Bank for Agricul-
ture and RUral Development where he is an officer of the Sponsor 
Bank and with the prior approval of the Central Government where 
he is not an officer of the Sponsor Bank, instead of his being appoint-
.ed by the Central Government. . 
(d) provision for the amalgamation of Regional Rural Banks 
in certain circumstances is being provided; 
(e) the Sponsor Banks are being empowered to uJ\dertake 
periodical inspection, internal auditing and monitoring the progress 
of their sponsored RRBs. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI N. D. TIWARI. 
'lh€ 20th August, 1987. 
7 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 of the Act so as to 
increase the authorised caipital of each Regional RUral Bank from Rs. 1 
c.rore to Rs. 5 crores. Sub-clause (a) ot clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend 
sub--section (1) of section 6 of the Act so as to provide that the issued 
capital 9£ each Regional Rural Ballk shaH, in the· first instance, be such 
as may be fixed by the Central Government, not being less than Rs. 25 
lakhs and not more than Rs. 1 crore. ' 
2. Since the Central Govemment will .have to bear 50 per cent. of the 
E'nh~d share capital of a 'Regional RUral Bank, there will be an 
~1df.1thngl' non-recurring expenditure to be met out of the Consolidated 
Fund (If India. Tt is, however, not possible at this stage to estimate the 
q\lant~m o~ such ex:penditure, 
3. The Bill, if enacted, will n ')t involve any other expenditure of a 
recurril\g or I;\On-r(fC~g na1iUre. 
• , v. 
.~ 

11 
(b) not mo.re than two directors, to be nomir.ated by the con-
cerned State Government; and 
(c) not more than three directors, to be nominated by the 
Sponsor Bank. 
• • • • • 
11. (1) The Central Government shall appoint as individual to be the Chairman. 
Chairman of a Regional Rural Bank and specify the period, not exceeding 
five years, for which such individual shall, subject to the provisions of 
sub-section (4), hold office as the Chairman. 
(1 A) cNotwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
Central Government shall have the right to terminate the term of office 
Of the Chairman .at any time before the expiry of the period specified 
under sUb-section (1) by giving him notice of not less than three months 
in writing or three months' salary and allowanecs in lieu of such notice; 
and the Chairman shall also have the right to relinquish his office ,at any 
time before the expiry of the period so specified by giving to the Central 
Government notice of not less than three months in writing. 
II< 
'" '" '" '" 
1.4) The Central Government may, at any time, remove the Chairman 
from office: 
Provided that no person shall be removed from his office, under this 
l'>ub-section, unless he has been given aD. opportunity of showmg cause 
against his removal. 
(5) The Chairman shall receive such salary and allowances and be 
governed by such terms and conditions of service as may be dete:mined 
by the .Central Gove.rnment. 
'" ... ... ... '" 
13. (1) '" ... '" '" '" 
(2) The Chairman may resign his office by giving notice thereof in 
writing to the Central Government and a director may resign his office 
by giving notice thereof to the authority by which he was nominated; 
and, on such resigmition being accepted, the Chairman or the director, as 
the case may be, shaH be deemed to have vacated his office. 
'" '" '" '" '" • 
16. (1) Every director and every member of a committee (other than 
the Chairman) shall be paid such fees and allowances as may be deter-
mined by the Central Government: 
Provided that no fees shall be paid to any director, or member of a 
committee, if he is an officer of the Central Government, State Govern-
ment, the Reserv.e .Ba.?k, . Sponsor Bank Or any other bank. 
(2) The allowances payable to a director or a member of a committee, 
who is an officer of the Central Government, State Government, Reserve 
Bank, Sponsor Bank or any other bank, shall be paid by the Government 
V:lcltion 
Of the seat 
of direct.ors. 
Fees and 
allowances 
of directors 
nnd 
members 
or com 
mittees. 

Estllblish. 
ment 
and in· 
Corpora. 
tion of 
Regional 
Rural 
Banks. 
AuthoriMd 
capital. 
Issued 
capital. 
3. (I) 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM mE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS Ac'!. 1976 
(21 OF 1976) 
... ... • ... • 
... ... ... • 
(3) It shall be the duty of the Sponsor Bank to aid and assist the 
Regional Rural Bank, sponsored by it, by subsc,Tibing. to the share capi-
tal of such Regional Rural Bank, recruitment and training Of personnel 
during the first five years of the fUnctioning of the Regional Rural Bank 
and prOviding such managerial and financial assistance as may be 
mutually agreed upon between the SponSOr Bank and the Regional 
Rural· Bank. 
4. (1) A Regional Rural Bank shall have its head office at such place in 
the notified area as the Central GoveI1lttlent may, after consultation with 
the Reserve Bank and the Sponsor Bank, specify by notification in the 
Official Gazette . 
... • • ... . 
5. The authorised capital of each Regional Rural Bank shall be one 
crore of rupees, divided into one lakh of fully paid-Up shares of one 
hundred rupees each: 
Provided ~hat the Central Government may, after consultation with 
the Reserve Bank and the SponSOr Bank, increase or reduce such autho-
rised capital; so, however, that the authorised capital shaH not be re-
duced below twenty-five lakhs of ru~, and the shares shall be in all 
cases, fully p~id-up shares of one hundred rupees each. 
6. (1) The issued capital of each Regional Rural Bank shall be 
twenty-five lakhs of rupees . 
• >II >II • 
(3) The Board may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank. the 
concerned State, Government and the Sponsor Bank and with the prior 
approval of the Central Government, from time to time, increase the 
issued capital of the Regional Rural Bank; and, where additional capital 
is issued, such capital shall also be subscribed in the same proportion 
as is specified in sub-section (2) . 
... • • .. • 
Board 01 9. (1) The Board of directors shall consist of the Chairman appointed 
directors. under sub-section (1) of section 11, and the folloWin, other members, 
narnely:--- . 
(a) not more than three directors, to be nominated by the 
Central Government; 
l' 

11 
(b) not more than two directors, to be nominated by the con-
cerned State Government; and 
... 
(c) not more than three directors, 10 be nominated by the 
Sponsor Bank. 
• • ... • • 
11. (1) The Central Government shall appoint as individual to be the Chairman. 
Chairman of a Regional Rural Bank and specify the period, not exceeding 
five years, for which such individual shall, subject to the provisions of 
sub-Bection (4), hold office as the Chairman. 
(1A) ~otwithstandjng anything contained in s\,lb-:s~otion (1), the 
Central. Government shall have the right to. terminate the term of office 
Of the Chairman ,at any time before the expiry of the ,period specified 
under sub-section (1) by giving him notice of not less than three months 
in writing or three months' salary and allowanecs in lieu of such notice; 
and the Chairman shall also have· the right to relinquish his office .at any 
time before the expiry of the period so specified by giving to the Central 
Government notice of not less than three months in writing . 
... ... ... ... ... 
(4) The Central Government may, at any time, remove the Chairman 
from office: 
Provided that ~o person shall be removed from his office, under this 
sub-section, unless he has been given an opportunity of show1f1g cause 
against his removal. 
(5) The Chairman shall receive such salary and allowances and be 
governed by such terms and conditions of service as may be determined 
by the Central Gove,rnment. 
... ... ... ... 
13. (1) * ... ... ... Vac~tion 
Of the seat 
(2) The Chairman may resign his office by giving notice thereof in nf director!!. 
writing to the Central Government and a director may resign his office 
by giving notice thereof to the authority by which he was nominated; 
and, on such resigaation being accepted, the Chairman or the director, as 
the case may be, :;hall be deemed to have vacated his office. 
... ... ... ... • • 
16. (1) Every director and every member of a committee (other than 
the Chairman) shall be paid such fees and allowances as may be deter-
mined by the Central Government: 
Provided that no fees shall be paid to any director, or member of a 
committee, if he is an officer of the Central Government, State Govern-
ment, the Reserve Bank, Sponsor Bank Or any other bank. 
(2) The allowances payable to a director or a member of a committee, 
who is an officer of the Central Government, State Government, Reserve 
Bank, Sponsor Bank: or any other bank, shall be paid by the Government 
Fees and 
allowances 
of directors 
and 
members 
of com 
mittees. 

Establish· 
ment 
and in· 
Corpora. 
tion of 
Regional 
Rural 
Banks. 
3. (1) 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS AC1\ 1976 
(21 OF 1976) 
• • '" • '" 
'" '" • '" 
(3) It shall be the duty of the Sponsor Bank to aid and assist the 
Regional Rural Bank, sponsored by it, by subs~ibing, to the share capi-
tal of, such Regional Rural Bank, recrUitment and training of personnel 
during the first five years of the functioning of the Regional Rural Bank 
and ,providing such managerial and financial assistance as may be 
mutually agreed upon between the SponSOr Bank and the Regional 
Rural Bank. 
4. (1) A Regional Rural Bank shall have its head office at such place in 
the notified area as the Central Government may, after consultation with 
the Reserve Bank and the Sponsor Bank, specify by notification in the 
Official Gazette. 
• '" '" '" 
AuthoriMd 5. The authorised capital of each Regional Rural Bank shall be one 
capital. crore of rupees, divided into one lakh of fully paid-up shares of one 
hundred rupees each: 
Iuued 
capital. 
Provided 'hat the Central Government may, after consultation with 
the Reserve B:mk and the SponSOr Bank, increase or reduce such autho-
rised capital; so, however, that the authorised capital shall not be re-
duced below twenty-five lakhs of rupee6, and the shares shall be in all 
cases, fully paid-up shares of one hundred rupees each. 
6. (1) The issued capital of each Regional Rural Bank shall be 
twenty-five lakhs of rupees. 
'" '" '" 
(3) The Board may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank. the 
concerned State, Government and the Sponsor Bank and· with the prlor 
approval, of the Central Government, from time to time, increase the 
issued capital of the Regional Rural Bank; And, where additional capital 
is Issued, s~~h capital lihall also be subscribed in the same proportion .. as is specified in sub-section (2). 
* '" '" • '" 
Board of 9. (1) The Board of directors shall consist of the Chairman appointed 
directors. under SUb-section (1) of section 11, and the followini other members, 
namely:-
. (d) not more than three directors, to be ,namitiated 'by the 
Central Government; 
10 

LOKSABHA 
... 
A 
BILL 
further to ammd the Regional Rural Banks Ad, 1978. 
(Shori Narayan D4tt Tiwari, 
Minf.lter oJ FinanC4') 