LOK SABRA 
COR]I GErlDA 
to 
THE LADY lIARJ)INGE MEDICAL COLLEGE AND HOSPITAL 
(ACQUISITION) AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISI~NS 
BILL, 1977 
L-To be/As introduced in 10k Sabha 7 
1. Page 4, line 41,-
for "privilges" ua4 "privileges" 
2. Page 5, line 47,-
for "reasons" mad. "reason" 
3. Page 7, line 35,-
for "or" ~ "of" 
4. P~ge 10, line 1,-
t2!:. "neart" nla!1 "heart" 
Sravana 6, 1 99 (Saka) 

As INTRODUCED IN LdK SABRA ON 
1 l "- . 
" u I.; iJ' " . . , 
BIll No. 89 of 1977 , 
THE LADY HARDINGE MEDICAL COLLEGE AND HOSPITAL 
(ACQUISITION) AND ·MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition of the Lady Hardinge M~dicai College and 
Hospital and for the 1Mrl4gemcmt of the Kalavati SaTan HospitGl, with 
<1 view to ensuring better facilities for higher medical educa.'tion fM 
women and medical facilities for women cmd chlidTen tn. the Union.· 
territory of Delhi. and for matters connected therewith or iftoCidental 
thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1, (1) This Act maybe called the Lady Hardinge Medinl College and 
Hospital (Acquisition) and Miseellaneous Provisions Act, 1977. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Governmf!nt 
may, :by notifieation in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the eentext otherwise requires,-
10 (0) "appointed day" means the date on which this Act comes into 
force; 
(b) "Board of Administration" means the Board of Administra-
tion constituted by the Central Government under the Scheme; 
Short 
title 
and 
com-
II1'ence-
ment. 
De1lni-
tionL 

Lady 
Hardinge 
Medical 
College 
and 
Hospital 
to vest 
in 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
:I 
(c) "Board of Management" means the Board of Management of 
the Kalavati Saran Hoapital, constituted by the Central Governml"nti 
(d) "Fund" means the Lady Hardinge Hospital for Women and 
Children, Delhi, Fund, established by the Scheme; 
(e) "Kalavati Saran Hospital" means the institution known as S 
the Kalavati Saran Children's Hospital, New Delhi, 'together with 
the dispensaries attached thereto and used in connection therewith, 
and includes all laboratories and libraries used in connection with 
or as accessories to, or adjuncts of, the said Hospital; 
(f) "Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital" means the 10 
institutions known as the Lady Hardinge Medical College for Women. 
New Delhi, and the Lady Hardinge Hospital for Women and Children, 
New Delhi, together with the dispensaries attached thereto and used 
in connection therewith. and includes all lecture-rooms, museums, 
labroratories, libraries, hostels and boarding-houses used in connection IS 
with, or as accessories to, or adjuncts of, the said College or Hospital; 
(g) "Scheme" means the Scheme for the administration of the 
Fund settled by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of 
section 5 of the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890, and published with 6 of 1890. 
the notification of the Government of India, jn the late Minist.ry of 20 
Health, No. F.4-3 (1) /53-MI, dated the 12th June, 1953, as amended 
,by the notifications of the Government of India, in the late Ministry 
of Health, No. F. 4-77/56-M 11. dated the 14th March, 1957 and 
No. F.4-77/56-MII, dated the 17th March, 1957; 
(h) "Treasurer" means the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments 2S 
of India, appointed under the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890. 6 of 1890. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUIsmoN OF LADY H!\IU)INGE MEDICAL COLLEGE AND HOSPITAL 
3. (1) On the appointed day, the Lady Hardinge Medical College and 
Hospit.t together with- 30 
(4) all lands, on which the Lady Hardinge Medical College and 
Hospital stands, and all other lands appurtenant thereto and all buil-
dings, erections and fixtures on such lands; 
(b) all furniture, equipments. stores, apparatuses and appliances. 
drugs. moneys and other assets of the Lady Hardinge Medical Col- 35 
lege and Hospital; 
(c) all other properties and assets. movable and immovable includ-
ing leases pertaining to the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospi-
tal, whether vested in the Treasurer or the Board of Administration 
or in any other person; and all rights, powers, authorities and pri- 40 
vlleges. cash balances, reserve funds, investments and all other rights 
and interests in, or in relation to, or arising out of, such property 
as were, immediately before the appointed day, in the ownership, 
possession, power or control of the Treasurer or the Board of 
Administration or any other person in charge of the management of 45 
the affairs of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital; and 
(d) all borrowings marte by, or on behalf of, and all other 
liabilities and obligations Qt wha.wver kind, incuned in relation to. 

.3 
the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital, and subsisting on 
.the appointed day, 
shall stand transferred to, and shall vest absolutely in, the Central 
Government. 
S (2) Every deed of gift, endowment, bequest or trust or other document 
in relation to all or any of the properties, and assets, referred to in sub-
section (1), shall, as from the appointed day, be construed as if it ·were 
made or executed in favour of the Central Government. 
(3) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, any property, 
10 referred to in sub-section (1), which, by virtue of the provisions of that 
sub-section, has vested in the Central Government, shall, by force of 
such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mort-
gage, charge, lien and other incumbrances affecting it, and any attach-
ment, injunction or any decree or order of any court or tribunal 
IS restricting the use of such property in any manner shall be deemed to 
have been withdrawn. 
(4) Subject to the other provisions :ontained in this Act, any proceed-
ing or cause of action, pending or existing Immediately before the appoint-
ed day, by or against the Treasurer or the Doard of Administration or any 
20 other person, in relation to the Lady Hardinge Medical College and 
Hospital, may, as from the appointed day, be continued and enforced by 
or against the Central Government as it might have been enforced by 
or against the Treasurer or the Board of Administration or such other 
person if this. Act had not been ~acted, and shall cease to be enforceable 
2.5 by or against the Treasurer or the Board of Administration or· such other 
person. 
4. (1) The Central Government shall rive, in cas~ to the Treasurer 
an amount equivalent to the sum of rupees one lakb for the transfer. to, 
and vesting in, the Central Government, under section 3, of the Lady 
30 Bardinge Medical College and Hospital. 
(2) The amount, referred to in sub-section (1), shall be paid within 
three months from the appointed day (hereafter in this section referred 
to as the specified period). 
(3) The amount, referred to in sub-section (1), if not paid within the 
35 specified' period, shall carry interest at the rate of four per cent. per 
annum from the date of expiry of the specifted period until the p~yment 
thereof. 
5. On and from the appointed day, the Lady ·Hardinge MedkalColIege 
and Hospital shall be administered by the Central Government as a 
40 Government institution, and, in administerjng the properties trans{~rred 
to and vested' in it under section 3, regard shall be had to the purposes 
specified in the Scheme. 
Payment 
of 
amount. 
Lady 
Hardinge 
MediCa! 
College 
and 
HospJtal 
to be 
adJninia-
tered .. 
Govern_ 
ment 
lnatitu-
tJon. 

Applica-
bility of 
Act 2 of 
1882 to 
Board 
of Admi-
nistration. 
Amount 
to be 
held for 
purposes 
of 
Scheme. 
Kalavati 
Saran 
Hospital 
to be 
managed 
as 
GoVern-
ment 
institu-
tion. 
Act to 
override 
all other 
enact-
ments. 
Provi-
sions 
relating 
to officers 
ahd other 
employee, 
of 
Lady 
Hardin", 
Medical 
conep 
and 
Hospital 
and 
Kalavatl 
Saran 
HOIpitil 
4 
6. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in 
this Act shall be deemed to apply to any right accrued to, or any liability 
incurred by, the Board of Administration or any member thereof under 
the provisions of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, in respect of anything dCllle 
or omitted 'to be done by it or him during any period preceding the, ap. 5 
pointed day. 
7. (1) The amount paid under section 4 shall vest in the Treasurer, 
and shall be held by him in the same manner as the Fund vested in him 
was held by him immediately before the appointed day. 
(2) The amount paid to the Treasurer under section 4 shaH be 10 
adnlinistered by the Board of Administration in the same manner in 
which the Fund was administered by it, as if such amount were the 
li'und. 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGEMENT OP THE KALAVA'1! SARAN HOSPITAL 
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any contract or instru-
ment to the contrary, on and· from the appointed day, the Kalavati Saran 
Hospital shall be managed ·by the Central Government as a Government 
institution. 
(2) In managing the Kalavati Saran Hospital as a Government 20 
institution, regard shall be had to the purposes far which that Hospital 
wal set up in pursuance of the indenture, dated the 8th day of June, 
1954, executed by Shri Ashok Saran, and the indenture, dated the 8th 
day of June, 1954, executed by Shri Raghbir Saran, in favour of the 
President of India. 2S 
(3) On and from the appointed day, the Board of Management shall 
stand. dil!l8olved. 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 30 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in 
force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than 
this Act or any decree or order of any court, tribunal or authority. 
10. (1) Every o8leer or other employee, who, immediately before the 
appointed day, is employed in, or in eonnedion with the! atlairs of, the 35 
Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hotpital, or, .. the ease may be, 
the Kalavati Saran Hospital, shall become, as from the appointed· da,., 
an oftleer or other employee, I as the case mil)' be, of the Central 
Governmeat, aDd thall hoW hiB omc:e by the same' tenure, at ,the same 
remwaerado. alltl upon the same terms and eonditions ~and with the 40 
sama riaht. auul privitlesa. to. pension, patuity and other .matters as 
he would have held,. if this Act had not been enacted, aDd shall continue 
to do so unless and until his employment under the Central Government 
is duly tenninated or until his remuneration, terms and eonditions are 
duly altered by the Central Government. 4S 
Provided that, if the alteration so made is not acceptable to any 
such officer or other employee, his employment may be terminated by 

the Central Government on payment to him of an amount equivalent 
to three months' remuneration in the case of permanent employees and 
one month's remuneration in the case of other employees: 
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply 
S to any officer or other employee who has, by notice in writing given to 
the Central Government within thirty days next following the appointed 
day, intimated his intention of not becoming an officer or other employee 
of the Central Government. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
14 of 1947. 10 Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer 
of the services of any officer or other employee, employed in, or in con-
nection with the affairs of, the Lady Hardinge Medical College and 
Hospital or the Kalavati Saran Hospital to the Central Government shall 
not entitle any such officer or other employee to any compensation under 
IS that Act, or any other law, and no such claim shall be entertained by 
any court, tribunal or other authority. 
(3) For the persons who, immediately before the appointed day, were 
the trustees for any pension, provident or gratuity fund or any other 
like fund constituted for the officers or other employees of the Lady 
20 Hardinge Medical College and Hospital and the Kalavati Saran Hospital, 
there shall be substituted as trustees such persons as the Central Govem-
mE'nt may, by general or special order, specify. 
11. (1) All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, 
grants of legal representation and other instruments of whatever nature, 
2S subsisting or having effect immediately before the appointed day, and 
to which the Board of Administration or, as the case may be, the Board 
of Management, or any person on behalf of the Board of Administration 
or, as the case may be, the Board of Management, is a party, or which 
are in favour of the Board of Administration or, as the case may be, 
30 Board of Management, shall, in so far as they relate to any purpose, or 
affairs, of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital; or, as th~ 
case may be, the Kalavati Saran Hospital, be of as full force and effect 
against, or in favour of, the Central Government, and may· be enforced 
or acted upon as fully and effectually as if in plaC'e of the Board of 
3S Administration or, as the case may be, the Board of Management, the 
Central Government had been a party thereto or as if they had been iasued 
in. favour of the Central Government. 
(2) If, on the apPOinted day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding 
of whatever nature in relation to the Lady Hardinge Medical College and 
40 Hospital, or, as the case may be, the Kalavati Saran Hospital, or any 
affair of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital or the Kalavatj 
Saran Hospital, is pending by, or against, the Board of Administration 
or, as the case may be, the Board of Management or the Treasurer or 
any other person, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in' 
45 any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the Lady 
Herdinge Medical College and Hospital to the Central Government or by 
reasons of tbe· a&lUmption of management· of the Kalav:ati Saran Hospital 
by the Central Government, or PI anything contained in this Act; but 
the suit, appeal or other proceedin. may be continued, proaeeuted and 
So -enforced by or ataiDfi tbe ~1Iral GeyPIDPeDt. 
Effect ot 
contracts, 
etc. 

Contracts 
in bad 
faith or 
detrimen-
tal to the 
• interests 
of 
Lady 
Hardinge 
Medical 
Coll'ege 
and 
Hospital 
and • Kalavatl 
Saran 
Hospital 
to be 
cancelled 
Or varied. 
Duty to 
deliver 
poSlea8ion 
of pro-
perty, etc. 
6 
12. (l)Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11, the Central 
Government may, if satisfied after such inquiry as it may think fit, that 
any contract or agreement entered into before the appointed day between 
the Board of Administration or Board of Management or any member 
thereof, in relation to the Lady lIardinge Medical College and Hospital, S 
or, as the case may be, the Kalava~i Saran Hospital, or any aft'airs connec-
ted with the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital or the Kalavati 
Saran Hospital, has been entered into in bad faith, or is detrimental to 
the interests of the Lady Hardinge Medical· College and Hospital, or, as 
the case may be, the Kalavati Saran Hospital, it may make an order 10 
cancelling or" varying (either unconditionally or ~ubject to such condi-
tions as it may think fit to impose for the purpose) such contract or 
agreement and thereafter the contract or agreement shall have effect 
accordingly: 
Provided that no contract or agreement shall be cancelled or varied IS 
except after giving to the parties to the contract or agreement a reason- . 
able opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Any person, aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (1), 
may make an application to the principal court of civil jurisdiction " 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Lady Hardinge Medical 20 
College and Hospital, or, as the case may be, the Kalavati Saran Hospi-
tal, is situated, for the variation or reversal of such order and there-
u~n such C(\urt may confirm, modify or reverse such order. 
13. (1) On the transfer to, and the vesting in, the Central Govern-
ment of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital, and on the 2S 
assumption of the management of the Kalavati Saran Hospital by the Cen-
tral Government,-
(/I) the Board of Administration, or, as the case may be, the 
Board of Management, and every person in whose pos6elsion, custody 
or control any property or asset specified in sub-section (1) of sec- 30 
tion 3, or any property or asset pertaining to the Kalavati Saran 
Hospital may be, shall deliver the same to such officer or other 
person as may be authorised by the Central Government in this 
behalf; 
(b) the Board of Administration or, as the case may be, the 3S 
Board of Management, and every person who, immediately before 
Inlch vesting or assumption, has in his possession, custody or con-
trol any books, documents or other papers relating to the Lady 
Hardinge Medical College and Hospital, or the Kalavati Saran Hospi-
tal, shall be liable to account for the said books, documents and 40 
papers to the Central Government and shall deliver them up to' the 
Central Government or to such ofBcer or other person as may be 
authorised by the Central Government in this behalf. 
(.2) Without prejudice to the other provisions contained. in this sec-
tion, it shall be lawful for the Central Gowrnment to take all necessary 4S 
steps for taking possession of all properties and assets which have been 
transferred to, and vested in, it under this Act, or in relation to which 
the management has been U8\UI1ed by it ~ this Act. 
, Ii J 

7 
14. Any person who,-
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
held for the purposes of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and 
Hospital or the Kalavati Saran HoSpital, wrongfully withholds such 
S property from the Central Government; or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property 
held for the purposes of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and 
Hospital, or the Kalavati Saran Hospital; or 
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Centt'a1 Gov-
10 ernm~nt any books, documents or other papers relating to the Lady 
Hardinge Medical College and Hospital or the Kalavati Saran 
Hospital; or 
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government any assets, books 
or other documents in his possession, custody or control relating to 
51 the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital or the Kalavati 
Saran Hos'pital; or 
20 
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property held for the 
purposes of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital or 
the Kalavati Saran Hospital; or 
(1) wrongfully uses any property held for the purposes of the 
Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital or the Kalavati Saran 
Hospital, 
ahall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years or with fine which may extend to 'ten thousand rupees 6r with 
25 both. 
15. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was 
in charge of, and was responsihle to, the company for the conduct of 
the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
30 to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
3S gence to prevent the commission or such offence. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
prov~d that the offence has been committed with the consent or conniv-
ance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, 
40 manager, secretary or other officer of the company, SUch director, 
manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished ac-
cordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
45 (a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
Penalty. 
Offencelt 
by com-
panies. 

Protection 
Of action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
Cogni-
zance of 
offences. 
Indem-
nity. 
Power to 
make 
rule .. 
8 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
16. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or any of its oflieers or other employ~es for any-
thing which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. S 
17. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973, no court shall take C".ognizance of any oftenceunder this 2 of 1974. 
Act except on a complaint, in writing, made ,by the Central Govemment 
or any officer authorised in this behalf by that Government. 
1& Every officer of the Central Government shall be indemnified. by 10 
the Central Government against all losses and expenses incurred by him 
in, or in relation to, the discharge of his duties under this Act except 
BUch as have been caused by his own wilful act or default. 
19. (1) The Central Government may, by notitlcation in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. IS 
(2) Every rule'made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment while it is in session for a total period of thirty days' which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessionsj and 
if, before the expiry of the sassion immediately following the session 20 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modifh!ation in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
fonn or be of no effect, as the case may bej so, however, that eny such 
.modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 2S 
anything previously dODe under that rule. . 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In 1912, Lady Hardinge collected funds for starting a iJtedical college 
for women, to be staffed en'drely by women, with a hospital for women 
and children attached to it, in commemoration of the visit to Delhi, in 
1911, of the Queen of England. The College star~ed functioning in 19116 
and was managed by an ad' hoc committee. The tnanagement of the 
College and Hospital by the committee proved unsatidactory Rnd, in 
Hl27, the College and Hospital were taken over by the Association for 
the Control and Management of the Lady Hardinge Med:cal 
College for Woinen and Hospital for Women and Children, Delhi, a 
society, registered under the Societies Registration Act, 186~, which set 
up a governing body to manage the College and Hospital. Tn 1953, oil 
the application, and with the consent, of the Association, the Centra] 
Government settled a scheme under section 5 of the Charitable Endow-
meOLS Act, 1890, to manage the affairs of the College and Hospital. Under 
this scheme, the main purpose for which the Association was established 
was retained intact, but the management of the College and Hos-
pital was vested in a Board of Administration and the Association, 
became defunct. Almost the entire recurring and non-recurring ex-
penditure in relation to the College and Hospital are, from the outset, 
met by the Central Government through grants-in-aid, the funds orig)-
nally collected having been spent on the construction of some buildings 
and the endowment of some scholarships. 
2. The Kalavati Saran Children's Hospital, New Delhi, was estab-
hshed in 1956 by the Central Government in the campus of th~ Lady 
Hardinge Medical College and Hospital from the sale proceeds of the 
properties assigned to the Central Government by Shri Ashok Saran I)nd 
Shri Raghbir Saran by two Indentures, executed by them separately on 
the 8th day of June, 1954. This Hospital provides teaching facilitiell to 
the medical students of. the Lady Hardinge Medical College and deals 
with cases of all branches of paediatrics, including diagnosis and treat-
ment in out-patient as well as in-patient departments. The facilities pro-
vided in this Hospital are complementary to the facilities provided in the 
Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital. It is being managed by a 
Board of Management, constituted by the Central Government. The 
entire recurring and non-recurring expenditure in relation to the Kala-
vati Saran Children's Hospital also is met by the Central Government. 
3. The Inspectors, appointed by the Medical Council of India and the 
University of Delhi, have, from time to time, pointed out the need to im-
prove the standards of, and the facilities for, medical education provided 
by the Lady Hardinge Medical College. The present set up of these 
institutions with two separate Boards for the administration of their 
affairs is alao proving cumbersome in their efficient day-to.day manage-
ment in a co-ordinated manner. These institutions are situated in the 
9 

10 
aeart o~ the capital and have the potential to set a very high standard 
in the spheres of medical education and patient care. It would be in 
the interests of the medical students and the public to develop the Lady 
Hartlinge Medical College and Hospital and the Kalavati Saran Child-
rcn'~: Hospital complex into a centre of exce~lence for imparting medical 
education to ",",omen and for providing advanced health care for women 
and children. It is. therefore, necessary to provide for the administra-
tion of that College and Hospital as well as the Kalavati Saran Children's 
Hospital as Government College and Hospltals and to acquire the assets 
of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital for the said purpose. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
N1:W DELfl1; RAJ NARAIN. 
The 21st July. 1977. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under sub-clause (1) of clause 4 of the Bill, the Central Governmant 
has to pay a sum of Rs. 1 lakh to the Treasurer of Charitable Endow-
ments for the 'transfer to and vesting in it, under clause 3 of the Bill, of 
the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital. 
2. Even now, the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital and 
the Kalavati Saran Children's Hospital are maintained mainly from 
grants made by the Central Government every year on "cover the deficit 
basis". The amount of such grant, during the financial year 1975-76. (or 
the purpose of· maet~ng the recurring expenses of the Lady Hardinge 
Medical College and Hospital, was Rs. 152·91 lakhs and of the Kalavati 
Saran Children's Hospital Rs. 32.50 lakhs. The amount of such granlc; 
for the financial year 1976-77 for the two institutions was as. 163.39 
lakhs and Rs. 33.11 lakhs. The provision made for the current finan-
cial year for such grant is as. 1't8.28 lakhs in the case o·f the Lady Har-
dinge Medical College and Hospital and Rs. 37.50 lakhs in the case of 
the Kalavati Saran Children's Hospital. Besides this, the Central Gov-
ernment is incurring expenditure on the construction of buildings and 
the purchase of the equipments required for these institutions. The 
Central Government would have continued to meet the expenses necessary 
for the maintenance of both these institutions from the Consolidated Fund 
of India hereafter also. Therefore, if the Bill is enacted and brought into 
operation, there is not likely to be any additional expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India on these accounts. 
3. However, some additional expenditure will have to be incurred {fllm 
the Consolidated Fund of India by way of pension, gra~ui'y and similar 
benefits to be extanded to the employees of these institutions when, by 
virtue of the provisions contained in clause 10. such employees become 
Government servants. It is not possible to estimate the actual expendi-
ture that may have to be incurred on this account; but it is likely to be of 
the order of Rs. 83,000 in a year. 
4. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, will not involva any 
other recurring or non-recurring expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 
1.1 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
There is no provision in the Bill which contamplates the making of 
any rule by the Central Government on any specific matter. However, 
!t il!l considered desirable to confer on the Central Government a general 
power to make rules to carry out the provisionl!l of the Act, so that the 
Cen~ral Government may not be without power to make rules with regard 
to matters o~ detail in the· administration of the Lady Hardinge Medical 
College and Rospita} and the Kalavati Saran Childrert's Hospital as Gov-
ernment institutions, in case it finds that such rules have to be made !nr 
the better administration of these institutions. Therefore, a general 
power has been conferred on the Central Government by clause 19(1J of 
the Bill to make rules to carry out the provisions of -the Act. The neceS-
sary safeguard of placing the rules so made before the Houses of Parlia-
ment has also been provided for by sub-c1ause (2) of that clause. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 

LOK SABHA 
r' 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition of the Lady Hardinge Medic:al College and 
Hospital aDd for the management of the Kalavati Saran Hospital, 
with a view to eDSurmg better facilities for higher m~. education 
for women and medical facilities for women and children in the 
Union territory of Delhi and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. . 
\;t _. I· ..... .• -
• 
... v 
• 
-' 