oy

o

2A oe

i
a.

10.
1.
12.

13.
14.

As passep By Lox Sapna
on StH AuGust, 1986

Bill No. 8$-C of 1986

THE STATE OF MIZORAM BILL, 1986

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CLAUSES

PART I
PRELIMINARY
Short title.
Definitions,
PART II

EsTaBLISHMENT OF THE STATE 07 M1zorAM

. Establishment of the State of Mizoram.
4, Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution,

PART III
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES

The Council of States

. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.

. Allocation of sitting member,
. Amendment of section 27A of Act 43 of 1950.

The House of the People

. Allocation of seat in the existing House of the People.
. Provision as to sitting member, .

The Legislative Assembly

Provision as to Legislative Assembly.
Delimitation of’ constituencies,

Power of-Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders
up-to-date. oped

Amendment of Scheduled Castes Orders,

Amendment. of ‘Scheduled. ‘Tribes: Orders.



(ii)
PART IV
Hicu Courr

CLauses

15. Common High Court for Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur,
Tripura and. Mizorarn,

16. Provision as to Advocates,

17. Practice and procedure in the common High’ Court.

18. Custody of seal of the common High Court.

19. Form of writs and other processes,

20. Powers -of Judges.

21. Principal seat and other Places of sitting of the common High Court.

22. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court.

23. Transfer of proceedings from the High Court of Assam, Nagaland,
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura to the common High Court.

24. Interpretation,

25. Right to appear or to. act in proceedings transferred to the common
High Court.

26. Saving.

PART V
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION oF REVENUES

27. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by the Legisla-

ture.
28. Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of

Mizoram,
29. Allowances and privileges’ of Governor of Mizoram,

30. Distribution of revenues. ,
PART VI

ASSETS AND LIABILITIES

31. Property, .assets, rights, liabilities, obligations, etc.
PART VII
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES

32. Provision relating to All-India Services,
33. Provisions relating to other services.
34. Other provisions as to services. i
35. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same posts,
36. Advisory Committees,

37. Prohibition of representation after certain period,
38. Power of Central Government to give directions.


(ii) |

PART VII i |

LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS '

CLAUSES q

39. Amendment of article 210, article 239A, article 240, article 244, the ।
Fifth Schedule and the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution. f

40. Amendment of Act 28 of 1958,

41, Amendment of Act 20 of 1963. |

42, Amendment of Act 84 of 1971.

43, Continuance of existing laws and their adaptations.

44, Power to construe laws.

45. Provisions as to continuance of courts, etc.

46. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws.

47. Power to remove difficulties.

48. Power to make rules. |
THE FIRST SCHEDULE, F
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.



5

To

Bill No. 89-C of 1986.

THE STATE OF MIZORAM BILL, 1986

A
BILds

to- provide for the establishment of the State of Mizoram and for
है matters connected therewith,

Bi it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
PART I
PRELOMINARY

1. This Act may be called the State of Mizoram Act, 1986.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “Administrator” means ‘the administrator appointed by the
President under article 239 of the Constitution;

(b) “appointed day” means the day which. the Central Govern
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint;

(c) “article” means ‘an article of the Constitution;

(2) “Blection Commission” means the Election Commission
appointed by the President under article 3245

Short title.

Definitions.



Establish-
ment of the
State of
Mizoram,

Amend-
sent

of First
Schedule to
the Consti-
rution,

Amend-
ment of
Fourth
Schedule
to the
Consti-
tution,

Allocation
of sitting
member.

2

(०) “existing Union territory of Mizoram” means the Union
territory of Mizoram as existing immediately before the appointed
day;

(0) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order,
bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having, imme- 5
diately before the appointed day, the force of law in the whole or
any part of the existing Union territory of Mizoram;

(g) “sitting member”, in relation to either House of Parliament
or of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory of
Mizoram, means a person who, immediately before the appointed day, 10
is a member of that House or that Assembly;

(0) “treasury” includes a sub-treasury.
PARE IP
EsTaBLISHMENT or THE 87047 or Mizoram

3. On and from, the appointed day, there shall be established a new 15
State, to be known as the State of Mizoram, comprising the territories
which immediately before that day were comprised in the existing Union
territory of Mizoram.

4. On and from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the
Constitution,— i
(a) under. the heading “L THE STATES”, after entry 22, the
following entry shall be inserted, namely: —
“23, Mizoram The territories specified in section 6 of the
North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act,
_1971."; 25
(6) under the heading “II. THE UNION TERRITORIES”,
entry 8 relating to Mizoram. shall be omitted and entry 9 shali be
re-numbered as entry 8.

20

PART पा
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES 30
The Council of States
5. On and from the appointed day, in the Fourth Schedule to the
Constitution, in the Table;—

(a) entries 23 and 24 shall be re-numbered as entries 24 and 25
respectively, and before entry 24 as so re-numbered, the following 35
entry shall be inserted, namely:—

“98 Mizoram... , 1;
(0) entry 25 shall be omitted,

6. (1) On and-from the appointed day, the sitting member-of the
Council of States’ representing the existing Union territory of Mizoram 4°
shall be deemed:to have been duly elected under clausé: (4) ‘of article
80 to fill the seat allotted to the State-of Mizoram in that Council.



3
(2) The term of office of such sitting member shall remain unaltered.

7. On and from the appointed day, in section 27A of the Representa-
tion of the People Act, 1950, in sub-section (4), the word “, Mizoram”
shall be omitted. |

5 The House of the People

8. (1) On and from’ the appointed day, the allocation of seats to the
State of Mizoram in the House of the People and the number of seats to
be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes of that State shall be one; and the
First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, shall be

1o deemed to be amended, accordingly.

(2) On and from the appointed day, the parliamentary constituency of
the existing Union territory of Mizoram shall be deemed to be the parlia-
mentary constituency of the State. of Mizoram and the Delimitation of
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, shall be

15 construed accordingly, : हु

9. The sitting member of the House of the People representing the
constituency which, on the appointed day, by virtue of the provisions of
section 8 becomes the constituency of the State of Mizoram, shall be
deemed to have been elected under sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of article

20 81 to the House of the People by that constituency,

The Legislative Assembly

10. On and from the appointed day, the total number of seats in the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Mizoram to be filled by persons,
chosen by direct election from assembly constituencies shall be forty;
). 25 and the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950,
shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.

11, (1) The Election Commission shall,:before the appointed day, and
in the manner hevein provided, distribute the seats ‘assigned: to the Legis-
Jative Assembly of the State of Mizoram under section 10 to single-mem-

30)ber territorial constituencies and delimit them, having regard to the
provisions of the constitution and to the following ‘provisions, namely: —

(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographi-
cally compact areas, and in delimiting them regard. shal] be had to
physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, facili-
ties of communication and public convenience; and

‘ae मर

2
ea

(b) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled
Tribes shall, as far as practicable. be located in areas where the
proportion of their population to the total population is the largest.

song

(2) For the purpose of assisting it in the performance.of its functions
under sub-section. (1). the Election Commission shall associate with
itself 88 associate members,—

(a) the sitting member of the Howse of the People referred to in
section 9; and ‘

Amend-
ment of
section 27A
of Act 43
of 1950.

Allocation
of seat in
the existing
House of
the
People.

Provision
as to sit

ting mem-
ber.

Provision
as to Legis-
lative
Assembly.

Delimita-
tion of
consti-
tuencies,



4

(b) such six of the memberg of the Legislative Assembly of the
existing Union territory of Mizoram as the Speaker thereog may
nominate; |

Provided that none of the associate members shal} havea right to
Vote or to sign any decision of the Election, Commission,

(3) lt owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member
falls vacant, it shall be filled, ig Practicable, in accordance With the
Provisions of sub-section (2),

(4) The Election, Commission shall

(०) publish its Proposals for the delimitation of :
together with the dissenting Proposals, ip any, of any associate
member who desires publication thereof, in the Official Gazette and

be further considereq by it;

(b) consider al] objections and suggestions which may have been

Teceived by it before the date so Specified;

(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may
have been Teceived by 1६ before the date 80 specified, determine by
one or more orders the delimitation of constituencies ang cause such
order oy orders to be published in the Officiay Gazette; ang upon such
bublication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and
Shall not be called in question in any court,

(5) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order rela. 25
ting to assembly constituencies shall be laiq before the Legislative As-
sembly of the existing Union territory of Mizoram,

eae of 12: (1) The Election Commission may, from time {o time, by notificae
lection लि ial Gaz

Commis. tion in the’ Officiay azette,—_

sion. to है

Maintain (2) correct any printing mistake in any order made under 3०

delimita. Section: 11 op any error arising therein from inadvertent slip or

don orders omission;

Up-to-date,

(०) where the boundaries oy Mame of any territorial division
Mentioned in any such order are or is altered, make such amendments

38 appear to it to be Necessary or €xpedient for bringing such order 35
Up-to-date,

(2) Every notification under this section relating to an assembly
constituency shall be laid, as Soon as may be after 1६ is issued, before
the Legislative Assembly 08 the existing Union territory of Mizoram,

paren Casey D On sind trom the pombe’ day, the Constitution (Scheduled 4o
Scheduled ‘astes) Order, 1950, shaly stand amendeg as directed in the  Firgt
Castes Schedule, : 1 दर

Orders.



25 of 1961.

5

(2) On and from’ the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled
Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951, shall stand amended as directed
in the Second Schedule i |

14, (1) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled
5 Tribes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Third

* Schedule, |
(2) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951 shall stand amended as directed
inthe Fourth Schedule: 1

PART IV

Hick Courr

15. (1) On and from the appointed day,—

(a) there shal] be a common High Court for the States of Assam,
“Nagaland Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura’ and Mizoram to be called
15 the Gauhatij High Court (the High Court of Assam, Nagaland.
Meghalaya, Maniour, Tripura and Mizoram) (hereinafter referred to

as the common High Court)

(0) the Judges of the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Megha-

laya, Manipur and Tripura holding office. immediately before that

a0 day shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become on that day
the Judges of the common High Court.

(2) The expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of the
Judges of the common High Court shall be allocated amongst the States
of Assam, Manivur, Meghalaya, Mizoram. Nagaland and Tripura and

25.the Union in such proportion as the President may, by order, determine.

16, (7) On and from the appointed day,—

(a) in the Advocates Act, 1961, in section 3, in sub-section (1),
for clause (b). the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(b) for the States of Assam, Manipur. Meghalaya, Mizoram,

30 Nagaland and Tripura and the Union territory of Arunachal

-Pradesh, to- be known: as the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland,
Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and. Mizoram;”;

(b) the Bar Council of Assem, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Maniour

and Tripura shall be ‘deemed to be the Bar Council of Assam, Naga-
35 land, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram.

(2) Any person who. immediately before the appointed day, is an
advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of Assam, Nagaland,
Meghalava, Manipur and Trinura. shall be entitled to practise as an
advocate in the common High Court.

40 (3) All persons who, immediately ‘before the appointed day, are
advocates on the roll of the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya.
Manipur and Trivura. shall as from that day, become advocates on the
roll of the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura
and Mizoram,

Amend-
shent of
Scheduled
Tribes
Orders.

Common
High Court
for Assam,
Nagalond,
Megha-
laya,
Manipur,
‘Tripura

and
Mizoram

Provision
as to
advocates,



Practice
and proce-
dure in the
common
High
Court,

Custody of
seal of the
common
High
Court,

Form of
writs and
other

processes,

Powers of
Iudges,

Principal
seal and
other
places
Of sitting
of the
commen
High
Court,

6

(4) The right-of audience in the common High Court shall be regu-
ated’ in ‘accordance with the like principles as, immediately before the
appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of audience in the
High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura:

Provided: that as among the Advocates-Genera] of the States of Assam,
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura, the right of
audience shall be determined with reference to their dates of enrolment
as advocates,

17, Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law in force immediately
before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the
High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura shall,
with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the common High
Court. 1

18. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with
respect to the custody of the Seal of the High Court of Assam, Nagaland,
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura shall, with the necessary modifi.
cations, apply with respect to the custody of the seal of the common
High Court,

49. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with
respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded
by the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya Manipur and Tripura
shall. with necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of
writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the common High
Court, t i

20. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with
respect to the powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division
courts of the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and
Tripura and with respect to all matter. ancillary to the exercise of those
powers shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the
common High Court,

21, (1) The princival seat of the common High Court shall be at the
same vlace at which the principal seat of the Hich Court of Assam,
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura is located immediately
Before. the appointed day. !

(2) The President may, by notified order, provide for the establish-
ment of a permanent bench or benches of the common High Court at
one or more places within the territories to which the jurisdiction of the
High Court extends, other than the principal seat of the High Court, and
for any matters connected therewith:

Provided that before issuing any order under this sub-section, the
President shal ronsult the Chief Justice of the common High Court and
the Governor of the State in which the bench or benches is or are propos-
ed to be established

(3) Notwithstanding anvthing contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), the Judges and division courte of the common High Court
may also sit at such other place er.olaces in the Stotes of Assam. Nagaland,
Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram as the Chief Justice may,
with the approval of the Governor of the State concerned, appoint,

Io

G

25

30

3B

45


5

10

20

2)

30

co
35

7

22. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to
appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court of Assam, Nagaland,
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura and the Judges and division courts
thereof shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the
common High Court, j

23. (1) All proceedings pending in the High Court of Assam, Naga-
Jand, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura immediately before the appointed
day shall, from such day, stand transferred to the common High Court.

(2) Every proceeding transferred under sub-section (1) shall le
disposed of by the common High Court as if such proceeding wag enter-
tained by that High Court. i

24, For the purposes of section 23,—

(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until
that court has disposed of all issues between the parties, including
any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings
and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for revision
and petitions for writs; and H

(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including
references to a Judge or division court thereof; and references to an
order made by a court or a Judge shall be construed ag including
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that
court or Judge. |

25. Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an
advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of Assam, Nagaland,
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura and’ was authorised to appear or to act
in any proceedings transferred from the said High Court: to the common
High Court under section 23 shall have the right to appear or to act, as
the case may be, in the common High Court in relation to those
proceedings.

26. Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the common
High Court of any provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall
have effect subject to any provision that may be made on or after the
appointed day with respect to that High Court by any Legislature 06
other authority having power to make such provisions,

PART V
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES

27. (1) The President may, at any time before the appointed day,
authorise by order such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the

Procedure

Supreme
Court.

Transfer of
proceed-
ings from
the High
Court of
Assam,
Nagaland,

Meghalaya,

Manipor
and
‘Tripura to
the com-
mon High
Court.
Interpreta-
tion

Right to
appear

or to

act in
proceed-
ings trans-
ferred to
the com-
mon High
Court,

Saving.

Authori-
sation of



exper
Pending its
sanction
by the
Legisla-
ture.

Reports
relating
10 the
accounts
of the
existing
Union
territory
of
Mizoram,

Allowan-
ces and
Privileges
of Gover-
Nor of
Mizoram,

Distribu-
tion of
Tevenues,

Property,
assets,

rights,

liabilities,
obligations,
ete,

a

jue State of Mizoram as he deems necessary for a period of not more than

six months beginning with the appointed day, pending the sanction of
such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Mizoram:

Provided that the Governor of Mizoram may, after the appointed
day, authorise by order such further expenditure as he deems necessary
from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Mizoram for any period not
extending beyond the said period of six months,

a

(2) The President or, as the case may be, the Governor of Mizoram
shall make separate orders under sub-section (1) in respect of periods
failing in different financial years, 1 to

28, (1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India referred to in section 49 of the Government of Union Territories Act,
1963, relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of Mizoram
in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be submitted to
the Governor of Mizoram who shall cause them to be laid before the 1
Legislative Assembly of the State,

20 of 1

(2) The Government may, by order,—

(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated
Fund of the existing Union territory of Mizoram on any service in
respect of any period prior to the appolnted day during the financial 2
year 1986-87 or in respect of any earlier financial ‘year in excess of
the amount granted for that service. and for that year as disclosed
in the reports referred to in sub-section (1) to have been duly
authorised, and '

(0) provide for any action to 96 taken on any matter arising out eh
. If

of the said reports, ।

29, The allowances and privileges of the Governor of Mizoram shall,
until provision in that behalf is made by Parliament by law under
clause (3) of article 158, be such as the President may, by order,

determine. i 30

30. The President shall, by order, determine the grants-in-aid of the,
revenues of the State of Mizoram and the shave of that State in the
Union duties of excise, estate duty and taxes on income and for that pur-
pose amend thereby the relevant provisions of the Additional Duties of
Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, the Union Duties of Excise 35 58 of 1957,
(Distribution) Act, 1979, the Estate Duty (Distribution) Act, 1962 and the[” 94°. 1674
Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) Order, 1985-in such manner as he 9 of 1962, हु

thinks fit.

PART Vi
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES 40

31, (1) All such property and assets within the existing Union terri-
tory of Mizoram as are held immediately before the appointed day by
the Union for purposes of governance of that Union territory shall, on
and from that day, pass to the State of Mizoram unless the purposes for #5
which such property and assets are so held are Union purposes:



9
ances in the treasuries in the Union territory
day shall, as from that day, vest in the

Provided that the cash bal:
of Mizoram before the appointed
State of Mizoram,

(2), All rights, liabilities and obligations (other than those yelatable
to, or in connection with, a Union purpose), whether arising out of any
contract or otherwise, which are, immediately before the appointed day,—
nd obligations of the Central Govern-

(a), the rights, liabilities 8
nection with, the governance of the

ment arising out of, or in conn
Union territory of Mizoram; or
(b) the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Administrator of
the existing Union territory of Mizoram in his capacity as such, or
» ० the Government of that Union territory,

shall, on and from the appsinted day, be the rights, Yabilities and obliga-

tions of the Government. of the State of. Mizoram.

(3) The right to recover arrears of—

(a) any. tax or duty peing a.tax or duty. enumerated in the State
List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; or

(b) any duty referred to in article 268; or

(९) any tax under the Céntral..Sales: Tax Act, 1956,

which have fallen due in the existing Union territory of Mizoram
pass to the State of Mizoram. हे
(4) The provisions of this section shall ni
४5 (a) any jnstitution, cundertaking or project the expenditure in
relation to which is immediately before the appointed day. met, from
and out of the Consolidated Fund of India;
peen placed by the Union at the
of.the existing Union territory of
nn that the ownership thereof will

m shall

(b). any property which has
disposal of. the administration
Mizoram subject to. the conditio
continue to vest in the Union.

Ewplanation—For the purposes ‘of this section—
ility in respect of any civil deposit,
her. endowment, provident fund

७... (७) “ability” includes
local fund deposit, charitable
account, pension or actionable," wr

» means the purposes of Government rela-

(b) “Union purposes
table.to any of the matters: mentioned in the Union List.

PART VII

PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES

f the Indian Administrative Service, the Indian
Indian Forest Service who, immediately before
post in the existing Union territory ०
Central Government, be

32. Every member ०
Police Service and the
the appointed day, is holding any
Mizoram shall, until otherwise directed by the
deemed’ to be on deputation, on and from the appointed day, to the Goy-
ernment of the State of Mizoram on the same terms and conditions of
service as are applicable to tim under the relevant cadre rules:

Provided. that. the period .of such deputation shall in no case extend
beyond a period of three years from the appointed day.

ot apply to.or.in relation to,— :

Provision
relating to
All-India
Services,



Provisions
relating to
other
Services,

Other
provisions
as 10 ser-
vices,

Provisions,
as to conti-
nuance of
officers

in same
posts,

Advisory
Commit-
tees,

10

Explanation—In this section, “cadre rules” means the Indian Adminis-
trative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954, the Indian Police Service (Cadre)
Rules, 1954 or the Indian Forest Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966, as the case

may be.

$3. (1) Every person who immediately before the appointed day is 5
serving in connection with the affairs of the Union under the administra-
tive control of the Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram shall,
unless otherwise directed by an order of the Central Government, be
deemed to have been allocated for service as from that day in connection
with the affairs of the State of Mizoram: 10

Provided that no directions shall be issued under this section after
the expiry of a period of one year from the appointed day.

(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to

Petsons to whom the provisions of section 32 apply.

34. (1) Nothing in this section or section 83 shall be deemed to affect 15
on or after the appointed day the operations of the provisions of Chapter
I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to determination of the con-
ditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of the

State of Mizoram: |

(2) AML services prior to the appointed day rendered by a person
deemed to have been allocated under section 83 in connection with the
administration of the Union territory of Mizoram, shall be deemed to
have been rendered in connection with the affairs of the State of Mizo-

tam for the purposes of the rules regulating his conditiong of service,

हि 35. Every person who. immediately before the appointed day, is hold-
ing or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the ०
affairs of the Union tevritory of Mizoram shall continue to hold the same :
Post or office and shall be deemed, on and from that day, to have been
duly appointed to the post or office by the Government of, or other appro-
Priate authority in,- the State of Mizorarn’ oh the same terms and condi-
tions of appointment and on the same tenure as he was holding the post
or office ‘immediately’ before that day: a ़

competent. authority on or after the appointed day from passing in rela-
a to such person any order affecting his continuance in such post or
ice
A fost | हे
36. The Central G i
४6. The Centra’ Overnment may, by . order, establish one or
more Advisory Committees for the purpose ‘of assisting it in regard to-—

(a) the discharge of ity functions under this Part; and

कि डः the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons
affected by the Provisions of this Part and the Proper consideration 45
of any representations made by such persons



it

3%. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law — Prohibi-
or rule for the time being in force, no representation shall lie against tion of
any order passed under the provisions of this Part on the expiry of three दा न
months from the date of publication or service, whichever is earlier, of after cer.

5 such order: tain period.

Provided that the Central Government may, suo motu or otherwise and
for reasons to be recorded, re-open any matter and pass such orders there-
on as May appear to it to be appropriate if it is, satisfied that it is necessary
so to do in order to prevent any miscarriage of justice to any affected

so person. ० mal

_ Power of
38. The Central Government may give such directions to the Gov- Central

ernment of the State of Mizoram as may appear to it to be necessary Govern
for the purpose of giving effect to the foregoing provisions of this Part ment

and the State Government shall comply with such directions. ieee
tions.
78 PART VIII
- LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
38. On and from the appointed day— : Amend-
(a) in article 210, in clause (2), after the proviso, the following ™ewt of
proviso shall be inserted, namely:— ae
aD: ‘Provided further that in relation to the Legislature of the article
State of Mizoram, this clause shall have effect as if for the words aie
; “fifteen years” occurring therein, the words “forty years” were 2
substituted. ’; article
(b) in article 239A, in clause (1), the word “, Mizoram” shall be Pah the
Pane Fifth
as omitted; पु phe.
(0) im article 240, in clause (1),— dule
(i) entry (f) shall be omitted; Pe ane
(ii) in the provisos, the word “, Mizorarn” shall be omitted; schedule
(१) in article 244,— aaa
titution,
go (i) in clause (1), for the. words “Meghalaya and Tripura”,
the words “Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (2), for the words “Meghalaya and Tripura and
the Union territory of Mizoram”, the words “Meghalaya, Tripura
and, Mizoram” shall be substituted, i
38 (e) in the Fifth Schedule, in paragraph 1, for the words “Megha- Hi
laya and Tripura”, the words “Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram” shall A
be substituted; है F
(f) in the Sixth Schedule— |
(i) in the heading, for the words “the States of Assam,
40 Meghalaya and Tripura and in the Union territory of Mizoram”,

the words “the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram”
shall be substituted; |
(i) in paragraph 128, for the words “Union territory”, i
wherever they occur, the word “State” shall be substituted; i
45 (iii) in paragraph 17, after the words “or Tripura”, at both |
the places where they occur, the words “or Mizoram” shall be in- x
serted;



Amend-
ment of
Act 28 of
1958,

Amend-
ment of
Act 20 of
1963:

Amend.
ment: of:
Act-84 of
1971,

Continu-
ance of
existing
laws and
their
adaptations

1

(iv) in paragraph 20, in sub-paragraph (1), for the words
“Union territory”, the. word “State” shall be substituted,

40: On and from the appointed day, in the Armed Forces (Special
Powers) Act, 1958, in the long title and in sub-section (2) of section 1, for
the words “Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura and the Union territories of +
Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram”, the words “Meghalaya, Mizoram, Naga-
land and Tripura and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh” shall be
substituted,

41. On and from the appointed day, in the Government of Union
Territories Act, 1963,— 70

() in clause (h) of sub-section (1) of section 2, the word
“, Mizoram” -shall be omitted;

(i) in section 33, in. the proviso to sub-section (2), for the
words “the Legislative Assemblies of the Union territories of Aruna-
chal Pradesh and Mizoram”, the words “the Legislative Assembly ‘of 15
the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh” shall be substituted;

(ii) in section 44,

(a) the second Proviso to sub-section (1) shall be omitted;

(०) in sub-section (2), for the words “each of the Union
territories of Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram”, the words “the 20
Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh” shall be substituted,

42, On and trom the appointed day, in the North-Eastern Council Act,

1971,~ ; ! +
(a) in section 2, for clauses (b) and (c), the following clauses

shall be substituted, namely;— i 25

1 “(b) “north-eastern area” means the area comprising the
States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and
Tripura and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh;

(०) “State” includes the Union territory of Arunachal
Pradesh,’ 90

(9) for clause (9) of sub-section (1) of section 3, the following
clause. shall be substituted, namely: —

i “(b) the Chieg Ministers of the States of Assam, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura and of the Union
territory of Arunachal Pradesh;”, 35

43: (1) All laws in force, immediately before the appointed day, in the
existing Union territory of Mizoram shal) continue to be in force in the
State of Mizoram until altered, repealed or amended by a competent
Legislature or other competent authority, i

(2) For the purpose of facilitating the application in velation to the 40
State-of Mizoram of any law made before the appointed day, the appro-
priate Government may, within two years from that day, by order, make


such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal

or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and therevtpon every

such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications

so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature
5 or other competent authority.

Explanation.—In this section, the expression “appropriate--Govern-
ment” means, as respects any Jaw relating to a matter enumerated in the
Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the. Central
Government, and as respects any other law, the Government of the State ||

10-०1 Mizoram,

aid

44. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has Power ‘o
been made under section 43 for the adaptation of a law made before the construe
appointed day, any court, tribunal or authority, required or empowered 10४
to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application

15 in relation to the State of Mizoram, construe the law in such manner not
affecting the substance as. may be necessary or proper in regard to the
matter before the court, tribunal or authority, as.the: case may be.

45. All courts and tribunals and all authorities discharging lawful Provisions q

functions throughout the existing Union territory of Mizoram or any % 10
2० Part thereof immediately before the appointed: day shall, unless their ae
continuance is inconsistent with the provisions of this. Act or until other courts,
provision is made by a competent legislature or other competent autho- etc, ‘

rity, continue to exercise their respective functions.

46. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any- Effect of

25 thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law, Provisions
of Act

inconsis-
tent with
other laws,

47. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect.to the provisions of Power to
this Act, the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with remove
such provisions which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for ‘ifficulties.
the purpose of removing the difficulty. Ai

30 (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each
House of Parliament. ma

48. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, in the Official Power to
Gazette, make rules to give effect: to the provisions of this Act. make rules.

(2) Every rule made under this section shall bg laid as soon as may
95 be aiter it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two. or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid hoth Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
40 both Houses: agree: that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, there-
after have effect only in sucti-modified form or be of-no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that ~
rule,



हा it
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 13(1)]
AMENDMBNTS TO THE CoNSTITUTION (ScHEDULED CasrEes) OrpER, 1950)
In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950,—

(1) In paragraph 2, for the figures “XIX”, the figures “XX” shall
be substituted;

(2) In the Schedule, after Part XIX, the following Part shall
be inserted, namely: —

“Part XX.—Mizoram
1, Bansphor
2, Bhuinmali or Mali
3. Brittial-Bania or Bania
4, Dhupi or Dhobi
5. Dugla or Dholi
6. Hira
7. Jalkeot
8. Shalo, Malo or Jhalo-Malo
9, Kaibartta or Jaliya
10. Lalbegi
11, Mahara
12, Mehtar or Bhangi
13. Muchi-or Rishi
14, Namasudra
15. Patni é
16. Sutradhar.”, i |

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 13(2)]

AMENDMENTS 10 THB ConstrruTIoN (ScHEDULED Castes) (UNroN
TERRITORIWs) Oper, 1951

In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order,
1961,— c ६

(1) In paragraph 2, for the words and figures “Parts I to Ty;
the words and figures “Parts I to III” shall be substituted;

(2) In paragraph 4, for the words and figures “Parts III and IV”,
the word and figures “Part IIT” shall be substituted:

(3) Jn the Schedule, Parr III.—Mizoram shall. be omitted and
Part IV shall be renumbered as Part III.


"5

THE THIRD SCHEDULE

{See section 14(1)]
AMENDMENTS To ‘tHE ConstiYUTION (Scuzpu.zp Tries) Orpen, 1950

In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950,—

(1) In paragraph 2, for the figures “XVI", the figures “XVII”
shall be substituted;

(2) In the Schedule, after Part XVI, the following Part shall be
inserted, namely: —
“Pant XVIL—Mizoram
7. Chakma हैँ
2. Dimasa (Kachari)
3. Garo :
4. Hajong
5, Hmar

6. Khasi and Jaintia (including Khasi, Synteng or Pnar,
War, Bhoi or Lyngngam)

7. Any Kuki tribes, induding—~
(i) Baite or Biete
(it) Changsan
(iii) Chongloi
ker (iv) Doungel
fst ‘(v) Gamalhou
(vi) Gangte.
(०४) Guite
(viii) Hanneng , ५ पु ; : ।
(ix) Haokip or Haupit’ “*°" es दर ||
(x) Haolai aoa sean de) ४ 3
(wi) Hengna ih + है है
(xii) Hongsungh - .
(मर) Hrangkhwal 0 Rangkhol
(xiv) Jongbe
(xv) Khawchung
(evi) Khawathlang or Khothalong
“(wvii)! Khelma aa |
(xviii) Kholhou है ve |
(win) Kipgen ‘|
(ex) Kuki ° “0 हु
हक) Lengthang ~ \
(xorti) Lhangum हा
{xatit) Thoujem



(wxiv) Lhouvun
(xxv) Lupheng
(wxvi) Mangjel
(2००४) Missao
(waviii) Riang
(xxix) Sairhem
(xx) Selnam
(xaxxi) Singson
(«watit) Sitlhou,
(xasiii) Sukte
(xaxiv) Thado
(2४००) Thangngeu
(cxzvi) Uibuh

(xxxvii) Vaiphei

8. Lakher

9. Man (Tai-Speaking)

i0. Any Mizo (Lushai) tribes
11, Mikir

12, Any Naga tribes

13. Pawi

14. Synteng.”.

THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
[See section 14(2)]
AMENDMENTS TO THE CoNSTITUTION (ScHEDULED Tatsrs) (Union

TeRRrvoRtEs)’ Onper, “1951

॥ In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order,
1951,—

(1) In paragraph 2, for the words and figures “Parts I to IIT”, the
words and figures “Parts 1 and I!” shall be substituted:

(2) In paragraph 3, for the words and figures “Parts IT and TIT",
the word and figures “Part II” shall be substituted;

(3) In the Schedule, Part IT shall he omitted and Part गा shall
he renumbered as Part IT.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of the State of Mizoram
and for matters connected therewith.

. ‘ : (As passed by Lok Sabha)