51ot19.71J. 
, , 
As INTRODUCED Dr LOK SABRA ON 
-.. 
~" ii JUL lSB~ 
Ul No ... of 1982 
" 
THE CUSToMS TARIFF (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Customs Tariff Act. 1975. 
DB it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Customs Tariff (Second Amend-
ment) Act, 1982. 
5 ,(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
z. In section 9 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (hereinafter referred to 
as the principal Act) ,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be sub-
10 .tituted, namely:-
1 
_-'10-
to 
"(1) Where any country or territory pays, or bestows, 
directly or indirectly, any bounty or subsidy upon the manu-
facture' or production therein or the exportation therefrom of 
any article, then, upon the importation of any such article into 
India, whether the same is imported directly from. the country 
of manufacture, production or otherwise, and whether it is im-
ported in the same condition as when exported from the CO'W1try 
of manufacture or production or has been changed in conditio&. 
by manufacture, productiQn or otherwise; the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, impose,-
(i) if the article is not otherwise chargeabie with duty 
under the provisions of this Act, a duty; or , 
Shori 
title IIIld 
com-
mence. 
Amend. 
mentOf 
section 9. 

Insertion 
of new' 
sections 
9Aand 9B. 
Anti-
dump-
inc 
duty. 
(ii) if the article is otherwise so chargeable, an addi-
tional duty, 
not exceeding the amount of such bounty or subsidy: 
Provided that the Central Government may, pending the 
determination in accordance with the provisions of this section 5 
and the rules made thereunder of the amount of such bounty or 
grant, impose a duty or additional duty under this Bub-section 
not exceeding the amount of such bounty or subsidy as provi-
sionally estimated by it and if such duty or aMition.al duty ex-
ceeds such bounty or subsidy as so determined,- I () 
(a) the Central Government shall, having regard to such 
determination and as soon as may be after such determina-
tion, reduce such duty or additional duty; and 
(b) refund shall be made of so much of such duly or 
additional duty which has been collected as is in excess of 15 
the duty or additional duty as so reduced."; 
(b) in S'Ub-section (2) ,-
. (i) for the words "net amount of any such bounty or grant", 
the words "amount of any such bounty or subsidy" _hall be 
wbstituted; 20 
(ii) for the worcts "additional duty", the words "duW or 
, additional duty, a9 the case may be," shall be substituted. 
3. Mter section 9 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:-
'9A. (1) Where any article is exported from any country or terri- 25 
tory (hereafter in this section referred to as the exporting country 
or territory) to India at less than its normal value, then, upon the 
importation of such articl~ into India, the Central GOvernment may, 
by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, impose,-
(a) if the article is not otherwise chargeable with duty under go 
the provisions of this Act, a duty; or 
(b) if the article is otherwise so chargeable, an .ac\d1tional 
duty, 
not exceeding the margin of dumping in relation to such article: 
Provided that the Central Government may, pending the deter- 35 
mination in accordance with the provisions Qf this section and the 
rules made thereunder of the normal value and the margin .of dump-
ing in relation to any article, impose on the importation of .lIueh article 
into Indla a duty or additional duty under this sub-eecttop on the 
basis of a provisional estimate of such value and margin ap.d j't S'UCh -40 
duty or additional duty exceeds the margin as so determined,-
(a) the Central Government shall, having regard to such 
determination and as soon as may be after such detennination, 
reduce such duty or additional.duty; and ' 
(b) refund shall be made of so much of such duty or add!- 45 
tional duty which has been collected as is in excess of such duty 
or additional duty as so reduced. 

5 
10 
20 
,. ... 
I' 
35 
a 
E:tplcmatioR.-For the purpoJeS ot. this, aectioa,-
(a) "margin of dumping", in relation to an article, meaJU 
the difference between the price at which such article is exported 
and. its normal value; 
(b) "normal value", in relation to an article, means-
(i' the comparable price in the ordinary CaLU'se of trade 
for the said article or like article when meant for CODlUDlp-
tion in' the exporting country or territory as determined 
und&r Bub-section (2); or 
(ii) where such comparable price cannot be aso~d 
because of the particular market situation or for any other 
reason, such value shall be either-
(A) the highest comparable price for the said article 
or like article from the exporting country or territory 
to any third country in the ordinary course of trade as 
determined under sub-section (2); or 
(8) the cost of production of the said article or like 
article in the country of origin along with reasonable 
addition for selling and any other cost, and for proftts, 
as determined under S'LIb-section (2). 
(2) Subject to any rules made under sub-eection '(3). the Cer.ttral 
Government shall, after making due allowance in each case for 
differences in conditions and terms of sale, for differences in taxation 
and for other differences affecting price comparability, and, after 
such inquiry as it may consider necessary, determine, for the pur-
~ses of sub-section (1), the export price and the normal value of 
and the margin of dumping in relation to, any article. 
'(3) The Central Government may, by notifleation in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for the purposes of this section, and without 
prejudice to the generality df the foregoing, such rules may provide 
for the manner in which article's liable for any duty or adaIabnal 
duty under suh-EIection (1) may be identified, and for the manner in 
which the eXl>Ort prk-e and the normal value of, and the margin of 
dumping in relation to. such articles may be determined and for the 
assessment and r.ollection of such duty or additional 'du.ty. 
(4) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, as soon 
as may. be after it is issued, be Jaid before each House of Parliament. 
9B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 9 or sec-
tion 9A. the Central (J<\vernment shall not levy any duty or additional 
duty under either of those sections on the-import into India of any 
article from any country or territory to which this section applies 
unless that Government, after making investigation in accordance 
with the rules matte under suh-section (3). declares. by notification 
in the Ofticial Ga1.ette. tha~ the import of such article into Jndia 
causes or threatens material injury to any indUstry established in 
India or materially retards the establishment of any industry in 
Jndia. 
(2) This section apl?lies tt') every country or territory which iR 
specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official 
No levy 
wnder 
aectioD 9 
or section 
9A in 
certain 
cases 
in the 
absence 
of injW'7 
to 
induatry 
in India. 

Gazette to be a country or territory which, by reason of its beine a 
party to the Gelleral Agreement on Tariff and Trade or by reason of 
any agreement between it ar.d India for giving the mostfavoured 
nation treatment Of for any other reason, levies duty or additional 
duty of the nature referred to in section 9 or section 9A on articles 5 
imported from India only when such import causes or threatens any 
material injury to any inci.ustry established in SUCh counlry or terri-
tory or materially retards the establishment of such tnaustry in such 
country or territory. . 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 10 
Gazette, make rules for the I,;?UfPOses of this section, and without 
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such rules may provide 
for the manner in which any investigation may be made for the 
purposes of sub-section (1), the factors to which regard shall be had 
in any such investigation an~ for all matters connected with such in .. 15 
vestigation. 
(4) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) shall, as soon as may be after it is issued be laid before 
each House of Parliament. 
Explanatwn.-For the purposes of tHis section, "inf\ustry", in 120 
relation to any article, includes the manufacture er ~oduct1on of 
like articles, any activity connected ther.ewft'Ti·' ana the persons en-
gaged in such production, manufacture or activity'. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India is a signatory to the General Agreement on Tari1fs and 1'rade 
(GATT) which is a multilateral trpaty governing -the international trade 
of its members. Article VI of the GATI' provides that a contracting 
party may levy a countervailing duty on the importation of any product 
to offset any bounty or subsidy granted in the exporting country, or levy 
an anti-dumplng duty on any dumped product (viz. a product imported 
at a value less than its normal value) to offset dumping. The Article also 
provides that these duties can be levied only if it is determined that the 
effect of subsidization or dumping is such as to cause or threaten material 
injury to an establfshed domestic industry or is such as to retard mate-
rialJy the establishment of a domestic industry, in the importing country. 
During the Tokyo Round of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations 
held fit Geneva during 1973-7S, two multilateral Agreements 
on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures and Anti-dumping have 
been negotiated laying down detailed rules to provide unifOrmity and 
certainty in the implementation of Article VI of the GAT!'. India is • 
signatory to both these Agreements. These Agreements require that 
each Government accepting it shall take all necessary steps to ensure 
the conformity of its domestic laws, rules, regulations and administrative 
procedures with the provisions cif these Agreements. 
2. The Customs Tariff Act, 1975 which provides for the levy ot import 
duties does not contain any provision for the levy cif anti-dumping duty 
on goods found to have been dumped by fhe exporting countries. Section 
9 of the Act provides for the levy of a duty on bO'Unty-fed articles, but a 
duty can be levied under the section only if the article is otherwise 
chargeable with duty under the provisions of the Act. The section does 
not permit imposition of countervailing duty on duty-tree imports even 
i1 these are being subsidized by the eXporting countries. Further, the 
section also does not permit any exemption from the duty on bo'Unty-fed 
articles in cases where the imports of such W'ticles do not cause or threat-
en material injury to an established industry or materially retard the 
establishment of such industry in India. The Act does not contain any 
provision for the levy of antl-dumping duty on goods fO'Und to have been 
dumped by exporting countries. 
3. The Bill seeks to amend the Act to bring the-provisions of the Act 
into conformity with the provisions of Article VI Of the GATT and agree-
ments on subsidies and countervailing measur.es. The main· amendments 
proposed in the' Bill are the following:-
,. 
,. 
(i) Section 9 of the Act is being amended to /provide for the 
levy of countervailing duty on baunty-fed articles, whether or not 
such articles are otherwise chargeable with duty under the Act. The 
sec'tion is also being amended to provide for the imposition there-
under of provisional duty and of the refund of excess amount where 
the final duty as determined under the section is found to be less 

8 
than the provisional duty. The other changes propoaed in the sec-
tion are for bringing the language of the section into conformity 
with the wording used in Article VI of the GATI' (vide clause 2 of 
the Bill). 
(ii) A new section 9A Is being inserted in the Act to provide for 
the levy of anti-dumping du~y on dumped products and for the im-
pOSition of provisional duty on dumped products and refund of excess 
amount in cases where the final duty as determined under this sec-
tion is less than the provisional duty (vi'de clause 3, new section 9A). 
(iii) A new section SB is being inserted to provide for exemp-
tions from the levy of countervailing duties under section 9 and the 
antt-dumpmg duties under proposed section SA in the case of 
articles imported from any country or territory notified under the 
section. The exemption would not be available in respect of import 
(jf any article if. the import of such article into India causes or 
threatens material injury to any industry estabUshed in India or 
materially retards the establishment of any industry in IncUa', Fur-
ther, the Central Government may specify for the purposes of this 
section only a country or territory which by reason of ig being a 
party to the GATT or by reason of any agreement between it and 
hlCiia for giving it a most-favoUTed nation treatment or for any other 
reason, provides for a simUar exemption with respect to articles Im-
?Orted into such country or tt-rritory from Intt1a (vid4! clause 3, new 
section 98). 
3. The Bill seeb to achieve the above objects. 
Nr.w DELHI; 
The 6th July. 1182. PRANAB MUKHER.fEE. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 527 /2/82-Cus. (TO), dated the 9th July, 1982 from 
Shri Pranab Kumar Mukherj eoe , Minister of Finance to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.] , 
The Pret;ident, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Bill further to amend the Cu.'1toms Tariff Act, 1975, rec..)mmen<is under 
clause (1) of article 117 df the Constitution of India the introduction of 
the Bill in Lok Sabba. 
, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION-" 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 9 of 
the principal Act to empower the Central Government to make rules 
thereunder for the p'u~sealso of identification of bounty-fed articles 
which are otherwise liable to duty and for the assessment and collection 
of countervailing duty upon the importation thereof in accordance with 
the provisions cYf sub-section (1) of the section. as propoaed to be amend-
ed.by lub-clause (a) of clause 2 Of the Bill. 
2. Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert two new sections-5ection 9A and 
section 9B. New section 9A provide~ for the levy of anti-dumpin, dutielJ. 
Sub-section (3) of new section 9A seeks to empower the Central Gov-
ernment to make rules for the purposes of this section. The; rules made 
under this sub-section may 'Provide, in particular, for the manner in which 
articles liable for anti-dumping duties under the section may be identi-
fied, the manner in which the export Price am\ normal value of, and the 
margin of dumping in relation to, such articles may be determined 
and 'for the assessment and collection of such duties. Sub-section (3) 
01 Jlew section 9B seeks to empower the Central Government to make 
rules with ~t to the manner in which investiglltionsmay be made 
for the purpose 'of determining whether the import of any arti~e causes 
or threatens material injury to any industry established in India or 
Ill4lterially retards the est.-bUshment of any industry in India, the factors 
to which regard shall be hact in making such investigations and other 
matter~ connected with such inves~igations. 
3. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made under the 
foregoing provisions relate to matters of detail or procec:ture. The dele-
2ation of legislative power ie, therefore, of a normal character. 
7 

Additional 
import 
duty on 
bounty-
feci 
articles. 
• 
EX'l"ItACT FROM ~ CUSTOMS TARIn' ACT, 1975 
(51 OF 1975) 
• • • • 
9. (1) Where any country or territory pays, or bestows, directly or in-
directly, any bounty or grant upon the production therein or the expor-
tation therefrom of any article and the article is chargeabl~ with duty 
. under the provisions of this Act, then, upon the importation of any such 
article into India, whether the same is imported directly from the country 
of production or otherwise, and whether it is im~rted in the same con-
dition &3 when exported from the country df production or has been 
changed in condition by manufacture or otherwise, the Central Govern-
ment may. by notification in the Official Gazette, impose an additional 
duty equal to the net amount of such bounty or grant. 
(2) The net amount of any such bounty or grant as aforesaid shall, 
froOl time to time, be ascert&med, determined, and declared by the Cen-
tral Government, after such inquiry as it may consider necessary and 
the Cen.tral Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, 
make rules for the identification of such articles and for the assessment 
and col~on of any additional duty imposed upon the importation there-
of under 8ub-section (1). . 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Customs Tari1f Act, 1975. 
(Shri P1'aub KU7Mr Mukher;ee. 
Miftuter ot FinClnce.) 