Bill No. 89 of 1978 , , 
THE RARYANA AND UTTAR PRADESH (ALTERATlON OF 
BOUNDARIES) BILL, 1978 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
PART 1 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title. 
2. Definitions. 
PART II 
ALTERATION 010' BOUNDARIES 
3. Replacement of fluctuating boundaries by fixed boundaries. 
4. Transf~r of territories. 
5. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution. 
PART III 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES 
6. Construction of delimitation orders. 
7. Provision as to sitting members. 
PART IV 
HIGH COURTS 
-
8. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to, High 
Court of Punjab and Haryana. 
9. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to', High 
Court at Allahabad 
10. Right to appear in any proceedings transferred under seetion 8 or 
section 9. 
11. Interpretation. 
, , 
•... \. I: PART V 
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE 
12. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territorlet 
under existing appropriation Acts. 
13. Reports relating to accounts of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. 

(U) 
PART VI 
,ApPORTIONllolENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITlII 
CLAUSES 
14. Land and goods. 
15. Arrears of taxes. 
16. Right to recover loans and advances. 
17. Refund of taxes collected in excess. 
18. Deposits. 
19. Contracts. 'I 
20. Liability in respect of actionable wrong. 
21. Liability as guarantor of co-operative societies. 
22. Items in suspense. 
23. Apportionment of assets or liabilities thy agreement. 
24. Power of Central Government to order a1location or adjustment 
in certain cases. 
25. Expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund. 
PART VII 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
26. State Financial Corporations and State ElectriCity Boards. 
27. Territorial extent of laws. 
28. Power to adapt laws. 
29. Power to construe laws. 
30. Legal proceedings. 
31. Transfer of pending proceedings. 
32. Construction of boundary pillars, etc. 
33. Validity of demarcation done before commencement of Act. 
34. Effect of provisions inconsistent with other laws. 
35. Power to remove difficulties. 
36. Power to make rules. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

.3 of 1950. 
A$ INTRODUCED IN LoK SABH.\ ON 
Bill No. 89 of 1978 . 
THE HARY ANA AND UTTAR PRADESH (ALTERATION OF 
BOUNDARIES) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the alteration 'of boundaries of the States of Ha'l1lana and 
Uttar Pradesh and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
PART I 
PRl:LIMINARY 
S 1. This Act may be called the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Al..;eration Short 
of Boundaries) Act, 1978. title. 
10 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the day whkh the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; 
(b) "assembly constituency", "council constituency" and "parlia-
mentary constituency" have the same meanings as in the Represen· 
tation of the People Act, 1950; 
(c) "fixed boundaries" means the boundaries demar~ateci under 
the proviaiolli of ~ction 3 i 
Defini. 
tions. 

Replace. 
ment ef 
fluctuat-
ing boun-
daries 
by fixed 
bounda-
riea. 
2 
... 
(d) "law" includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, order, 
bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having the 
force of law in the whole or in any part of the State of Haryana or 
Uttar Pradesh; 
(e) "notified order" means an order published in the Ofticial 5 
Gazette; 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(g) "present deep stream line" means the deep stream line of 
the river Yamuna as verified and determined by the Survey of India 
during the months of November, 1974, December, 1974, January, 1975 10 
and February, 1975; 
(h) "sitting member", in ifelation to either House of Parliament 
or of the Legislature of a St~te, means a person who immediately 
before the appointed day is a member of that House; 
(i) "transferred territories" means,-
(a) in relation to the state of Haryana, the territories trans-
ferred by this Act from that State to the State of uttar Pradesh, 
and 
15 
(b) in relation to the State of Uttar Pradesh, the territories 
transferred by this Act from that State to the State of Haryana; 20 
(j) any reference to a district of a State shall be construed as 
a reference to the area physically comprised within that district 
immediately before the appointed day. 
PART II 
ALTE~ATJON OF BOUNDARIES 25 
3. (1) As from the appointed day, the boundary be:tween the Kamal. 
and Sonepat districts of the State of Haryana and the Saharan pur, 
Muzaifarnagar and Meerut districts of the State of Uttar Pradesh and the 
boundary between the Gwrgaon district of the State of Haryana and 
the Bulandshahr and Aligarh districts of the State of Uttar Pradesh 30 
which at present is the deep stream of the river Yamuna, shall be altered 
to and replaced by fixed boundaries. 
(2) 'I11e said fixed boundaries shall be demarcated by an authority 
apl,)Ointed in this behalf by the Central Government 80 as to be generally 
·In conformity with the heel bouIldaries deserQJed in the Schedule. 35 
(3) For the purposes of such demarcatiotl,-
(a) ,the deciSion of the said authority on any matter relating to 
the interpretation of any part of the description of the fixed boundary 
'given in the Schedule shall be final; 
(b) the said authority shall have power to determine the location 40 
of the points at which the boundary pillars shall be constructed and 
to specify the State Government which shall be responsible for the 
oonstnwtion. and maintenance of the boundary pillars at such points 
accoRling to such specificntions as that authori~y may indicate (tbe 
~ 

pillars of the same specifications being apportioned, as far asprac- . 
ticable, equally between the two State Governments), the decision 
of the said authority in regard to these matters being final; 
(c) it shall be lawful for the said authority and for any person 
5 specified by such authority to enter upon and survey any area in the 
vicinity of any of the fixed boundaries described in the Schedule 
and to do all other acts as may be necessary. 
(4) The authority referred to in sub-section (2) shall also prepare 
maps of the areas on both sides of the fixed boundaries and in the 
10 vieinity thereof showing-
(a) the present decp stream line and the fixetl boundary in 
relation to it; and 
(b) the names and boundaries of the villages on both sides of the 
fixed boundary as indicated by the State C.overllment concerned with 
IS reference to the revenue records of that Government, 
20 
and send authenticated copies thereof to the Central Govet"nment and to 
the State Governments of HarY8J1a and Uttar Pradesh. 
4. (1) As from the appointed day,-
(a) there shall be added to the State of Haryana. all the terri-
tories of the State of Uttar Pradesh which lie on the Haryana side of 
the fixed boundaries, and the said territories shall thereupon cease 
to form part of, the State of Uttar Pradesh; and 
(b) there shall be added to the State of Uttar Pradesh all the 
terll'itories of the State of Haryana which lie on the Uttar Pradesh 
25 side of tbe fixed boundarie'i, and the said territories shall thereupon 
cease to form part of the State of Haryana. 
(2) Each of the State Governments o~ Haryana and Uttar Pradesh 
thall, by order in the Official Gazette of the State, provide for the ad-
ministration, as from the appointed day, of the terIitories transferred to 
30 that State under sub-section (1) by including them or any part of them 
in such district, sub-division, police station or other administrative unit 
as may be specified in the order. 
5. As from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Constitu-
tion, under the heading "I. THE STATES"-
35 (a.) for the ·entry against !'13. Uttar Pradesh", the following shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"The territories. which immediately before the commence-
ment of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province 
known as the United Provim:es or were being administered as if 
40 they formed p,art of that Province, the territories specified in 
clause (b) of sub..section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar 
Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968, and the territories 
specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the 
Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alterati&n of Bound8lfies) Act, 19'18, 
45 but excluding the territories specified in clause (a) of sub-
Transfer 
of terri-
tories. 
Amen~_ 
ment 
of First 
Schedule 
tn the 
Con....-titu-
tion. 

Construc-
tion of 
delimita-
tion 
orders. 
Provision 
all to 
sitting 
members. 
4 
section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (A1t1er~­
tion of Boundaries) Actr 1968, and the territories specified m 
clause (4) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Haryana and 
Uttar Plradesh (Alteration of Bound~ries) Act, 1978."; 
(b) for the entry against "17. Haryana", the following shall be 5 
substituted, namely:-
"The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of 
the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 and the territories specified 
in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of, the Haryana and 
Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1978, but ex- 10 
cluding the territories specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
of section 4 of that Act.". 
PART III 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES 
6. As from the appointed day, any reference in any order relating to 
delimitation of, parliamentary constituencies, assembly constituencies or 
council constituencies-
15 
(a) (i) to the State of Haryana, shall be construed as including 
the territories transferred to that State from the State of Uttar Pra- 20 
desh under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 4, but excluding 
the territories transferred from the State of, Haryana to the State of 
Uttar Pradesh under clause (b) of that sub-section; 
(li) to any di~trict, sub-division, police-station or other adminis-
trative unit in the State of Haryana, shall be construed as includinR' 25 
that part of the territories, if any, transferred to that State, which is 
included in that distriC't, sllb-division. police-station or other adminiS-
trative unit by order made unGer sub-section (2) of section 4; 
(b) (i) to the State of, Uttar Pradesh, shall be construed as in-
cluding the territories transferred to that State from the State of 30 
Harvana under c1aw;{'I (h) of !';ub-!';ection (1) of section 4, but ex-
cludinR' the territories transferred from the State of Uttar Pradesh 
to the State of Haryana undf'r clause Ca) of that sub-section; 
(ii) to any district, sub-division, polic~station or other adminis-
trative unit in the State of Uttar Pradesh, shall be construed as in- 35 
eluding that part of the territories, if any, transferred to that State, 
which jg included in that district. sub-djvigion, police-station or other 
administrative unit hy order made under sub-section (Z) of section 4. 
'1. (1) Every sitting member of the House of the People representing 
any parliamentary constituency the extent of which has been altered by 40 
virtue o! the orovi<;jnm: of thi!'; Act shall, notwithstanding such altera-
tion, be deemed, as from the appointed day, to have been elected to that 
House by that ~onstituency as so altered. 
(2) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the State 
of. Haryanaor Uttar Pradesh representing any assembly constituency the 45 
extent of which has been altered by virtue of th~ provisions of this Act 
• , 

S 
.hall, notwithstanding such alteration, be deemed, as from the appointed 
day, to have been elected to the said Legislative Assembly by that consti-
tuency as so altered. 
(3) Every sitting member of the Legislative Council of the State of 
Uttar Pradesh representing any council constituency the extent of which 
S has been altered by virtue o£ the provisions of this Act shall, notwith-
standing such alteration, be deemed, as from the appointed day, to have 
been elected to the said Legislative Council by that constituency as so 
altered. 
10 
15 
PART IV 
HIGH COURTS 
8. (l) Except as hereinafter provided-
(<<) the jurisdiction of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana 
shall, as from the appointed day, extend to the territories trapsf~rred 
by this Act from the State of Uttar Pradesh to the State of Haryana; 
and 
(b) the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall, as from that 
day, have no jurisdiction in respect of the said territories. 
Extenaion 
of juris.. 
diction of, 
and trans-
fer of 
proceed-
ings to, 
High 
Court of 
Punjab 
nnd 
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Judicature at Haryana. 
20 Allahabad immediately before the appointed day as are certified by the 
Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place of accrual 
of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which 
ought to be heard ami decided by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana 
Shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the 
25 High Court of Punjab and Haryana. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), 
but save as hereinafter provided, the High Court of J·udicature at Allaha-
bad shall have, and the High Court of Punjab and Haryana shall not 
have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for 
30 leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review and other 
proceedings, where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any 
order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad before the 
appointed day: 
PrClovided that if, after such proceedings have been entertained by the 
35 High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, it appears to the Chief Justice 
of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court 
of Punjab and Haryana, he shall order that they shall be so trans£erred 
and sueh proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly. 
(4) Any order made by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad-
40 (a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to 
the High Court of Punjab and H8II'yana by virtue of sub-section (2), 
or 
(!» in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court of 
Judicature at Allahabad retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub-sec-
4S tion (3), 

Extension 
at juris-
diction of, 
and trans-
fer of pro-
ceediags 
to, High 
Court at 
Allahabad. 
6 
llhall, for all purposes, have effect not only as an order of tWe High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad, but also as an ol'der made by the HighCowt 
of Punjab and Hatryana. 
(5) Subject to any rule made or direction given by the High Court 
,of Punjab and Haryana, any such person who immediately before the 5 
appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of 
Judicature at Allahabad as may be specified in this behalf by the Chief 
Justice of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana having regard tOo the 
transfer of territories from the State of Uttar Pradesh to the State of 
Haryana, shall be recognised as an advocate entitled to practise in the 10 
High Court of Punjab and Haryana. 
9. (1) Except as hereinafter provided-
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court of Judicature at Allaha-
bad shall, as from the appointed day, extend to the territories trans-
ferred by this Act from the State' of Haryana to the State of Uttar 15 
Pradesh; and 
(b) the High COllil't of PUlljab and Haryana shall, as from that 
day, have no jurisdiction in respect of the said territories. 
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Punjab and 
Haryana immediately before the appointed day as are certified by the 20 
Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place of accrual 
of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which 
ought to be heard and decided by the High Court of Judicature at Allaha-
bad shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to 
the High Court of JUdicature at Allahabad. 25 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-s~ctions (1) and (2), 
but save as hereinafter provided, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana 
shall have, and the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall not have, 
jurisdiction to entertain, hf'.Br or dispose of appeals, applications for leave 
to appeal to the Supreme Court, applicatiOns for review and other pro- 30 
ceedings, where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any 
order passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana before the ap-
pOinted day: 
Provided that if, after such proceedings have been entertained by 
the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, it appears to the Chief Justice 35 
of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad, he shall order that they shall be so trans-
ferred and such p,roce.edings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly. 
(4) Any order made by the High Court, of Punjab and Haryana-
(a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred 40 
to the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad by virtue of sub-section 
(2); or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section (3), 
shall, for all purposes, have effect not only as an order of the High Court 45 
of Punjab and Haryana, but also as an order made by the High CoUl't of 
Judicature at Allahabad. 

7 
(5) Subject to any rule made or directioon given by the nigh CcnJl't of 
Judtcature at Allahabad, any such person who imMediately before the 
appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana as may: be specifted in this behalf by the Chief 
5 Justice 0'1. the High Court of 'udicature at Allahabad 'h'av1ng regaM to 
the transfer of territories from the State of Haryana to the State of 
Uttar Pradesh shall be recognised as an advocate entitled to practise in 
the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. 
10. Any person who immediately before the appointed day is an advo-
10 cate entitled to practise 'in the High Cburt of Punja,b and Haryana or the 
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad and was authorised to appear in 
any proceedings transferred under section 8 or section 9 shall have the 
right to appear in 'the High Court to which the proceed1ngshave been 
transferred in relation to those prc.ceedings. 
15 11. For the purposes of sections 8 and 9,-
20 
30 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed 'to be pending in the ,High Court 
of PUlljab and Haryana or the 'High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. 
until that Court has disposed of all iuues between tie parties, 
including any issue with respect to the taxation of the costs of the 
proceedings and shall include appeals, applicatfons for leave to appeal 
to the Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for revision 
and petitions for tvrits; 
(b) references to the High Court of Punjab and Haryana or the 
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shaUbe coturtrued as inclua-
ing references to a Judge or division court thereof, and references to 
an arder made by a court or a JUdge shall be conStrued as including 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree pasaedor made by that 
court or Judge. 
PART V 
AUTHORISATION OF F.XPENDITURE 
12. (/) As from the appointed day" any Act passed by the Legislature 
of the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh befcre that day for th& appro-
priation of any moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of th& State ,to. meet 
any expenditure in Il'espect of any part of the financial year in which the 
35 appointed day falls shall have effect also in relation to the territories 
transferred to that State by the provisions of Part II and it shall be 
lawful for the State Government to spend any amount on afty service in 
those territories out of the amount authorised by such Act to be expended 
for that service during the ftnancial year in that Sta~. 
40 (2) The Governor of Haryana or of uttar Pradesh may, after the 
appointed day, authorisesueh expenditure from the Consolidated Fund ~f 
the State as he deems necessary for any purpose or service in the te~­
tories transferred to that State for a period of not more than s~x man .s 
beginnin'g with the app~tnted day ~ding the sanction of suen expen(il-
45 ture by the Legislature of the State. 
Ri,ht to 
appear In 
any pro-
ceedings 
transfer-
red under 
section 8 
or section 
9. 
Interpre-
tation. 
Appro-
priation at 
moneys 
for expen-
diture in 
transfer-
red terri-
tories 
under 
existing 
,appropria-
tion Acts. 

Reports 
relatini to 
accounts 
of Har-
yana and 
Uttar 
Pradesh. 
Land and 
looda. 
Arrears 
of taxes" 
Right to 
recover 
loans and 
advances. 
, ~:::-~. 
Refund 
of taxes 
collected 
in excess. 
Deposits. 
Contracts. 
8 
13. The reports of the Co~ptroller and Auditor-General of India 
referred to in clause (2) of aTticle 151 of the Constitution relating to the 
accounts of the State of Haryanaor .uttar Pradesh in respect of any 
financial yearr ending before the appointed day shall be submitted to the 
Governor of each of the States of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh who shall ~ 
cause them to be laid before the Legislature of the State. 
PART VI 
ApPORTIONMENT OF ASSETs AND LIABILITIES 
14. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all 
stores, articles and other goods belonging to the State of Haryana or 10 
Uttar Pradesh in the transferred territories shall, as from the appointed 
day, pass to the State to which the territories are transferred. 
(2) In this section, the expression "land" includes immovable pro-
perty of every kind and any rights in or over such property. 
15. The right of the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh to recover IS 
arrears of any tax or duty on property situate in the transferred terri-
tories, including land revenue, or to. recover arrears of any other tax or 
duty in any case where the place of assessment of that tax or duty is in 
the transferred territories shall belong to the State to which the territories 
life transferred. 20 
16. The right to recover any loans or advance~ made before the 
appointed day by the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh to any local 
body, society, ag:rlculturist, or other person in the transferred territories 
Shall, belong to the State to wh;ch the terri tones are transferred. 
17. The liabil1ty of the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh to refund 2S 
any tax or duty on propert~, ~tuate in tlie transferred territories includ-
ing land revenue, collected in excess shall be the liability of the State to 
which the territories are fransferred, and the liability of the State 0·£ 
Haryana or Uttar Pradesh to refund any 9ther tax or duty collected in 
excess in any case where the place of assessment of the tax or duty is 30 
in the transferred territories shall also be the liability of the State to 
which the territ.ories alfe transferred. 
18. The liability of the State of Hary8na or Uttar Pradesh in respect 
of any civil deposit or local fund deposit made in the transferred terri-
tories shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State to 35 
which the territories are transferred. ' 
19. (1) Where, before the appointed day, the State of Haryana or 
Uttar Pradesh has made any contract in the exercise of its executive 
power for any purposes of the State, that contract shall be deemed to 
have been made in the exercise of the executive power- 40 
.JIl) if such purposes are, as korn that day, purposes relatable 
exclu~ively to the transferred territories, of the State to which the 
territories are transferred.; a~d 
~) in any other case, of the State which rna.d~ ~ c;ontract, 

ind aU rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue, under 
any such contract shall, to the extent to which they are rights or liabili-
ties of the State which made the contract, be the rights or liabilities of 
the State specified in clause (a) or clause '(b) above. 
S (2) For the purposes of this sectidn, there shall be deemed to be 
included in thei liabilities which have accrued or may accrue under 
arty eonirac~ 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any eourt 
6l' other tribunal in proceedings relating to the contract; and 
1') (0) any liability in respect of' e)CJ>el1S(~s incurred in or in con-
nection with any such proceedings. 
(3) This section shall have effect subj~ to the other provisions o~ this 
Part relating to the apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, gua-
rantees and .other ftnaneial,obligations. 
15 20. Where, iinmediately before the appointed day, the State of Haryana 
or Uttar Pradesh is subject to any liability in respect of an actionable 
wrong, other than breach of contract, that liability shall,- . 
(a) if the cause of action arOSe wholly within the transferred 
territories, be a liability of the State to which the territories are 
Liability 
in respect 
of action-
able 
wrong. 
20 transferred; and 
(b) in any other case, continue to be a liability of the State 
which,. immediately before that day, was subject to such liability. 
21. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of Haryana 
or Uttar Pradesh is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a 
25 registered co-operativesociety, that liability shall,--
Liability 
as 
guarantor 
of co-
(4) if the area of the society's operations is limited to the tranll- operative 
ferred territories, be a liability oil the State to which the territories societies. 
are transferred; and 
(b) in any other case, continue to be a liability of the State 
which, immediately before that day, was subject to such liability. 
22. If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or 
liability of the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of 
this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance with that provision. 
23. Where the States of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh agree that the 
3S benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be appor-
tioned between them in a manner other than that provided for in the 
foregoing prOVisions of this Part, then, notwithstanding anything con-
tained therei~ the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be 
apportioned in the manner agreed upon. 
40 24. Where, by virtue of any aI. the provisions of this Part, either of 
the States of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh becomes entitled to any property 
or obtains any benefits or becomes subject to' any liability, and the Central 
Government, on a reference made within a period of three years from 
the appointed day by either of the States, is of opinion that it is just 
4S and equitable that that property or those benefits should be transferred 
to, or shared with, the other State or that a contribtltion towards that 
liabiliiy should be made by the other State, the said property or benefits 
Items in 
suspense. 
Appor-
tionment 
of assets 
or 
liabilities 
by dgree-
ment. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
. ment to 
order allo-
cation or 
adjust-
ment in 
certain 
cases. 
, \ 

Djebdl-
ttitet()be 
thUaed 
on the 
CoDIOUda-
t.d t\and. 
State 
Financlal 
Corpora-
tlOll4 and 
State 
EIectri-
cliP 
Boards. 
Territo-
rial 
extent of 
law •• 
Power to 
adapt 
law •. 
Powe~. to 
construe 
..... 
16 
shah be allocated in such manner between the two States, or the. otller 
$ta~e shali make to the State subject to the liability such contributiOn 
In respect thereot, as the Central Government may, after consultation 
with the two State Governments, by order, determine. 
~ A1lisums.paya~le by either the State of Haryana or Uttar Pr~desh 5 
til tpe other State by virtue of the provisions of this Par;t sha,ll be 
eharged on the Consoliclated Fund of the State by whioh such sums are 
payable. 
I'ART VII 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANBOUS PROVlSIONS 
M. As from the appointed day,-
(4) the Financial Corporations constituted under the State 
Financial Corporations Act, 1951, for the States of Haryana and 
Uttar Pradesh; and 
, 
10 
(b) the State Electricity Boards 'constituted under the Electri- 15 
city (~upply) Act, 1948, for the said States, 
shall be deemed to have been constituted for those States with their 
areas as altered by the provisions of section 4. 
27; The provisions of section 4 shall not be deemed to have effected 20 
any ch~nge in the territories to which any law in force immediately 
before the appointed day extends or applies, and territorial references 
in any such law to the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh shall, until 
otherwise provided by a competent Legislature or other competent 
autboxity, be construed as meaning the territories within that State 2S 
immediately before the appointod day. 
28. For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law in rela-
tion to the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh, the appropriate Govern-
ment may, before the expiration ot two years from the appointed day, 
by order, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether 30 
by way of repeal or amendment as may be necessary or expedient, and 
thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations 
or modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a com-
petent Legislature or other competent authority. 
Expla'l4tion.-In this section, the expression "appropriate Govem- 35 
ment" means as respects any law relatina to a matter enumerated in the 
Union List, the Central Government, and as respects any other law, the 
State Government. 
29. NotWithstanding that no prOvision or insufficient provision has 
~n. made for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, 40 
any court, tribunal or authority, required or empowered to enforce such 
laW<nlay, for the purpose of facilitating its application in relation to the 
St.te. of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh, construe the law in such manner, 
without ,aftecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper in' regard 
to the matter before the court, tribunal Or authority. 4S 
63 of 1951. 
54 of 1948. 

2 of 1974. 
Ii 
IA,. Wl.lere, iJJJ.mediately before the appointed day, the State of ~- Lelll 
yana or Uttar Pradesh is a party to any Jegal proceedings with Il"espect to procee4. 
any property, rights or liabilities transferred to the other State under lnp. 
tl).iJ A<;t, the other State shall be deemed to be substituted for the State 
5 from which such property, rights or liabilities are transferred as a party 
to those proceedings, or added as a party thereto, as the case may be, and 
the proceedings may continue accordingly. 
31.. (1~ Every proceeding pending immediately before the appointed Transfer 
day before a court (other than a High Court), tribunal, authority or om- of 
10 cer in any area which on that day falls within the State of Haryana or pe:!:: 
Uttar Pradesh shall, if it is a proceeding relatable exclusively to any part r:eJ. • 
of the territories which as from that day are the territories of the other 
~, lltand. tr~erred. to the cCkrespondin:g court, tribunal" authority or 
04'llc;er, in the other State. 
15 (2) If any question aJrises as to whether any proceeding shoy.ld stand 
transfelTed under SUb-section (1), it shall be referred to the High Court 
ha~g jurisdiotion in respect of the area in which the court, tribunal, 
authority or officer before which, or before whom, such proceeding is 
pending on the appointed day, is functioning, and the decision of that 
20 High Court shall be final. 
(3) In tbis sectiOll,-
(q) "proceeding" includes any suit, case or appeal.; and 
(b) "corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer" in a 
State means--
2S (i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or be-
fore Whom, the proceeding wvuld have lain if the proceeding had 
been instituted afief' the appointed etay, or 
(ii) in case of aoubt, such court, tribunal, authority or officer 
in that State as may be determined after the appointed day by 
30 the Government of that State, or before the appointed day by 
the Government of the other State, to be the corresponding court, 
tribunal, authority or officer. 
32. (1) It shall be lawful for the State Government which is responai- Construe. 
ble for the construction of any boundary pillar under sub-section (3) of tion of 
35 section 3 to cause such pillar to be constructed and maintained and no b?undary 
suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the State p:llars, 
Government or any of its officers for anything in good faith done or e c. 
intended to be done under this section. 
(J) Tl\e boundary pillars shall be inspected jOintly by the officers 
40 of ~ State Governments of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh in accordance 
with such rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf. 
(~) \1(hoever wilful~ removes or injures any boundary pillars shall 
be pUn~she.ble with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
m~ extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
45 (~) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, an offence under sub-section (3) may be inquired intO 
and tried by a court in either of the States of Haryana and Uttar Pradeeh. 

Validity 
Of demar-
cation 
done 
before 
commen· 
cement 
of Act. 
Effect of 
provisions 
inconllill-
tent with 
other 
lSWL 
Power to 
remove 
dlftlcuL 
ties. 
Power to 
make 
rul_ 
.. 12 
33. All things done and all steps taken. before the commencenierit of 
this Act in connection with the demarcation of the fixed baundariesBhall, 
in so far as they are ir. conformity with the provi.sions of sub-sections (2) 
and (3) of section 3, be deemed to have been done in accordance with 
law. 5 
34. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithatandin& JIIl1 
law, custom or usage which is inconsistent therewith. 
35. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of thfs 
Act, the President may, by notified order, do anything, not inconsistent 
with such provisions which appears to him to be necessary or expedient 10 
for the purpose of removing the difficulty. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
, 
36. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
, ,.. 
Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act. IS 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty day. which 
may be comprised in one session or in tw,o or more succesSive sessions, 
and if before the exp~ry of the session immediately following the session 10 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses asree in maldDg any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi-
fication or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any- 125 
thing previously done under that rule. 
THE' SCHEDULE 
[See section 3 (2)] 
Description of the fixed bound41'ies 
l. The fixed boundary between the Karnal and Sonepat districts of 
Haryana on the one side and the Saharanpur, Muzaffarnagar and M.erut 
districts of Uttar Pradesh on the other side shall be the present deep 
stream line. 
30 
2. (1) The fixed boundary between the Gurgaon district of Haryana 35 
on ~, one side and the Bulandshahr and Aligarh districts ot Uttar 
PradeSh lim the other side shall commence from the point where the 
present deep stream line crosses the north .. west ,boundary of BASANT-
PUR and proceed along the said boundary up to the. point where it 
crOS$es the north bank of the river Yamuna as ascertained at the 1971-7240 
river survey' conducted by the Survey of India. 

13 
(2) It shall then PJ;oceed along the said north bank up to the pOint 
where it meets the boundary between BASANTPUR and SALARPUR; 
thence along the northern and eastern bc:undaries of SALARPUR, the 
eastern boundary of ASALA TPUR, the north-eastern boundary of 
S DADSIA, the northern and north-eastern boundaries of KIRA WLI, the 
northern boundary of LALPUR, the northern and eastern boundaries of 
MAHABATPUR, tile eastern boundary of MUAZZAMABAD, the 
eeatem Poundary of BHASKOLA, the eastern and northern boundariea 
of RAJPUR KALAN including CHAK PHULERA, the northern and 
10 eastern boundaries of SHIKAaGAH, the northern and eastern boundaries 
of AMINPUR, the eastern boundary of CHIRSI, the eastern boundary 
of AKBARPUR. the eastern boundary of MOZAMABAD-MAZRA. 
SHEIKHPUR, the eastern boundary of SHEIKHPUR, the eastern boun-
dary of MANJHA WLI, the eastern boundary of GARHI BEGAMPUR. 
IS the sou"th-eastern boundary of DALELGARH, the eastern boundary of 
N~G:LA-MAZRA-CHANDPUR, the northern and eastern bounda,ies 
of SHAHJA!fANPUR, the eastern boundary of LATIFPUR, the eastern 
boundary of PARASRAMPUR alias DULEHPUR, the eastern boundary 
of MAKANPUR. the north-eastern Qoundary of W ~IPUR, the western. 
20 northern and eastern boundaries of SHEIKHPUR. the northern and 
the north-eastern boundalfies of BEHRAMPUR, and the ncrth-western 
boundary of NANGLIA up to the point where it meets the present deep 
stream line. 
(3) From this point, it shall proceed along the present deep stream 
25 line following the boundary on Uttar Pradesh side of NANGLIA, 
JHUPPA, BAGHPUR KALAN, BAGHPUR KHURD, SOLRAH, BHOLRA, 
DOS'I1PUR, GURW ARI and CHANDHAT up to the junction of the old 
main .trelln'l c:rf the river Yamuna and the channel or branch of the 
river commonly known as the Zair Nala, and thence along the present 
30 deep stream line up to the southern boundary of MAHOLI. 
3S 
, .. I 
E.rpZanation.-In this paragraph,-
(a) any reference to the boundary of a village named in sub-
paragl"aphs (1) and (2) shall be construed as a reference to the 
boundary of that village as ascertained and mapped at the Settle-
ment Ilf Gurgaon district completed in 1943; 
(b) the references to the present deep stream line at the end 
of sub-paragraph (2) and the beginning of sub-paragraph (3) shaD 
be construed as references to the present deep stream line pertain-
ing to the old main stream of the river Yamuna. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONs 
At present the boundary between the States of 'Haryana and ~ 
Pradesh is partly fixed with reference to the boundaries of adja~ 
border villages and pa·rt1y variable, being the deep stream of the· river 
Yamuna which often changes its course. Out of the five border districts 
of Haryana and six of Uttar Pradesh, the boundary between Ambala ana 
Kurukshetra district of Haryana arid Sallaranpur district of Uttar 
Pradesh is fixed, and so is the boundary between Gurgaon distriet of 
Haryana and Mathura district of Uttar Pradesh. The deep stream of the 
Yamuna has all along been declared to be the boundary between Kamal 
and Sonepat districts of Haryana on the one side and Saharanpur,lf ... f. 
farnagar and Meerut districts of Uttar Pradesh on the other, and also 
between GU!'gaon district of Haryana and Bulandshahr and Aligarh dis-
~ricts of Uttar Pradesh. 
2. Attempts were made from time to time in the past to replaee the 
river boundary by a fixed boundary, particularly in the portion covering 
Ballabhgarh tehsil of Gurgaon district, but for one reason or anothel', 
these attempts remained inconclusive. Latterly, after the establishment 
of Haryana as a separate State, the disagreement between the two 'State 
Governments over the exact location of the river boundary between 
Gurgaon and Bulandshahr distritts grew more and more pronounced. 
3. With a view to settling once for all the problems arising out of 
the fluctuating boundary, the then Chief Ministers of Uttar Pradesh and. 
Haryana had suggested to the then Horne Minister, Shri Uma Shankat 
Dikshit, in May, 1974 that the latter might a'gree to arbitrate in this matter 
in his personal capacity, and that the Award of his arbitration would be 
, accepted by beth the parties. Accordingly, Shri Dikshit gave his Award 
on 14th February, 1975, recommending the replacement of the variable 
boundary by a fixed boundary described therein. The Bill seeks to give 
effect to the Award. 
4. Clause 27 of the Bill provides tha~ the existing laws shall continue 
to be in force in the transferred territories until otherwise provided by 
a competent legislature or other competent authority. To facllltate 
identification of the transferred territories by t~e authorities who have 
to implement the laws, provision has been made for the demarcation of 
the fixed boundary on land and preparation and supply of maPs to the 
Governments of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. 
5. The Bill also makes the necessary supplemental and incidental pro-
visions relating to the representation in Parliament and State Legisla-
tures, transfer of jurisdiction between the High Courts of Punjab and 
Haryana and Allahabad, authorisation 'Off expenditure, apportionment 
of assets and liabilities and certain other matters. 
6. As required by the proviso to article 3 of the Constitution, this Bill 
was referred by the President to the Legislatures of the States of Haryana 
and Uttar Pradesh for expression of their ,views. 
14 
-

IS 
7. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions of the 
Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 3rd Ma.y, 1978. 
DHANIK LAL MANDAL. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER AR'1'lCLES 3 AND 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. S-U014/3/78-SR, dated the 3rd May, 1978 from 
Sbri Dhanik Lal MandaI, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Mairs 
to the Secretary, Lok Sabha]. 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill 
to provide for the alteration of boundaries of the States of H¥yana and 
Uttar Pradesh and other matters connected therewith. recommends the 
introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha under the proviso to article 3, and 
its consideration under article 117 (3) of the Constitution. 

;. ~ , ~ ~ , : .- . , l , 
Clause 2.-At present, the boundary between the ~nal. an~ S9aepat 
districts of the State of Haryana and the Saharanpu~, Muzaft'arnag8'1' and 
Meerut districts of the State of U,ttar Pradesh in the northern sector 
and the boundary between Gurgaon district of the State of Haryana and 
,t •. BUilandsbabr and· AUgll'h: districts 'of tlw"'State. of Uttar' e.adeah in 
the southern sector, is Ute deep ,stream C)f the ri!Ye~ Yamuna as it emerges 
af~r ~rch rainy season. A survey of the river Y lWluna was cond\.J.C.ted by 
the,"5b.rveybf In:dia during '1911-72 .. In order to'take illto aCCbunt any 
sttbs~'tcha'nges intbe deep stream, the de¢t>~\lteani :of yatittm:a'W8s 
again verified and determined by the Survey of Illdi'a during the"months 
.of. Nove~ber, 1974, December, 1974, January, 1975 and Felmltp;'Y, 1975. 
Su):)..cla •. (g) d.es th,e "present deep stTeam.line" which forms the 
basis of the fixed Qoun,daries as defined in sub-clause (c). 
Clause {~d SChedu.Ze.;-The inter-State bo~dary immediately be-
iore the transfer of territories would be the deep stream of Yamuna as 
it would emerge at the end of the rainy season preceding the transfer. 
Sub-clause (1) seeks to replace the present deep stream boundaries by 
fixed bOWldaries as described in the Schedule. The Schedule to the Bill 
describes the fixed boundary, but it has to be actually located on the 
ground and demarcated after making the necessary survey. Su1H:Jause 
(2), therefore, provides for the demarcation being done by an authority 
appointed by the Central Government. 
The description of the fixed boundary in the Schedule which follows 
the Award given by Shri Uma Shankar Dikshit is in terms of "the present 
deep stream line" and in terms of inter-village boundaries as ascertained 
and mapped at the Settlement of Gurgaon district completed in the year 
1943. Suh-clause (3) seeks to empower the demarcating authority to 
interpret and take into account the relevant Il'ecords. This sub-clause 
also seeks to confer necessary powers on the demarcating authority to 
conduct survey in the area concerned and to determine the points at which 
the boundary pillars shall be located and the State which shall be respon-
sible for the cons1:auction and maintenance of each such pillar. 
As stated above, the village boundaries mentioned in the Schedule 
relate to the vear 1943. Since then, on account of change in the course 
of Yamuna a~d consequent transfer of land from one State to another, 
the village boundaries have undergone change. Sub-clause (4), there-
fore, provides for the preparation of maps showing the "present deep 
stream line" the fixed boundary in relation thereto and the names and 
boundaries of villages as they exist at the time of their preparation; and 
for authenticated copies of such maps being sent to the Central Govern-
ment and to the Governments of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. 
Clause 4.-Sub-clause (1) provides for the transfer to the State of 
Haryana of the territories of the State of Uttar Pradesh lying on the 
Haryana side of the fixed boundary and for the transfer to the State of 
Uttar Pradesh of the territories of the State of Haryana lying on the 
16 

17 
Uttar P,ddersh side of the ;fixed boundarY,,' Sub-clause (2) 'provides for 
the i!lsue oflnotifled ord~rS, by the two S~~e Governlntmts proViding for 
the adm1histrationof the'transferred territorIes by induding them or any , 
~t, ~f tJilern in such, district, sub-division, police-statk¥l or other adrhi-
nitk'atw~~,as, DiUlY pe sPIIiiICitj~; in the QrdeJ.1S. 
~Plf'us~ ':,5.~T.Jlis ~w.we aeek~ to 'make cOJlsequeriU'f.1 amendments .in 
th~ .. ij.rst,~c~qle. ,tq ~ COIUtitutioa 
'·CZ4~ ·~.~i~ cllrtJse provides ''ltYr' 'the n~essarY adjusttnent at·:the ' .. 
parliamentary, assembly and council oonslituencies. 
iel~~ Y,...iThhi ClaUse P,tovid~ that the 'sitting members of th~ H'ouse 
of thle' People and the State Legislatures representing' the constituencies 
altered by the provisions of ~ Btu will continue to reptelMmt thOte 
c~~c;:.ieJf'aa,alttred., ,. :l " .. ': 
Clauses 8 to n.-These C'lausesprovide' fIOIr thea1teration' .f,) the 
jurisdiction of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana and the High 
Court of Judicature at Allahabad. They also provide for the transfer 
of proceedings pending in either of the High Courts to the other High 
Court and enable advocates already engaged in such proceedings to 
appear and to act in the other High Court in relation to those proceedings. 
Clau.se 12.-This clause makes necessary provisions to enable the two 
States to incur expenditure on the administration of the territories 
transferred to them until the expenditure is specifically sanctioned by 
the appropriate Legislature. 
Clause 13.-This clause provides that the audit reports of the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts of either 
of the States in respect of any financial year ending before the appointed 
day shall be submitted to the Governor 0If each 0If the two States who 
shall cause them to be laid before the State Legislature concerned. 
Clauses 14 to 25.-These clauses relate to the apportionment of the 
assets and liabilities of the State Governments in relation to the terri-
tories transferred from one State to another and follow generally the 
corresponding provisions of the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration 
of Boundaries) Act, 1959 or the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 or the 
Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968, 
Clause 26.-This clause seeks to adjust the jurisdiction of the Financial 
Corporations and the Electricity Boards of the States of Haryana and 
Uttar Pradesh in relation to the transferred territories. 
Clauses 27 to 31.-These clauses contain provisions re'gaa'ding conti-
nuance of existing laws in the transferred territories, adaptation of 
these laws, power of courts and tribunals to construe laws, legal proceed-
ings, etc, These provisions follow the corresponding provisions of the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956, or the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh 
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968. 
Clause 32.-Sub-clause (1) provides for the construction and main-
tenance of the boundary pillars. Sub-clause (2) provides for the ins-
pection of the boundary pillars jointly by the officers of the two State 
Governments in accordance with such rules as the Central Government 
may make in this behalf. Sub-clause (3) makes wilful removal ~r 
injuring of a boundary pillar an offence. As the boundary pillars wou1d 

18 
be located on land which will lie in both the States, doubts mi,ht rm.e 
as to the place of trial of an offence under sub-clause (3). Hence, sub-
clause (4) provides that such offences may be tried in either State. 
Clczuse 33.-Some preliminary action had been initiated in the year 
1975 with a view to demarcating the boundary as recommended by 
Shri Uma Shankar Dikshit so as to minimise the interval between the 
date of passing of this Bill and the actual transfeT of territories. This 
clause seeks to validate the things already done and action already tak.m 
10 that to the extent possible, surveys, etc., already made could be 
utilised. 
CZrmsflB 34 and 35.-Theee clauses follow the corresponding provi-
sions of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 or the Bihar and Uttar 
Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968. 
Clause 36.-This clause enables the Government to make necessary 
rules t.o give effect to the provisions of the Act. 

:'1 ~ , FINANCIAL' MEMOltAN'DUIf 
Sub-clau~ (J)' Jf clause J of the Bill p~vid(ls for the demueatJnD 
of the ftxed boundary by an authority appointed in' this behalf by the 
Central Government. Sub-clause (4) of that clause a1so provide. that 
the said authority shall prepare maps of the areall on both sides of the 
fixed boundaries and in the vicinity ther,eof 'JhowJng the "present c:leep 
stream line" and the fixed boundary in relation to it and also the names 
and boundaries 'of' the villages on both sides of the fixed boundary. In 
pursuance of an agreement between the Governments of Haryan! and 
Uttar Pradesh, th, expellditure amounting to Rs. 7 ~,210 on the surveys 
of the river Yamuna carried out in 1971-72 and 1974-75 to determine the 
deep stream c~el and also tlte demarcation of tl-e boundary on the 
ground carried out in 1975-76 and 1976-77 has already been met by the 
two State Governments. The printing of maps by the Survey of India 
will involve a nen-recurring expenditure of about 'Rs. 54,600 from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. The Govemmel'lts of Haryana and Uttar 
Ptradesh have agreed to meet this expenditure also in equal proportions. 
The Bill does not involve any other expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund cJf India. . I . j 
19 ,,-

CllNalr :2&,: ,of" lth" ,Bill. e.ppwen ~ a~r,gpriate, ~~,nt· r,te 
adapt existmg ,1aWltI;n order. ~ .~cilitate ·their., ap,pli~M, .*0; 1iae:. S~ 
of Hary .... ··anq ;U:'~r lb'adesb. Tbis pow~r wilibe available.,·anlxW~.,' 
a period, Qof,twOri)le:tra,f~ the aPPtOin~ ~y. I' . 
)L ! . f. '. \~ , , . 
2., ,~~~attSe ,(2). of clau~, 3~ of the ;~ill empowers, the. ~tral 
Gov'ern~t to ~~ r$s for, ,39in~ iI\Spection o! the, boundary. pillars 
by tb.e ~m.cer~ of,~e,S~Go~ts,~.t\Htu'yan~,aii~ Uttar Pr,desh. 
3. d~use as;,'Of~l'rull empowersthe,een'tral'Oovernmel'l't to ultaa 
rul~s.,g~~a:~nY',:t~~')Wv~,~eci to the' ~~~i~'~ of the Bfll'Wfien .e~. " 
Suer.. rules, wnt be cQIlfined to matters df procedUre and other matters' of ~etail. . ',' " I :.' " . • , 
4. "I:Q.~·dM~tibn &f:le~latiV'e power- in.the clauses referred to' above 
is of' a normal' ~ifaTacter; , " ;! 
: Iq , " 
2~'1 • • . _ .L. 

Name 
• 
ExTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITVTION or INOlA 
• 
• 
• • 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
(Articles 1 and 4) 
I. THE STATES 
• • 
• 
TerritOries 
• 
• 
• 
13. Uttar Pradesh The territories which immediately before the com-
• 
I I. 'Haryan~ 
• 
• 
_. , . 
mencement of this Constitution wt're either com-
prised in the Province known as the United Provinces 
or were being administered as if they formed part 
of that Province and the territories specified in clause 
(b) at sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and 
Uttar Pradesh (Alteraticn of Boundaries) Act, 1968, 
but excluding the territories specified in clause (a) 
of sub-section,. (1) of section 3 of that Act . 
• , .'.1* • • 
'~terrHofi'cs speCified in si1b-sectiOn'{l)'~t~tion 
3 'of the 'Punjab Reorgani!lation ;Act,1986 . 
• • • • 
i· , \: 21 
" . 

tOK SABRA 
\-" 
A , 
BILL 
to provide for the alteration of boundaries of the States of Haryana and 
Uttar Pradesh and fOO' matters connected therewith, 
• 
(Shri Dhanik Lat Mandat, MiniBteT of State in the 
M inistTy of Home Affairs) 