THE TELEGRAPH LAWS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoI SABRA 
ON 19TH DBcIMBBR, 1960) 

LOK SABRA 
O.Jrri'genda 
to 
. 
THE TELSGRAPH LAWS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1960 
(To be...LAs introduced jJLLok Sabhal 
1. Page 1,-
in ser tat too top "Bill No. 89 of 19§Q fI 
2. Page 2, line 28,-
~ ''mean'' read "me ans" 
3. Corre ct line nwn bar on page 2. 
NEW DELHI:, 
Decem berl3_IL _19 00 • 
Agr ahayana ~2, 1882 (8 aka J 

THE TELEGRAPH LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
('As lNftODUCED IN LOK SABRA} 
A 
BILL 
funher- 110 ame-Bd the Iftdian Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Indian 
. Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the T~legraph Laws (Amendment) Short title. 
Act~ 196Q. 
S 2. III the Indian Telegrapn Act, 1885 (hereinafter referred to as Amenf ~t 
. • 0 section 3. the Tdegraph Act), m section 3, for clause (1), the following clause 
shan be substituted, namely:-
'(1) "telegraph" means any appliance, instrument, material 
or apparatlis used or capable of use for transmission or reception 
10 of signs, signals, writing, images and sounds or intelligence of 
any nature by wire, visual or other Electro-magnetic emissions, 
Radi~ waves or Hertzian waves, galvanic, electric or magnetic 
means; 
E.rplanation.-URadio waves" or "Hertzian waves" means 
IS electro-magnetic waves of frequencies lower than 3,000 giga-
cycles per seeoDd propagated in space without artificial guide: '. 
3. In section 7 of the Telegraph Act,- :ra::~~ 
(i) in sub-section (2), after clause (j), the following clause 
shall be inserteq, namely:-
20 "(jj) the qualifications to be possessed and the examina-
tions, if any, to be passed by the persons employed for the 

, 
i 
establishment, maintenance Or working of any teiegraph 
and the fees to be charged for admission to such examina-
tions;"; 
(ii) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:- $ 
"(5) Every rule made under this section shall be laid 
as soon as may be after it is made before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two succes-
sive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which 10 
it is so laid or the session immediately following, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any 15 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 
Amendment '- In the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933 (hereinafter 17 of 
of ICCtion a. referred to as the Telegraphy Act), in section 2,-
(a) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, 30 
namely:-
'(1) "wireless communication" means any transmission, 
emission or reception of signs, signals, writing, images and 
sounds, or intelligence of any nature by means of electricity, 
magnetism, or Radio waves or Hertzian waves, without the 25 
use of wires or other continuous electrical conductors 
between the transmitting and the receiving apparatus; 
ExpZanation.-"Radio waves" or "Hertzian waves" mean 
electro-magnetic waves of frequencies lower than 3,000 
gigacycles per second propagated in space without arti1lcial 20 
guide;'; 
(b) for clause (2A) , the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
• (2A) "wireless transmitter" means any apparatus, 
appliance, instrument or material used or capable of use for 55 
transmission or emission of wireless communication;'. 
Anaendment 5. In the Telegraphy Act, in section 10, afte,r sub-section (3), the 
of aedion 10. following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
II (4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as 
soon as may be after it is made before, each House of Parliament 40 

5 
JO 
a 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the SEssion in which it is so laid or the 
session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the :rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so 
however, that .any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
With the introduction of television in India, it has become neces-
sary to licence the possession and working of teleVision apparatus. 
Although the definition of "telegraph" in the Indian Telegraph 
Act, 1885 and the definition of 4'wireless communication" in the 
Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933 appear to be wide enough to 
cover transmission and reception of. visual images by teleVision, 
it is considered desixable to place, the matter beyond controversy by 
a suitable amendment of these two Acts. Opportunity has also been 
taken to amend section 7 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 so as to 
take power to prEscribe by rules the qualifications for persons 
employed in establishing, maintaining or working wireless telegraph 
systems, the examinations to be passed by them and the fees to be 
charged for admission to such examinations. 
NEW DELHI; P. SUBBARAYAN. 
The 15th November, 1960. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3 of the Bill which seeks to amend section 7 <C1f the Indian 
Telesraph Act, 1885, confers on the Central Government the power 
to make rWes prescribing the qualifications to be possessed and the 
examinatioos, if any, to be pamled by the persons employed in the 
establishment, maintenance or working of any telegraph and the 
fees to be charged for admission to such examinations. These are 
matters of detail and the delegation of legislative power with respect 
to them is of a nonna! character. 
, 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM nm INDIAN TELEGRAPH ACT, 1885 (13 OF 1885) 
• • • • 
DcftllltioQa. 3. In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject 
or context,-
Power to 
(1) "telegraph" means an electric, galvanic or magnetic 
telegraph, and includes appliances and apparatus for making, 
transmitting or receiving telegraphic, telephonic or other com-
munications by means af electricity, galvanism or magnetism: 
• • • • 
7. 
make rules * * • • fortbe con-
ducthoftele- (5) All rules made under this section shall be laid for not less ,rap s . 
than thirty days before each House of ParlIament as soon as possible 
after they are made and shall be subject to such modifications 88 
Parliament may make during the session in which they are so laid 
or the session immediately following. 
• * • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY ACT, 1933 (17 or 
1933) 
• • * • 
Ddloftion.. Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context,-
(1) "wireless communication" means the making, transmit-
ting or receiving of telegraphic, telephonic or other communica-
tions by means of electricity or magnetism without the use of 
wires or other continuous electrical conductors between the 
transmitting and the receiving apparatus; 
• • • • 
(2A) "wireless transmitter" means any apparatus, appliance, 
instrument or material used or capable of use in making or 
transmitting telegraphic, telephonic or other communication by 
means of electricity or magnetism without the use of wires or 
other continuous electrical condJuctors between the tranamittini 
mel the receiving apparatus; and 
• • • • 
8 

A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Indian 
Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933. 
Dr. P. Subbarayan, 
Minister oJ. Transport 
and Communications.) 