As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
- 5 JUL '971 
8W ~ 8z of 12z1 
THE PU~LIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED 
OCCUPANTS) BILL, 1971 
A 
BILL 
to p7'lOt1ide leor the eviction of unauthorised occupants from public premises 
and for certain incidental matters. 
liM R e1NcKed By Parliament in the Twmty-second Year {)f the Republic 
of lIadia asfoUows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Premises (Eviction of Un- Short title, ex-authorised Occupants) Act, 1971. tentand 
, , 
S (2) It extends to the whole of India. commence_ 
ment. 
10 
(8) It shall be deemed to have come into forceontne Ulth day of 
September, 1958 except sections 11. 19 and 20 which shall come into force 
at once. 
,2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requil'es,-
(a) "corporate authority" means--
(i) any company or Corporation referred to i~ sub-cl.ause 
(1), or 
(ii) the CorporatiOJll or any committee or the Authority 
referred, toio sub-cla\lse (2), 
IS of clause (e) of this section: 
Defi-
nitions. 
• • 

2 
(b) "estate officer" means an officer appointed as such by the 
Central Government under section 3; 
(c) "premises" means any land or any building or part of a 
building and includes,-
(i) the garden, grounds and outhouses, if any, appertaining S 
to such building or part of a building, and 
(ii) any fittings affixed to such building or part of a building 
for the more beneficial enjoyment thereof; 
(d) "prescribed" menns pres(;l'~bed by rules made under this Act; 
(e) "public premises" means any premises belonging to or taken 10 
on lease or requisitioned by, or on behalf of, the Central Gov'ernment, 
and includes-
(1) any premises belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on 
behalf of-
(i) any company as defined in section 3 of the Companies IS 1 of 1956. 
Act, 1956 in which not less than fifty~one per cent. of the 
paid-up share capital is held by the Central Government; and 
(ii) any Corporation (not being a company as defined in 1 'Of 1950. 
section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 or a local ~uthority) 
established by or under a Central Act and owned or cOQtrQlled ~Q 
by the Central Government; and 
(2) in relation to the Union territory of Delhi-
(i) any premises belonging to the Municipal Corporation 
of Delhi or any municipal committee or notified area com-
~~,~ ~ 
(ii) any premises belonging to the Delhi Development 
Authority whether such premises are in the possession of, or 
leased out by, the said Authority; 
(1) "rent", in relation to any public premises, means the considera-
tion payable periodically for the authorised occupation of the premises, 30 
and includes-
(i) . any charge for electricity, water or any other services in 
connection with the occupation of the premises. 
(ii) any tax (by whatever name caned) payable in respect of 
the premises, ~S 
where such char~e or tax is payable by the Central Government or 
the corporate authority; 
(g) "unauthorised occupation", in relation to any puhlic premises, 
means the occupation by any person of the public premises without 
a~thority for such occupation, .and inc,ludes the continuance in occupa- 40 
tion by any person of the publtc premIses after the authority (whether 
tw way of grant or any other mode of transfer) under which he was 
allowed to occupv the premises has expired or has been determined 
fo~ an~' reason whatsoever. 

3 
3. The Central Government may, by notification in 
Guette,-
the Official Appoint-
ment of 
estate 
(a) appoint such persons, being gazetted officers of Government officers. 
or officers of equiv~lent rank of the corporate authority, as it thinks 
5 fit, to be estate officers for the purposes of this Act; and 
(b) define the local limits within which, or the categories of 
public premises in respect of which, the estate officers shall exercise 
the powers conferred, and perform the duties imposed, on estate offi-
cers by or under this Act. 
10 4. (1) If the estate officer is of opinion that any persons are in unautho-
rised occupation of any public premises and that they should be evicted, 
the estate officer shall issue in the manner hereinafter provided a notice 
in writiDg calling upon all peJ.'sons concerned to show cause why an order 
of eviction should not be made. 
IS (2) The notice shaU-
(a) specify the grounds on which the order of eviction is pro-
posed to be made; and 
(b) require all persons concerned, that is to say, all persons who 
are, or may be, in occupation of, or claim interest in, the public pre-
20 miaes, to show cause, if any, against the proposed order on or before 
such date as is specified in the notice, being, a date not earlier than 
ten days from the date of issue thereof. 
(3) The estate officer shall cause tbe notice to be served by havinat it 
25 aftlxed on the outer door or some other conspicuous part of the public 
premises, and in such otlher manner as may be prescribed, whereupon 
the notice shall be deemed to have been duly given to all persons con-
cerned. 
(4) Where the estate officer knows or has rt'lasons to believe that any 
30 persons are in occupation of the public premises, then, without pl'ejudiee 
to the provisions of sub-section (3), he shall cause a copy of the notice 
to be served on every such person by post or by delivering or tendering 
it to that person or in such other manner as may be prelScribed. 
Issue ot 
notice to 
show 
cause 
against 
order of 
eviction. 
5. (1) If, after considering the cause, if any, shown by any person in Eviction 
pursuance of a notice under section 4 and any evidence be may produce of un-
35 in support of the same and after giving him a reasonable opportunity of authorised 
being heard, the estate officer is satisfied that the public premises are in occupants. 
unauthorised occupation, the estate officer may ~ke an order of eviction, 
for reasons to be recorded tberein, directing t'hat the public premises shaU 
40 be vacated, on such date as may be specified in the order, by all persons 
who may be in occupation thereof or any part thereof, and cause a copy 
of the order to be affixed on the outer door or some other conspicuous 
part of the public premises. 
(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with the order of eviction 
within thirty days of the date of its publication under sub-section (1), 
45 "he estate oftIeer or any other offi(!er duly authorised by the estate officer 
in this behalf may evict that person 1rom, and take possession of, the 
public premises and may, for that purpose, use such force as may be 
necessary. 

f>itpdaal 
of pJlO-o 
perty left 
on public 
premises 
by un-
authorised 
occu-
pants. 
Power 
to require 
payment 
of rent 
or 
damales 
in respect 
of pub-
lic pre-
mises. 
Powers of 
estate 
ofBcaln. 
Appeals. 
4. ~1) Where any persons bave been evic~d fTom allY pJibiic pJenaises 
under section 5, the e~tate ofticer may, after giving fourteen d~s' ~. 
to the personE: from whom possession of the public premises has been 
taken and after publishing the notice in at least one newspaper having 
cftocuiai'iol1 in the-locality, remOV2 or cause to be removed or dispose of 3 
by public auc4iion any property remaining on such premises. 
(2) Where any property is sold under sub-section (1), the sale pro-
c"eds thltflC,)f shall, after deducting the expenses of the sale 8l'rd the 
amount. if ~ny, due to tilleCefttral GGvernm~nt or tRe cOlpora~ autho-
rity on account of arrears of rent or damages or costs. be paid to such 10 
person Qr persons as may appear to the estate officer to be entitled to 
the same. 
Provided taat where the estate officer is unable to de'lide as to. the 
peuSOll or 1)eJ'SGJlS to whom the balance of the amount is ~ulJt or _ to 
the apportionment of; the same, he may refer ~ch dispuUt to r.h.e 4ivill IS 
court of competent jurisdiction and the decision of the court thereon shall 
be final. 
7. (1) Where any person is in arrears of rent payable in respect of any 
public premises, the estate officer may, by order, renufre that petson to 
Pili¥' tP.e ~ within sucb time and in such inat.aln:lelli:saa .~y b~specifted 20 
in the wder. 
(2) Where any person is, or has at any time been, in unauthorised 
occupation of any public premises, the estate offi~er may, having regard 
to such prinCiples of assessment of damages as may be prescribed, assess 
the dama~ PJ1. account of the use and occupation of such premise$ and ,25 
~, by Qrdel', require that person to pay the damages within such time 
and in such instalments as may be speCified in the order. 
(3) No order under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)" shall be made 
against any person until after the issue of a notice in writing to the person 
nl1ing upon him to show cause within such time.as may be _pacified in 30 
the nptice, why such order should not be made, and JmW hisobjectioDs, 
if allY, and any evidence he may produce in support oftAe same, ave 
been cOlijlidered by the estate officer. 
8. An estate officer shall, for the purpose of holding any inquiry under 
this Act. haVE: the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the 3~ 5 of 1108. 
Code of Civil Procedure. 1908, when trying a suit in respect of the follow-
ing matters, nnmely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of a.ny ~rson and 
examining him on oath; 
(0) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 40 
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
9. (1) An appeal shall lie from every order of the estate lfficer made 
irl-lI8epect of any public premiae& under section 5- ~ser:tion 7 to aD appel-
la$e otftcer who shall be the district judge of the district in Rich tbe 
pubijc premises are situate or such other judicial oIieer in teat. diJtlUt .$ 
of not less than ten years' standing as the cU5tr~t judie may de_ate 
in this behalf. 

(2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be preferred,-
(a) in the case of an appeal from an order under section 5 
within fifteen days from the date of publication of the order under 
sub-section (1) of that section; and 
S (b) in the case of an appeal from an order under section 7, within 
fifteen days from the date on which the order is communicated to 
the appellant: 
Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that the appel-
10 lant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
(3) Where an appeal is preferred from an order of the estate· officer, 
the appellate officer may stay the enforcement of that order for such 
period and on such conditions as he deems fit. 
(4) Every appeal under this sec:tion shall be disposed of by the appel-
IS late officer as expeditiously as possible. 
(5) The costs of any appeal under this section shall be in the discre-
tion of the appellate officer. 
(6) }I'or the purposes of this section, a presidency-town shall be deem-
ed to be a district and the chief judge or the principal judge of the city 
20 civil court therein shall be deemed to be the district judge of the district. 
10. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every ollele:r made 
by an estate officer or appellate officer under this Act shall be final and 
shall not be called in question in any original suit, application or execu-
tion proceeding and no injunction shall be granted by ay court or other 
25 authOl'ity in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of 
any powe-r conferred by or under this Act. 
11. (1) If any person who has been evicted from any public pFemises 
under this Act again occupies the premises without authority for such 
occupation, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
'0 may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. 
(.2) Any magistrate convicting a person under sub-section (1) may 
make an order for evicting that person summarily and he shall be liable 
to sllch eviction without prejudice to any other action that may be taken 
IS against him under this Act. 
12. If the estate officer has re~\son to believe that allY persons are in 
unauthorised occupation of any public premises, the '!State officer or 
any other officer authorised by him in this behalf may require those 
persons or any other person to furnish information relating to the names 
-40 and other particulars of the persons in occupation of the public premises 
and every person so required shall be bound to furnish the information 
in his possession. 
13. (1) Where any person against whom any proceeding for the 
determination of arrears of rent or for the assessment of damages is to 
45 be or has been taken dies before the proceeding is taken or during the 
pendency thereof, the proceeding may be taken or, as the case may be, 
continued against the heirs or legal representatives of that person. 
Finality 
of orders. 
Oft'ences 
and 
penalty. 
Power to 
obtain 
informa-
tion. 
Liability 
of heirs 
and 
legal re-
presenta-
tive.. 

ltecOV&ry 
of rent, 
etlc., a. 
an arrear 
of land 
revenue. 
Bar at 
juris-
diction. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken , --
in lood 
faith. 
Delega-
tion of 
powers. 
Power 
to make 
rulea. 
(2) Any amount due to the Central Government or the corporate 
authority from any person whether by way of arrears of rent or damages 
or costs shall, after the death of the person, be payable by his heirs or 
legal representatives but their liability shall be limited to the extent of 
the assets of the deceased in their hands. S 
14. If any person r~fuses Of fails to pay the arrears of rent payable 
under sub-section (1) of section 7 or the damages payable under sub-
section (2) of that section or tre costs awarded to the Central Government 
or the corporate authority under sub-section (5) of section 9 br any 
portion cf such rent, damages or costs, within the time, if any, speCified 10 
thert'for in the order relating thereto, the estate officer may issue a certi-
ficate for the amount due to the Collector who shall proceed to recover 
the same as an arrear of land revenue. 
15. No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceed-
ing in respect of the eviction of any person who is in unauthorised IS 
occupation of any public premises or the recovery of the arrears of rent 
payable under SUb-section (1) of section 7 or the damages payable under 
sub-section (2) of that section or the costs awarded to the Central Gov-
ernment or the corporate authority under SUb-section (5) of section 9 or 
any portion of such rent, damages or costs. 20 
16. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or the corporate authority or the appellate officer 
or the estate officer in respect of anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or orders 
made thereunder. 25 
17. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, 
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, 
be exercisable also by a State Government or an officer of the State 
Government. 30 
18. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely: _ 35 
(a) the form of any notice required or authorised to be given 
under this Act and the manner in which it may be served; 
(b) the holding of inquiries under t.his Act; 
(c) the distribution and allocation of work to estate officers and 
the transfer of any proceeding pending before an estnte officer to 40 
another estate officer,; 
(d) the procedure to be followed in taking posseSSion of public 
premises: 
'(e) the manner in which damages for unauthorised occupa-
tion may be assessed and the principles which may be taken into 45 
account in assessing such damages; 

7 
(f) the manner in which appeals may be preferred and the 
procedure to be followed in appeals; 
(g) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
S may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
10 Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in Euch modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule. 
IS 19. The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, R-:"peal. 
32 'Of 1958. 1958 is hereby repealed. 
32 of 1958. 
ZOo NotWithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, 
anything done or any action taken (including rules or ordprs made, 
notices issued, evictions ordered or effected, damages asses~ed, rents or 
2.0 damages or costs recovered and proceedings initiated) or purported to 
have been done or taken under the Public Premises (Eviction of Un-
authorised Occupants) Act, 1958 (hereafter in this section reft!rred to 
as the 1958-Act) shall be deemed to be as valid and effective as if such 
thing or action was done or taken under the corresponding provisions of 
2.S this Act which, under sub-section (3) of section 1 shall be deemed to 
have come into force on the 16th day of September, 1958, and 
accordingly-
30 
(0) no suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintained or 
continued in any court for the refund of any rent or damages or costs 
recovered under the 1958-Act where such refund has been claimed 
merely on the ground that the said Act has been declared to be 
uncon-titutional and void; and 
(b) no court shall enforce a decree or order directing the re· 
fund of any rent or damages or costs recovered under the 1958·Act 
merely on the ground that the said Act has been declared to be un-
constitutional and void. 
Valida-
tion. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1958 
(32 of 1958) was enacted to provide for a speedy machinery for the evic-
tion of unauthorised occupants from public premises. Section 5 of the 
Act provides for taking possession of the public premises which are iD 
unauthorised occupation of persons. Section 7 of the Act pr.ovidea fer 
the recovery of rent or damages in respect of public premises from par-
sons who are in unauthorised occupation thereof. The Act, as it origi-
nally stood, did not debar the Government from taking recour.le to civU 
courts to seek the aforesaid reliefs. 
2. In April 1967, in Northern India Caterers Private Ltd. 1)S. the State 
of Punjab (A.I.R. 1967, S. C., 1581), the Supreme Court declared section 
5 of the Punjab Public Premises and Land (Eviction and Rent Recovery) 
Act, 1959 (31 of 1959) void on the ground that the t:ection is discrimina-
tory and violative of article 14 of the Constitut~on. inasmuch as it c'Jnfer-
red an additional remedy over and above the usual remedy by way of 
suit and provided two alternative remedies to the Government, leaving 
it to the unguided discretion of the Collector to resort to one or the other 
of the procedures. The object and procedure prescribed by the aforesaid 
1958-Act being similar to those in the Punjab Act, there was a risk of 
the Central Act also being struck down by the Suprcmo:? Court, if chal-
lenged, on similar grounds of discrimination. Subs(!quently, the. Delhi 
High Court in Hukum Chand vs. S. D. Arya (Reference No. 1 of 1968) 
declared section 7 (2) of the aforesaid 1958-Act as ultra vires the Consti-
tution. The High Court also observed that section 5 of that Act must 
also be held to be tainted with the same constituti·onal infirmity which 
was held to invalidate section 5 of the Punjab Act, referred to above. In 
order to overcome the decisions of the Supreme Court and the Delhi 
High Court, the 1958-Act was suitably amended by the Public Premises 
(Eviction of Unauth{'rised Occupants) Amendment Act, 1968. By this 
Amendment Act, civil courts were precluded from entertaining any suit 
or proceeding in respect of the eviction of persons who are in unautho-
rised occupation of public premises and in re<:pet't of the recovery of the 
arrears of rent or damages from such persons. 
3. The ·vires of the Public Premises (Evietion of Unauthorised Occu-
pants) Act. 1958, as amended by the Public Premises (Eviction of Un-
authorised Occupants) Amendment Act, 1968 was again recently chal-
lenged by way of writ petitions in the ~elhi High Court and certain other 
High Courts. By a majority judgment, the Delhi High Court in P. L. 
Mehra vs. D. R. Khanna (civil writ No. 431 of 1970) have held the whole 
of the Act as void un~er article 13(2) of the Constitution as it was found 
to contravene article· 14 thereof. The Court aho obflerved that as the 
Act of 1958 was void, the Amending Act of 1968 was also ineffective. 
Similar views have also been held by the High Courts of Allahabad and 
Calcutta. The court decision, referred to above, have created serious 
difficulties for the Government inasmuch as the proceedings taken by 
" 

the various estate oftlcers appointed under the Act p.ither for the eviction 
<Yf persons who are in unauthoriled occupation of public premises or for 
the recovery of rent or damages from such persons stand null and void. 
It has become impossible for Govenunent to take expeditious action even 
in flagrant cases of unaUthorised occupation of public premises and 
recovery of rent or damages for such unauthorised occupation. It is, 
therefore, considered imperative to restore a speedy machinery for the 
eviClien of persons who are in unauthorised occupation of public premises 
keeping in view at the same time the necessity of complying with the 
provisions of the Constitution and the judicial pr;)'Douncements, referred 
to above. 
4. Accordingly, it is proposed to re-enact the Public Premises (Evic-
tion of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1958, as amended from time to 
time, after removing the vice which led to its haVing been declared as 
void. The law proposed to be re-enacted is being given retrospe~ti"e 
effect from 16th September, 1958. the date on which the 1958-Act afore-
said came into force. It is alSo proposed to make a suitable validating 
provision providing that anything done or any action taken or purported 
to have been done or taken under the 1958-Act shall be deemed to be as 
valid and effective as if such thing or action was taken or done under 
the corresponding provisions of the proposed law. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
NEW DELHI; UMA SHANKAR DIKSHIT. 
The 15th June, 1971. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the appointment of estBteoftlcers who 
will be empowered to evict persons in unauthorised occupation of public 
premises. It is intended that this work w.:.uld be entrusted to existing 
officers and it may not, therefore, be necessary to incur any additional 
expenditure. But the possibility of additional posts being created for 
d~aling with the extra work cannot be ruled out altogether. 
2. Expenditure will have to be incurred towards eviction proceedings 
(dauses 4 and 5) that may be taken under the proposed legislation. 
3. If the Bill is enacted and.rought into operation, the additional e::· 
penditure that may have to be incurred is not likely to be appreciable 
a~,d may not exceed rupees fifty thousand per annum. 
4. There will be no non·recurring expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The matters in respect of 
which rules may be made have been catalogued in sub-clause (2) of the 
clause. These matters, inter alia, relate to the form of any notice requir-
ed to be given and the manner in which it may be served; the manner of 
holding of enquiries; the manner in which damages for unauthorised oc-
cupation may be assessed and the principles which may be taken into 
account in assessing such damages and the manner in which appeals may 
be preferred. The matters with. respegt to which rules may be made 
are of a routine and administrative character. Moreover, the rules to 
be made are to be laid before Parliament for its scrutiny. The delega-
tion of legislative power is thus of a normal character. 
~---
11 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
'\ 
to provide fo),' the eviction of unauthorised occupants from public premises and for 
certain incidental matters, 
.. 
(Shri Uma Shankar"DiJcshit, 
M mister of Works and 
HOUSing and Health anti 
Family Plannm,.) 