Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 89 of 2025
THE ECO-TOURISM PROMOTION BILL, 2025
By
Shri Raju Bista, M.P.
a
BILL
to provide for the promotion, regulation, and development of eco-tourism in India through 
sustainable and inclusive practices, the constitution of institutional mechanisms for 
planning and implementation, protection of fragile ecosystems, empowerment of  
local communities, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
CHAPTER I 
Preliminary
1. (1) This Act may be called the Eco-Tourism Promotion Act, 2025. 
(2) This Act extends to the whole of India. 
5

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State, and in all other cases, the Central Government; 
(b) “Authority” means the Eco-Tourism Promotion Authority constituted under 
section 3 of this Act; 
(c) “Eastern States” include the States of West Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand and 
Odisha; 
(d) “North-Eastern States” include the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura as recognized under the 
North Eastern Council Act, 1971; 
(e) “Indian Himalayan Region” or “IHR” includes the States and Union 
Territories lying partially or wholly within the Himalayan-mountain ranges, namely,–  
Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura and Meghalaya, as well as the hill 
districts of Assam (Dima Hasao and Karbi Anglong) and the hill regions of West Bengal 
(Darjeeling and Kalimpong); 
(f) “Agency” refers to the Skill Enhancement Certification Agency constituted 
under section 15 of this Act; 
(g) “States” means the State Governments referred to in under Article 1 of the 
Constitution of India; 
(h) “Task Force” means the Marketing Task Force constituted under section 16 of 
this Act; 
(i) “tourist centre” means a centre declared as a tourist centre by the appropriate 
Government; and 
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II 
Institutional Framework
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute an Authority to be known as the Eco-Tourism Promotion Authority for the 
purposes of promoting eco-tourism and developing tourist destinations in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act. 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the said name, having a common seal 
and the power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, 
and to enter into contracts, and may sue or be sued in its said name. The Authority 
shall continue to exist notwithstanding any change in its composition. 
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members– 
(a) the Minister-in-Charge of the Union Ministry of Tourism – Chairperson, 
ex officio; 
(b) one full-time member to be appointed by the Central Government, having 
proven experience and expertise in the field of tourism development, archaeology, 
country and town planning, architecture, heritage conservation, or law – Vice-
Chairperson;
(c) the Secretary, Union Ministry of Tourism – member, ex officio; 
(d) the Secretary, Union Ministry of Culture – member, ex officio; 
(e) the Secretary, Union Ministry of Home Affairs – member, ex officio; 
(f) the Director General, Archaeological Survey of India – member, ex officio; 
(g) the Secretaries in charge of the Department of Tourism of the State 
Governments – members, ex officio; 
Definitions.
2
5
Constitution of 
the Eco-Tourism 
Promotion 
Authority.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

(h) the Member of the House of the People whose parliamentary constituency 
includes any part of a designated tourist destination – member, ex officio; 
(i) the Municipal Commissioner of the Municipality concerned – member, ex 
officio; 
(j) the Divisional Commissioner of the Division concerned – member,   
ex officio; and
(k) not more than three persons, possessing such qualifications and experience 
as may be prescribed, to be nominated by the Central Government – members. 
(4) The Vice-Chairperson and the nominated members under clause (k) shall hold 
office for a maximum term of three years, or such other period as may be prescribed. 
(5) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Vice-
Chairperson and other members, other than ex officio members, shall be such as may 
be prescribed.
4. (1) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Darjeeling in West Bengal. 
(2) The Authority shall have its offices in every state capital or at such other places as it 
may deem fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. (1) The Authority shall appoint a Secretary and a Chief Accounts Officer in such 
manner as may be prescribed, by the Central Government. 
(2) The Secretary shall be the principal executive officer of the Authority and shall– 
(a) act as the administrative head of the Authority; 
(b) be responsible for convening meetings, preparing agenda, maintaining records 
and proceedings of the Authority; 
(c) supervise and coordinate the activities of all divisions and personnel of the 
Authority; 
(d) implement the decisions of the Authority and ensure compliance with statutory 
obligations; and 
(e) discharge such other functions as may be assigned by the Authority or prescribed 
by rules. 
(3) The Chief Accounts Officer shall be responsible for the financial management of the 
Authority and shall—
(a) prepare annual budgets and financial statements; 
(b) maintain accounts in the manner prescribed; 
(c) ensure compliance with financial regulations; and 
(d) facilitate internal audits and coordinate with the office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
(4) The salary, allowances, and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Secretary, the Chief Accounts Officer, and other officers and staff shall be such as may 
be prescribed. 
(5) The Authority shall be provided with such number of officers and other 
employees as may be required for its efficient functioning. 
(6) The Authority may, with the approval of the Central Government, appoint 
such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its 
functions under this Act. 
(7) The duties, qualifications, and terms of service of the officers and employees 
appointed under sub-section (6) shall be such as may be specified by regulations made by 
the Authority, with the prior approval of the Central Government.
6. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of its business at its meetings, as may be prescribed. 
(2) When any member referred to in sub-clause (c) or (d) or (e) of section 3 is unable 
to attend a meeting of the Authority for any reason, he may depute an officer, not below the 
Headquarter and 
other offices of 
the Authority.
Appointment 
and Functions 
of Secretary, 
Chief Accounts 
Officer and 
other staff of the 
Authority.
Meetings and 
procedure of the 
Authority.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

rank of Joint Secretary, from his Department to attend the meeting and such member shall 
have the right to vote.
(3) No Act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid by reason of any vacancy in 
the Authority.
CHAPTER III
Powers and Functions of the Authority
7. The objectives of the Authority shall be—
(a) to promote and develop eco-tourism in the country; 
(b) to improve and strengthen the existing infrastructure in and around rural regions, 
ancient monuments, heritage sites and tourist destinations; 
(c) to develop new eco-tourism destinations with all basic amenities; 
(d) to co-ordinate, support and interact with other departments and agencies for 
streamlining services and amenities in and around eco-tourism destinations; 
(e) to provide safety and security to tourists;
(f) to facilitate and enhance the experience of the tourists, by promoting tourism 
ethics and education; and 
(g) to promote Indian culture, heritage, diversity, and tourism in a sustainable 
manner.
8. (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, prepare a separate Master Plan for the 
development of each eco-tourism destination. 
(2) The Master Plan shall include— 
(a) vision for the development of eco-tourism destinations; 
(b) measures both short term, and long term to promote and develop eco-tourism; 
and 
(c) measures to strengthen the existing infrastructure in and around eco-tourism 
destination. 
(3) The Master Plan of an eco-tourism destination shall be published in at least one 
local newspaper having circulation in that area for inviting objections and suggestions from 
general public before such date as may be specified in the publication. 
(4) The Authority shall, before finalizing a Master Plan, take into consideration all 
objections and suggestions made under sub-section (3).
9. The Authority shall– 
(i) promote the development of tourism facilities in collaboration with local 
communities in the eco-tourism destination; 
(ii) development of all infrastructure will be undertaken prioritizing the preservation 
of the original composition– ethnic, cultural and natural, of the tourism destination; 
(iii) prepare a calendar of activities including annual festival, melas, haats to 
be organised in each forthcoming financial year for the promotion of eco-tourism at 
different tourist destinations; 
(iv) advertise such activities as it considers necessary to promote eco-tourism at 
different tourist destinations; 
(v) interact once in three months with the stakeholders including representatives of 
the local communities, hoteliers, local authorities, police, forest, Archaeological Survey 
of India, and the Tourism Department of the State Governments concerned for proper 
co-ordination to develop and strengthen eco-tourism infrastructure in and around tourist 
destinations in the area; 
(vi) provide green amenities at such rate and in such manner to the visitors, as may 
be notified by the Central Government in this regard; 
4
Objectives of the 
Authority.
Master Plan for 
development 
of tourist 
destinations.
Functions of the 
Authority.
4
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

(vii) provide such other amenities as it may deem fit for the development of eco-
tourism destinations;
(viii) recommend to the Central Government the measures to be taken for the 
development of eco-tourism destinations; 
(ix) coordinate with the local authorities functioning in the area regarding any 
developmental work undertaken or to be undertaken in or around an eco-tourism 
destination; 
(x) maintain a website containing all essential information regarding eco-tourism 
destinations including forest camps, homestays, hotels, monuments and heritage sites, 
tourist maps, help desk, district administration and tour operators with a view to provide 
necessary information and help to the tourists; 
(xi) levy and collect entry fee at such rate and in such manner, as may be prescribed, 
from visitors at eco-tourism destinations; and 
(xii) issue such directions as it may deem necessary or expedient to meet the 
purposes of the Act.
10. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
an Eco-Tourism Satellite Account for the economic measurement of eco-tourism in the 
country. 
(2) The Eco-Tourism Satellite Account shall include – 
(a) harmonization and reconciliation of eco-tourism statistics from an economic 
perspective; 
(b) eco-tourism economic data that is comparable with other economic statistics; 
and 
(c) inbound domestic eco-tourism and outbound ecо-tourism expenditure including 
internal eco-tourism expenditure, production accounts of eco-tourism industries, the 
Gross Value Added (GV A) and Gross Domestic Product (GDP) attributable to eco-
tourism, employment, investment, Government consumption and non-monetary 
indicators.
11. (1) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that an area has eco-tourism 
potential in view of its location, cultural uniqueness, ancient or historical importance, or 
natural beauty, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that area to be an есо-
tourism destination. 
(2) An area declared under sub-section (1) as еco-tourism destination shall be maintained 
by the Board as per international standards.
12. (1) Whenever any development work is to be carried out in or around any eco-
tourism destination by any local authority, such local authority shall inform the Authority, 
through its Secretary or designated officer, in writing at least fifteen days before carrying 
out any development work, along with the estimates of expenditure likely to be incurred on 
the development work. 
(2) The Authority shall maintain a Register containing details of development works to 
be undertaken by the local authorities. 
(3) Any person, who intends to inspect the Register maintained under sub-section (2), 
shall apply to the Authority, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
(4) If, in the opinion of the Authority, any proposed development work shall adversely 
affect the eco-tourism potential of a tourist destination, the Authority may, after giving an 
opportunity of being heard to the agency concerned, restrain such agency from carrying out 
any such development work.
13. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Authority and 
in consultation with the State Government concerned, acquire any land required for 
the purposes of development of a new eco-tourism destination under this Act. Such 
acquisition shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Right to Fair 
Constitution of 
Eco-Tourism 
Satellite 
Accounts.
Declaration 
of an area 
as Tourist 
Destination.
Prior intimation 
of any 
development 
work by any 
local authority to 
the Authority.
Acquisition 
of land for 
development 
of tourist 
destination.
5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Act, 2013. 
(2) The Central Government shall ensure payment of fair compensation and 
provision of rehabilitation and resettlement to the affected persons within six months 
from the date of acquisition.
CHAPTER IV
Implementation Arms and Mechanisms
14. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute an Agency to be known as the Skill Enhancement Certification Agency for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Agency shall– 
(a) establish and recognize skill development institutions which provide 
courses in any such activity which aid in eco-tourism; and 
(b) provide to every student who successfully complete courses in eco-tourism 
guides, languages, cookery and driving a certificate for acquiring respective skills.
15. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Council, constitute 
a Task Force to be known as the Marketing Task Force for marketing and campaigning 
of the eco-tourism in the country. 
(2) The Task Force shall consist of—
(a) a Chief Public Relations Officer having compulsory training in marketing, 
even if recruited from All India Civil Services; and 
(b) representatives from the marketing and personal relations industry, to be 
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Task Force shall— 
(a) strive to develop positive image of eco-tourism in India and also in other 
countries; 
(b) make tailor-made ad campaigns and other marketing modes to promote eco-
tourism in the country; 
(c) report negative experiences of tourists in a particular place as collated through 
analytics to the local administration for their immediate redressal; and 
(d) showcase the trouble-shooting and hassle-free eco-tourism experiences in the 
place.
CHAPTER V
Financial Provisions
16. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Fund to be known as the Eco-Tourism Promotion Authority Fund. 
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the Fund for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act.
17. (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such 
form and manner, as may be prescribed, such returns, statements and other particulars in 
regard to any proposed or existing programme for the promotion and development of eco-
tourism, as the Central Government may, from time to time require. 
(2) The Authority or any other officer authorized on its behalf, may call for reports 
and other information from the State Government or any other agency, as may be required 
by it for the efficient administration of this Act and it shall be incumbent for the State 
Government or other agency concerned to furnish the information so required.
CHAPTER VI
Supervision and Accountability
18. The Central Government shall, from time to time, issue such directions to the 
Authority, as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Skill 
Enhancement 
Certification 
Agency.
Marketing Task 
Force.
Constitution of 
the Eco-Tourism 
Promotion 
Authority Fund.
Returns and 
inspections.
Central 
Government to 
issue directions.
6
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50s

19. (1) The Authority shall prepare every year an annual report in such form and manner, 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, giving a full account of its activities during 
the previous year, and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(2) A copy of the report forwarded under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
20. All permissions, orders, decisions, notices and other documents of the Authority 
shall be authenticated by the signature of the Secretary to the Authority or any other officer 
authorized by the Authority in that behalf.
CHAPTER VII
Miscellaneous
21. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person or 
authority for anything which has been done or intended to be done in good faith under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder.
22. The Board may, by general or special order, direct that any power exercisable by it 
under this Act may be exercised by such officer or local Board in such cases and subject to 
such conditions as may be specified therein.
23. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
24. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient 
for removal of the difficulty: 
(i) provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two 
years from the date of the commencement of this Act; and 
(ii) every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be 
laid before each House of Parliament.
25. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force, dealing with any of the matters dealt within this Act.
.
Annual Report.
Authentication 
of orders and 
documents of 
Authority.
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith.
Power to 
delegate.
Power to make 
rules.
Removal of 
difficulty.
Act not to be in 
derogation of 
other laws.
7
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India possesses immense ecological and cultural diversity, offering a tremendous 
opportunity to position itself as a global leader in eco-tourism. With 106 national parks 
covering 44,402.95 km² (1.35% of the geographical area) and over 1,000 protected areas 
spread across 178,640 km² (5.43% of India’s landmass), the country’s natural resources 
are unparalleled (Wildlife Institute of India, PIB, 2024). Further, India has a rich cultural, 
linguistic, musical, religious and ethnic diversity, which are primary drivers of eco-tourism 
across the world. Yet, despite this potential, eco-tourism contributes less than 5% to India’s 
tourism economy, signaling a significant gap between potential and policy. 
As per recent projections, India’s eco-tourism market was valued at USD 8.4 billion 
in 2023 and is expected to grow to USD 26.85 billion by 2030, expanding at a Compound 
Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 18.1% as per the Grand View Research, 2024. However, 
unregulated tourism has led to loss of traditional communities, their culture and traditions, 
environmental degradation, biodiversity loss, and the exploitation of fragile ecosystems. 
Recognizing these threats, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC) has designated Eco-Sensitive Zones (ESZs) around 487 protected areas, yet 
enforcement and developmental synergy remain weak. 
The Eco-Tourism Promotion Bill, 2025, seeks to establish a robust institutional and 
regulatory framework through the constitution of the Tourism Development Board, the Eco-
Tourism Promotion Authority, and the Sustainable Tourism Interventions Council. These 
bodies will ensure coordinated planning and execution of eco-tourism strategies while 
preserving local ecology, promoting sustainable infrastructure, and engaging indigenous 
communities. Additionally, the Bill proposes a Skill Enhancement Certification Agency 
to build human capital in eco-tourism and a mechanism for Tourism Satellite Accounts to 
monitor economic, social, and ecological outcomes.
This legislation aligns with India’s international obligations under the UN Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), particularly SDGs 8, 11, 12, 13, and 15 focusing on sustainable 
economic growth, resilient communities, responsible consumption, climate action, and 
biodiversity conservation, and responds to the increasing demand for nature-based, 
responsible tourism. By establishing a unified framework that integrates environmental 
safeguards, community-based tourism, and sustainable economic development, the Eco-
Tourism Promotion Bill, 2025 will serve as a blueprint for green growth and ecological 
resilience in India’s tourism sector.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi ;                                                             RAJU BISTA  
July 8, 2025
8

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Eco-Tourism Promotion Authority. 
Clause 5 provides for the appointment and functions of Secretary, Chief Accounts Officer 
and other staff of the Authority. Clause 13 provides for acquisition of land for development 
of tourist destination. Clause 14 provides for skill enhancement certification agency. Clause 
15 provides for constitution of a Marketing Task Force. Clause 16 provides for constitution 
of the Eco-Tourism Promotion Authority Fund.  The Bill, therefore if enacted, would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure 
of rupees fifty crore per annum will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
9

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
10

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion, regulation, and development of eco-tourism in India through 
sustainable and inclusive practices, the constitution of institutional mechanisms for 
planning and implementation, protection of fragile ecosystems, empowerment  
of local communities, and for matters connected therewith or  
incidental thereto.
_______ 
(Shri Raju Bista, M.P .) 