As INTRODUCED iN LOK SABHA

2

Bh Be Be Wi we

1 | i } Pee
9 हे थी Be
‘e fi & | fay s
eR d ९ ७९५ i

»aP)

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
| BY |
SHRI BRAJESH PATHAK, M.P.
A

# BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.
U _ Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005.

2. After article 2 1A ofthe Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

“218. Any person, who is deprived of his life or property or suffers any
losses in his trade or avocation due to any ethnic or social violence or communal

adequate compensation to the affected person or his family, as the case may be,
for rehabilitation and livelihood immediately, as far as possible, but in any case,
within thirty days from the date of occurence of the incident.”.

Bill No. 89 of 2005 |

or political disturbances, the State shall take appropriate measures for providing |

Short title.

Insertion of.
new article ~
— 21B.

Compensation

in case .of any

ethnic,

political or
communal
violence.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 21 of the Constitution provides that no person shall be deprived of his life 0
personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. However, in the rece!
past, there has been a sharp increase in the incidents of ethnic or social violence or commu
or political disturbances which have caused huge loss to the life, property and trade of the
common citizens ह

It has also come to notice that sometimes, the affected persons are not provided adequat
relief through compensation and rehabilitation measures and they are deprived of at ५
livelihood. It is the duty of the State to protect the citizens against the damage caused to their
life, personal property and occupation on account of such violence and disturbances

Therefore, this Bill seeks to amend the Constitution so that the citizens are not only
protected against incidents of. violence but rehabilitation of and payment of adequ
compensation to the affected persons is also ensured within a prescribed time frame

Hence this Bill.

New Dewi a . BRAJESH PATHAK
March 14,2005. | *


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the State shall ensure compensation and rehabilitation
measures within the prescribed time for the victims of ethnic or social violence and communal
or political turmoils. Since it is very difficult to predict such incidents and to evaluate the
damages caused in such incidents, the actual expenditure cannot be estimated at this point
of time. However, it is estimated that an annual expenditure of about rupees seven hundred
crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India to meet the relief work.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


LOK SABHA

A 5
| BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India. ' हि

(Shri Brajesh Pathak, MP)

MGIPMRND(S1)—1376LS—05.07.2005.