1
Bill No. 89 of  2020
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
By
SHRI HIBI EDEN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy first Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2020.
2. In article 39A of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:—
"Provided that in all cases connected to the Securitisation and Reconstruction of
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 in any forum or court or
tribunal under, the State shall provide compulsory legal assistance to a debtor or borrower
to assert, establish or regain his assets including pride, self-respect and esteem with a
sense of honour.".
Amendment
of article 39A.
54 of 2002.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest Act, 2002 was enacted to regulate securitisation and reconstruction of financial
assets in the courts. However, the Act is disadvantageous to certain sections of the society,
including dalits and the impoverished who are unable to understand the complexities of this
legislation. They are being evicted from their homes when the affluent classes who availed
astronomical sums as loans, escape the reach of law and lead a life of comfort.
It is disturbing to note that the recovery processes often exercised as the last resort are
regularly employed against the poor in the application of the parent Act.
The Bill intends to constitute a very comprehensive economic, social and political
programme for a modern democratic State which aimed at realising the high ideals of justice,
liberty, equality and fraternity as outlined in the Preamble to the Constitution which embody
the concept of a 'welfare state'.
Article 39A of the Constitution provides that the State shall secure that the operation
of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular,
provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that
opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or
other disabilities.
Being in debt is not a crime. It is necessary not only to protect the interest of the banks
but the interests of the debtors is also required to be protected including pride, self-respect
and esteem with a sense of honour in all cases connected with the Securitisation and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002.
The need is to provide constitutional protection in the form of compulsory legal
assistance in all forums or courts or tribunals to a debtor or borrower to assert or establish or
regain his assets in all cases connected with the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HIBI  EDEN
February 13, 2020
2

FINANCIAL   MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed amendment to article 39A provides for the State to
provide compulsory legal assistance to a debtor or borrower to assert, establish or regain his
assets including pride, self-respect and esteem with a sense of honour in all cases in every
forum or court or tribunal under the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets
and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of about rupees one hundred crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE CONSTITUTION  OF INDIA
* * * *
39A. The State shall secure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice, on
a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable
legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice
are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities.
* * * *
4
Equal justice and
free legal aid.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Hibi Eden, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5693LS(S4)—13-03-2020.