1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI  SUSHIL  KUMAR  SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"21B. The State shall provide affordable medical care, health insurance and
healthcare facilities to every citizen in such manner as the State may, by law,
determine."
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  89 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of a
new article
21B.
Right to
affordable
medical care,
etc.
5

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
According to World Health Organization, "Health is a state of complete physical,
mental and social wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease". In recent years, this
statement has been amplified to include the ability to lead a 'socially and economically
productive life'. Right to health is not included as a fundamental right in the Indian
Constitution. The Constitution makers imposed this duty on State to ensure social and
economic justice. Part IV of the Constitution, the Directive Principles of State Policy directs
the State to take measures to improve the condition of healthcare of the citizen. The Supreme
Court, in Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor Samity & Ors. vs. State of West Bengal & others,
while widening the scope of article 21 and stressing the Government's responsibility to
provide medical aid to every person in the country, held that in a welfare State, the primary
duty of the Government is to secure the welfare of the people.
Providing adequate medical facilities for the people is an obligation undertaken by
the Government in a welfare State. The Government discharges this obligation by providing
medical care to the persons seeking to avail of those facilities. In light of the increased
debate on expanding infrastructure in the healthcare sector and improved health indicators
such as maternal mortality rate and infant mortality rate, the concept of Right to Affordable
Healthcare assumes immense importance.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to make 'right to
affordable medical care, health insurance and healthcare facilities' as a Fundamental Right
of every citizen of the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUSHIL KUMAR SINGH
March 10, 2017

3
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide for incorporation of  'right to affordable medical
care, health insurance and healthcare facilities' as a Fundamental Right of every citizen of the
country. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore
will be involved per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is  likely to be involved.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Sushil Kumar Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—558LS(S3)—23-06-2017.