Bill No. 89 of  2022
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
THE MAHA TMA GANDHI NA TIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI V .K. SREEKANDAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
(Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 3 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act,
2005 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1) for the words “one
hundred days”, the words “two hundred days” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 3.
5

5
3. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the second proviso, the
following proviso shall be added, namely:—
 “Provided also that the wage rate to be fixed by the Central Government or the State
Government for any area shall be based on the prevailing Consumer Price Index and the
wages shall be disbursed accordingly to persons employed under this Act.”.
Amendment
of section 6.
2

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 has been
helping to uplift the rural economy and ushering our National economy as this scheme has
provided an opportunity to put the money back into the pockets of rural masses. This
scheme has been a great success since its launch way back in 2005 and there has been a
huge demand to increase the number of guaranteed employment from one hundred days to
a minimum of two hundred days as the current number of days is insufficient to meet the
needs of the households. Moreover, those who have been doing work under this Act, are
detached from other work or sources of work and they solely now depend upon thus
guaranteed employment under this Act. Therefore, remaining unemployed for the rest of
the year, not only creates social tension but also puts them into great economical difficulties.
Hence, it is a must situation to enhance the number of guaranteed employment from hundred
days to at-least a minimum of two hundred days.
The skyrocketing inflation and the upward trend in consumer price index, demand for
the revision of wage paid under this Act. The rate can be fixed by either the Central
Government or the State Government. But it should be justifiable or match with the cost of
living in rural areas. Therefore, the rate fixed by either the Central Government or the State
Government should be supported with the Consumer Price Index and the wages should be
paid accordingly.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act, 2005, with a view to:—
(a) increase the minimum number of days of employment to the registered persons
from one hundred days to two hundred days; and
(b) provided that the wage rate to be fixed by the Central Government or the State
Government to any area shall be based on the prevailing consumer Price Index provide
that and the wages shall be disbursed accordingly to persons employed under this Act.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; V . K. SREEKANDAN
28 February, 2022
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for increasing the number of days of employment of
the registered persons from one hundred days to two hundred days. Clause 3 provides the
wage rate to be fixed by the Central Government or the State Government to any area shall
be based on the prevailing consumer Price Index provide that and the wages shall be
disbursed accordingly to persons employed under this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
recurring expenditure of about rupees one lakh forty six  thousand crore per annum is likely
to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MAHA TMA GANDHI NA TIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT, 2005
* * * * *
3. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the State Government shall, in such rural area in
the State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every household whose
adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than one hundred days of
such work in a financial year in accordance with the Scheme made under this Act.
* * * * *
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of
1948), the Central Government may, by notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes
of this Act:
Provided that different rates of wages may be specified for different areas:
Provided further that the wage rate specified from time to time under any such
notification shall not be at a rate less than sixty rupees per day.
* * * * *
5
Guarantee of
rural
employment
t o
households.
Wage rate.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005.
————
(Shri V.K. Sreekandan, M.P.)