THE TRAFFICKING OF PERSONS (PREVENTION, PROTECTION
AND REHABILITATION) BILL, 2018
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
NA TIONAL A NTI-TRAFFICKING  B UREAU
3. National Anti-Trafficking Bureau.
4. Functions of Bureau.
5. Investigation by Bureau.
CHAPTER III
STATE ANTI-TRAFFICKING  OFFICERS
6. State Nodal Officer.
7. State Police Nodal Officer.
8. District Police Nodal Officer.
9. Anti-Trafficking Police Officers.
10. Anti-Trafficking Unit.
CHAPTER IV
RELIEF  AND R EHABILITATION  A UTHORITIES
11. National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee.
12. State Anti-Trafficking Committee.
13. District Anti-Trafficking Committee.
14. Powers of  District Anti-Trafficking Committee.
CHAPTER V
S
EARCH, RESCUE  AND POST -RESCUE  ACTIVITIES
15. Search and seizure.
16. Rescue and medical examination of persons.
17. Safety, care and protection of person rescued.
18. Investigation and evidence.
19. Presumption as to offences.
CHAPTER VI
P
REVENTIVE  MEASURES
20. Preventive measures by State and District Anti-Trafficking Committees.
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 26.07.2018
Bill No.  89-C  of  2018

CLAUSES
CHAPTER VII
PROTECTION  AND REHABILITA TION OF VICTIMS
21. Protection Homes.
22. Rehabilitation Homes.
23. Registration.
24. Application for providing care and protection.
25. Rehabilitation not to be contingent on criminal proceedings.
CHAPTER VIII
R
EPATRIATION
26. Repatriation of victims.
CHAPTER IX
MONETARY RELIEF  AND COMPENSA TION
27. Interim relief.
28. Relief.
CHAPTER X
FORFEITURE  AND ATTACHMENT OF PROPERTY
29. Forfeiture and attachment of property.
CHAPTER XI
REHABILITATION  F UND
30. Rehabilitation Fund.
CHAPTER XII
OFFENCES  AND PENALTIES
31. Aggravated form of trafficking of persons.
32. Punishment for aggravated form of trafficking of persons.
33. Trafficking of persons on more than one occasion.
34. Punishment for keeping or allowing premises to be used as place for trafficking of
persons.
35. Closure of premises and eviction of offenders from premises.
36. Punishment for promoting or facilitating trafficking of person.
37. Punishment for abetment.
38. Punishment for omission of duty.
39. Buying or selling of any person.
40. Hiring or obtaining possession, etc., for trafficking of person.
41. Offences related to media.
42. Punishment for disclosure of identity.
43. Applicability of punishment.
44. Punishment for attempt to commit offence under this Act.
45. Act committed by victim under coercion, compulsion, etc.
CHAPTER XIII
D
ESIGNATED  COURTS
46. Designated courts.
(ii)

47. Special Public Prosecutors.
48. Period and manner for recording of evidence of person who is trafficked and
disposal of cases.
49. Payment to the victim.
50. Appeal.
CHAPTER XIV
PROTECTION  OF VICTIM , WITNESS  AND COMPLAINANT
51. Protection of victim, witness and complainant.
CHAPTER XV
MISCELLANEOUS
52. Cognizance of offences.
53. Protection of action taken in good faith.
54. Power of Central Government to make rules.
55. Power of State Government to make rules.
56. Power to remove difficulty.
57. Section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the provisions of the
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 not to apply.
58. Sections 193, 195, 199 and 203 of Indian Penal Code to apply.
59. Act not in derogation of any other law.
(iii)
C
LAUSES

1
THE  TRAFFICKING OF PERSONS (PREVENTION, PROTECTION
AND REHABILITATION) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to prevent trafficking of persons, especially women and children and to provide care,
protection and rehabilitation to the victims of trafficking, to prosecute offenders and
to create a legal, economic and social environment for the victims and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Trafficking of Persons (Prevention, Protection and
Rehabilitation) Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different States and any reference in any
of the provisions to the commencement of this Act shall be construed in relation to any
State as a reference to the coming into force of that provision in that State.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  89-C  of  2018
5
10
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 26.07.2018

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Anti-Trafficking Police Officer” means a police officer referred to in section 9;
(b) “Anti-Trafficking Unit” means a unit set up in the Districts by the appropriate
Government under section 10;
(c) “appropriate Government” means, in respect of matters relating to,—
(i) a Union territory without legislature, the Central Government;
(ii) the Union territories with legislature, the Government of the National
Capital Territory of Delhi or, as the case may be, the Government of Union
territory of Puducherry;
(iii) a State, the State Government;
(d) “Bureau” means the National Anti-Trafficking Bureau established by the
Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 3;
(e) “child” means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen years;
 ( f) “Child Welfare Committee” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 27 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015;
(g) “Designated Court” means a court designated under section 46;
(h) “District Anti-Trafficking Committee” means a committee constituted by the
appropriate Government under section 13;
(i) “District Police Nodal Officer” means a police officer referred to in section 8;
(j) “Magistrate” means a District Magistrate or Additional District Magistrate
or a Sub-Divisional Magistrate;
(k) “narcotic drugs” and “psychotropic substances” shall have the meanings,
respectively assigned to them in the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985;
(l) “National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee” means a
committee established by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 11;
(m) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
term notify shall be construed accordingly;
(n) “premises” means any building, conveyance, land, location, place, structure
or any part thereof and includes any source, transit or destination of trafficking;
(o) “prescribed” means  prescribed by  rules made by the appropriate Government
under this Act;
(p) “Protection Home” means the Protection Home referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 21;
(q) “rehabilitation” means all measures and processes of physical, psychological
and social well-being of a person who is trafficked and includes access to education,
skill development, healthcare including psychological and physiological support,
medical services, economic empowerment, legal aid and assistance, safe and secure
accommodation;
(r) “Rehabilitation Fund” means the fund constituted under sub-section ( 1) of
section 30;
(s) “Rehabilitation Home” means the Rehabilitation Home referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 22;
Definitions.
2 of 2016.
61 of 1985.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(t) “State Nodal Officer” means an officer appointed by the State Government
under sub-section (1) of section 6;
(u) “State Anti-Trafficking Committee” means a Committee established by the
appropriate Government under sub-section (1) of section 12;
(v) “State Police Nodal Officer” means a police officer appointed by the State
Government under sub-section (1) of section 7;
(w) “trafficking of person” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
sub-section (1) of section 370 of the Indian Penal Code;
(x) “victim” means any person on whom an offence of trafficking has been
committed or attempted by any other person or persons:
Provided that for the purpose of receiving compensation or relief under this Act, any
dependent or legal heir, as the case may be, of a deceased victim, shall also be construed as
a victim.
(2) The words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Information Technology
Act, 2000 and the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
CHAPTER II
N
ATIONAL A NTI-TRAFFICKING  B UREAU
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a Bureau to be called
the National Anti-Trafficking Bureau for  exercising the powers and discharging its functions
under this Act.
(2) The Bureau shall have police officers and other officers of such appropriate ranks,
as may be necessary, for the discharge of its functions.
(3) The manner of selection, deputation, functioning and reporting of the officers and
employees of the Bureau shall be such, as may be prescribed.
4. The Bureau shall perform the following functions in relation to trafficking of
persons, namely:—
(i) co-ordinate and monitor surveillance and preventive efforts along with the
known or probable routes;
(ii) facilitate surveillance, enforcement and preventive steps at source, transit
and destination points;
(iii) maintain co-ordination between various law enforcement agencies and
non-Governmental organisations and other stakeholders;
(iv) strengthen the intelligence apparatus to improve the collection, collation,
analysis and dissemination of operational intelligence;
(v) increase international co-operation and co-ordination with concerned
authorities in foreign countries and international organisations, in operational and
long-term intelligence in investigation, mutual legal assistance, to facilitate universal
action for prevention and suppression and to implement any obligation under the
various international conventions and protocols that are in force in respect of counter
measures;
(vi) co-ordinate actions and enforcement by various bodies or authorities
established under this Act;
(vii) co-ordinate actions taken by the concerned Ministries, Departments,
organisations of the Government, especially linking the source of transit to destination
and connecting all stakeholders;
45 of 1860.
National
Anti-
Trafficking
Bureau.
Functions of
Bureau.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
21of 2000.
2 of 2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(viii) review measures for combating, preventing and formulating co-ordinated
strategy of action by various law enforcement agencies;
(ix) make sustained efforts for capacity building and training of agencies;
(x) bring out resource material including education curriculum for children,
Panchayat Raj institutions, enforcement agencies, judicial officers and other
stakeholders;
(xi) co-ordinate investigating activities among the Districts, States and with
other countries in case of cross-border trafficking of persons;
(xii) co-ordinate the investigation, where international ramifications are reported
or suspected;
(xiii) co-ordinate investigation, where inter-State ramifications are reported or
suspected across two or more States or Union territory Administrations;
(xiv) undertake and facilitate other investigators for investigating offences
from the organised crime perspective;
(xv) develop and monitor a database on every crime under this Act;
(xvi) co-ordinate with any national or international investigating or law
enforcement agencies and civil society organisations;
(xvii) facilitate inter-State and international transfer of evidence in investigation
as well as video conferencing in judicial proceedings;
(xviii) facilitate frequent meetings of the State Police Nodal Officers to facilitate,
monitor and evaluate the establishment and functioning of Anti-Trafficking Units;
(xix) provide necessary support for investigation by the Anti-Trafficking Units,
where such requests are made;
(xx) undertake steps to enhance the professional skills of Anti-Trafficking Police
Officers, Anti-Trafficking Units and all concerned with the investigation and
prosecution of cases;
(xxi) facilitate inter-State and trans-border transfer of evidence and materials,
witnesses and others for expediting prosecution;
(xxii) protection of witnesses, where referred by any State Government, victims,
complainants and  affected families, as the case may be;
(xxiii) undertake steps for timely and effective action on post-rescue care and
protection of any person who is trafficked, including steps towards rehabilitation by
the concerned agencies, so that their rights are ensured, and that they are not
re-trafficked;
(xxiv) monitor and facilitate victim and witness protection protocols, rules and
procedures including video conferencing during trial of offences which have
ramifications across States and beyond borders; and
(xxv) develop minimum standards of care and advice for all concerned, in matters
of compliance.
5. (1) The Bureau may take over investigation of any offence under this Act, where
referred to it by two or more States.
(2) Where an offence is referred to the Bureau under sub-section ( 1), the
State Government shall not proceed with the investigation of the offence and shall forthwith
transmit the relevant documents and records to the Bureau.
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that till the Bureau takes up the
investigation of the case, it shall be the duty of the officer-in-charge of the police station to
continue the investigation of an offence under this Act.
Investigation
by Bureau.
40
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45

5
(4) While investigating any offence under this Act, the Bureau, having regard to the
gravity of the offence and other relevant factors, may—
(a) if it is expedient to do so, request the State Government to associate with the
investigation; or
(b) with the previous approval of the Central Government, transfer the case to
the State Government for investigation and trial of the offence.
(5) While investigating any offence under this Act, the Bureau may also investigate
any other offence under any law for the time being in force, which the accused is alleged to
have committed, if the offence is connected with such other offence.
(6) The State Government shall extend assistance and co-operation to the Bureau for
investigation of an offence under this Act.
(7) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, nothing contained in this Act shall affect
the powers of the State Government to investigate and prosecute any offence under this
Act or other offences under any other law for the time being in force.
CHAPTER III
S
TATE ANTI-TRAFFICKING  OFFICERS
6. (1) The State Government shall appoint a State Nodal Officer, not  below the rank of
Director in the State Government.
(2) The State Nodal Officer shall be responsible for follow up action under this Act, as
per the directions of the State Anti-Trafficking Committee and co-ordinate with other
Government agencies and civil society organisations.
(3) The State Nodal Officer shall provide relief and rehabilitation services through
District Anti-Trafficking Unit and other Government agencies as well as civil society
organisations.
(4) The State Nodal Officer shall liaison with the State Police Nodal Officer and the
National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee, for all matters relating to
relief and rehabilitation.
7. (1) The State Government shall appoint a State Police Nodal Officer of such rank as
may be specified by that Government.
(2) The State Police Nodal Officer shall be responsible for all the activities in the
prevention and combating of trafficking of persons in the State and shall also monitor the
functioning of Anti-Trafficking Police Officers and Anti-Trafficking Units in the State.
(3) The State Police Nodal Officer shall also co-ordinate and monitor inter-State and
trans-border transfer of persons rescued, witnesses, evidence and offenders under this
Act.
(4) The State Police Nodal Officer shall liaison with State Nodal Officer and shall
perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
8. (1) The State Government shall designate one police officer not below the rank of
Superintendent of Police of the District to be the District Police Nodal Officer on matters
relating to trafficking of persons and responsible for all the activities in the District concerned
and perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
(2) The District Police Nodal Officer shall be the convener of the District Anti-Trafficking
Committee and shall report to the State Police Nodal Officer in every matter relating to an
offence of trafficking of persons including rescue, investigation and inter-State transfer of
a person who is trafficked and the offenders.
(3) The District Police Nodal Officer shall monitor the functioning of Anti-Trafficking
Unit and provide necessary assistance to them for the effective discharge of their duties.
State Nodal
Officer.
State Police
Nodal
Officer.
District Police
Nodal Officer.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
9. (1) The State Government shall designate for each District such number of Anti-
Trafficking Police Officers for matters related to trafficking of persons, including prevention
of trafficking, rescue and protection of the victims, investigation and prosecution.
(2)  In the case of inter-district or inter-state trafficking of persons, the Anti-Trafficking
Police Officer shall investigate an offence under this Act, in consultation with their counter-
parts in any other State or local police, as the case may be, in the prior approval of the
concerned State Police Nodal Officer.
10. ( 1) The appropriate Government shall set up for each District or a group of
Districts, such number of Anti-Trafficking Units, for dealing with  all matters of  prevention,
rescue, protection and care of victims and witnesses and of investigation and prosecution
of any offence under this Act.
(2) Every local police station shall, where Anti-Trafficking Unit is not functional,
undertake every activity in matters of rescue, investigation, prevention and protection of
persons trafficked under this Act.
(3) The State Government shall appoint for every Anti-Trafficking Unit such number
of subordinate police officers including women police officers as it deems necessary for the
discharge of the functions of the Anti-Trafficking Unit and vest in them with all the powers
to investigate any offence committed within its local jurisdiction under this Act:
Provided that the officer-in-charge of a police station after registering the First
Information Report under section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall take all
necessary steps for immediate rescue and protection and then transfer the case to the Anti-
Trafficking Unit.
CHAPTER IV
R
ELIEF AND R EHABILITA TION A UTHORITIES
11. (1) The Central Government shall establish a National Anti-Trafficking Relief and
Rehabilitation Committee, by notification for providing relief and rehabilitation services to
the victims.
(2) The composition of the National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation
Committee shall be as follows, namely:—
(i)  Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development—Chairperson;
(ii) Representative, Ministry of Home Affairs—Member;
(iii) Representative, Ministry of External Affairs—Member;
(iv) Representative, Ministry of Labour and Employment—Member;
(v) Representative, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment—Member;
(vi) Representative, Ministry of Panchayat Raj—Member;
(vii) Representative, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare—Member;
(viii) Representative, Legislative Department—Member;
(ix) Four representatives from registered civil society organisations active in
the prevention, rescue and rehabilitation of victims—Members;
(x) such other representatives of the Ministries or Departments or experts
representing different States, as may be prescribed—Members; and
(xi) Head, National Anti-Trafficking Bureau—Member-Secretary.
(3) The National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee shall perform
the following functions, namely:—
(i) facilitate and ensure rehabilitation and relief services including compensation,
repatriation, re-integration to the victims through concerned Ministries, Departments
and statutory bodies;
Anti-
Trafficking
Police
Officers.
Anti-
Trafficking
Unit.
2 of 1974.
National Anti-
Trafficking
Relief and
Rehabilitation
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(ii) provide for Protection Homes and Rehabilitation Homes to enable the
immediate and long-term sustainable rehabilitation of victims;
(iii) ensure the effective co-ordination between the concerned authorities both
within the country as well as with other countries for the repatriation of victims;
(iv) seek reports from appropriate Government, State Anti-Trafficking Committee,
District Anti-Trafficking Committee, on the quality of services and the functioning of
the Protection Homes and Rehabilitation Homes;
(v) maintain and monitor the Rehabilitation Fund under section 30; constituted
and
(vi) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
12. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish a State Anti–Trafficking Committee
to oversee the implementation of this Act and advise the State Government and District
Anti-Trafficking Committees on matters relating to prevention of trafficking, protection,
repatriation and rehabilitation of victims.
(2) The State Anti-Trafficking Committee shall consist of the following, namely:—
(i) Chief Secretary—Chairperson;
(ii) Director General of Police—Member;
(iii) Secretary, Department of Women and Child—Member;
(iv) Secretary, Home Department—Member;
(v) Secretary, Labour Department—Member;
(vi) Secretary, Health Department—Member;
(vii) Secretary, State Legal Services Authority—Member;
(viii) Secretary, Law Department—Member;
(ix) Protector of Emigrants, Ministry of External  Affairs—Member;
(x) State Police Nodal Officer—Member;
(xi) Two social workers out of which one shall be a woman—Member;
(xii) such other persons as may be prescribed—Members; and
(xiii) State Nodal Officer—Member-Secretary.
(3) The State Anti-Trafficking Committee shall perform the following functions,
namely:—
(i) identify the roles and responsibilities of each Department at State or District
level for effective implementation of the Act and the rules made thereunder;
(ii) arrange for appropriate training and sensitisation of functionaries of all
personnel including Governmental and non-Governmental;
(iii) develop effective networking and linkages with local non-Governmental
organisations for specialised services and technical assistance like vocational training,
education, healthcare, nutrition, mental health intervention, drug de-addiction and
legal aid services;
(iv) review and monitor the functioning of the District Anti-Trafficking
Committee;
(v) make necessary funds available to the District Anti-Trafficking Committee
for providing or setting up of required facilities for the implementation of the Act; and
(vi) perform such other functions and duties as may be prescribed.
State Anti-
Trafficking
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
(4) The State Anti-Trafficking Committee shall co-ordinate with Bureau and National
Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee to provide all necessary assistance
and inputs as may be required to prevent offences of trafficking of persons especially,
those that have inter-State and international ramifications and have features of an organised
crime.
13. (1)  The appropriate Government shall, by notification, constitute for every District,
a District Anti-Trafficking Committee for exercising the powers and performing such functions
and duties in relation to prevention, rescue, protection, medical care, psychological assistance
and need-based rehabilitation of victims.
(2) The District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall consist of the following, namely:—
(i) District Magistrate or Additional District Magistrate—Chairperson;
(ii) District Officer for Women and Child Development—Member;
(iii) Representative, District Legal Services Authority—Member;
(iv) Representative, Child Welfare Committee—Member;
(v) Two Civil Society Organisations or Non-Governmental Organisations
working in the field of prevention of trafficking and related issues—Members;
(vi) such other persons as may be prescribed—Members; and
(vii) District Police Nodal Officer—Member-Secretary.
(3) The District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall perform the following functions,
namely:—
(i) direct and facilitate the person in-charge of the Protection Home or
Rehabilitation Home, as the case may be, to submit an individual care plan to it;
(ii) ensure care, protection, appropriate rehabilitation or restoration of all victims,
based on each victims’ individual care plan by passing necessary directions to
Protection Homes and Rehabilitation Homes;
(iii) co-ordinate with other State Departments and Panchayat Raj institutions,
to keep a check on the children who drop out from schools and those children who are
covered by various schemes and have stopped accessing the benefits of those
schemes and inform such cases to the State Anti-Trafficking Committee and take
appropriate actions;
(iv) facilitate in a time bound manner or in the manner as may be prescribed, the
inter-State repatriation of victims or persons subjected to bonded labour;
(v) facilitate survey of the areas and vulnerable population to identify source,
transit and destination areas of trafficking of persons and based on the information
received, draw up an action plan for the prevention and protection of people who are
vulnerable to trafficking and implementation of the action plan;
(vi) create programmes for awareness generation, community mobilisation and
empowerment of vulnerable social groups against trafficking of persons;
(vii) assist the Anti-Trafficking Police Officer, the Anti-Trafficking Unit or the
local police, as the case may be, in conducting rescue operation, transferring victims
to the nearest Protection Home, in connection with prevention of trafficking of persons,
protection of victims and their rehabilitation, etc.; and
(viii) such other functions as may be prescribed.
(4) The appropriate Government shall provide adequate resources to the District
Anti-Trafficking Committee for carrying out prevention, protection and rescue procedures.
District Anti-
Trafficking
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(5) The District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall furnish a report to the State Anti-
Trafficking Committee on quarterly basis.
14. The District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall have the final authority to dispose
of cases for the care, protection, treatment, development and rehabilitation of the victims
under this Act and in case of child victim, the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 shall apply.
CHAPTER V
SEARCH , RESCUE  AND POST-RESCUE  ACTIVITIES
15. The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall mutatis mutandis
apply in relation to a search and seizure in respect of an offence under this Act.
16.  (1) Where a police officer or Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or Anti-Trafficking
Unit has reason to believe that it is necessary to rescue a person without undue delay due
to the imminent danger that may cause to his life and person, he or it may remove such
person from any place or premises and produce him before the Magistrate or Child Welfare
Committee, as the case may be, and shall take all necessary steps for the medical examination
of such person for the purposes of determination as to the age, the assessment or detection
of trauma, injury or illnesses incidental thereto.
(2) The provisions of section 164A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and
section 27 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 shall mutatis mutandis
apply in relation to a medical examination of any person under this section.
(3) The Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or Anti-Trafficking Unit or the Police Officer,
as the case may be, shall inform the District Anti-Trafficking Committee about the rescue
conducted under this section and the said Committee shall take appropriate actions for
providing interim relief and further rehabilitation services to the person rescued.
17. (1) The District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall assist the Anti-Trafficking Police
Officer or the Anti-Trafficking Unit or any police officer, as the case may be, in rescue
operation and transferring any person to the nearest Protection Home or any other suitable
institution, as deemed fit.
(2) The Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or Anti-Trafficking Unit or any police officer,
as the case may be, shall produce the person rescued before the Magistrate or the Child
Welfare Committee, as the case may be, without any delay but within twenty-four hours of
the rescue.
(3) The Magistrate may, after making an inquiry as to the age of the person rescued
and if it is found that the person is a child, pass such orders as he deems necessary for the
care and protection of the person.
(4) Where the Magistrate is satisfied, after making an inquiry as to the age of the
victim and it is found that the victim is not a child, the Magistrate may, make an order that
the victim be placed, for such reasonable period, in a Rehabilitation Home:
Provided that, if the victim or any person rescued is not a child and he voluntarily
makes an application supported by an affidavit for his release and if the Magistrate is of the
opinion that such application has not been made voluntarily, the Magistrate may reject
such application after recording his reasons in writing.
(5) In discharging the functions under this section, a Magistrate may summon a
mental healthcare professional, or psycho social counsellor, or clinical psychologist, or
psychotherapist, as the case may be, to assist him and may, for this purpose, in consultation
with the District Anti-Trafficking Committee and District Legal Services Authority, maintain
a list of experienced social workers.
Powers of
District Anti-
Trafficking
Committee.
Search and
seizure.
Rescue and
medical
examination
of persons.
2 of 1974.
32 of 2012.
Safety, care
and
protection of
person
rescued.
2 of 2016.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
18. (1) The Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or Anti-Trafficking Unit or any police
officer, as the case may be, shall ensure that investigation including search and
seizure must be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, and any other law for the time being in force.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or the officer-in-charge of the police station, as the case may
be, shall forward the  report on completion of investigation to the court having jurisdiction
within ninety days from the date of registration of first information report.
(3) The investigating officer, while forwarding the report on completion of investigation
of an offence under this Act, punishable with imprisonment of more than two years, has
reason to believe that any amount suspected to have been obtained by the accused by way
of commission of the offence and held by him in any bank account, the investigating officer
may submit an application before the designated court for freezing of such amount.
(4) The designated court, on satisfaction, after an inquiry made in this behalf, may
freeze such amount in any such bank account and may, upon conviction, order that such
amount lying in such bank account, shall be remitted to the Rehabilitation Fund.
19. Where a person is prosecuted for committing or abetting or attempting to commit
any offence under this Act in respect of a child or a woman or a person suffering from
physical or mental disability, unless it is specified, the designated court shall presume that
such person has committed or abetted or attempted to commit the offence, as the case may
be, unless the contrary is proved.
CHAPTER VI
P
REVENTIVE  MEASURES
20. (1) The State and the District Anti-Trafficking Committees shall undertake all
measures and recommend strategies and plans to protect and prevent vulnerable persons
from being trafficked.
(2) The measures referred to in sub-section (1) shall include—
(i) co-ordinating the implementation of all the programmes, schemes and plans
relating to the prevention of trafficking of persons with any statutory bodies,
organisations or agencies including the Panchayat Raj Institutions;
(ii) facilitating the implementation of livelihood and educational programmes
for vulnerable communities;
(iii) facilitating the implementation of programmes and schemes sponsored by
various Ministries and Departments of the appropriate Government;
(iv) co-ordinating with corporate sector to implement various schemes,
programmes for the prevention of trafficking of persons;
(v) ensuring accountability of the concerned agencies, by regular review and
appropriate action;
(vi) developing appropriate law and order framework to ensure prevention of
trafficking of persons;
(vii) undertaking vulnerability mapping of the State and give focus and attention
to the challenging areas;
(viii) commissioning independent  research on various aspects of trafficking
and ensure follow up action;
(ix) organising interface between law enforcement agencies, other Government
Departments and agencies with the voluntary organisations or non-Governmental
organisations in matters of prevention of trafficking of persons;
Investigation
and evidence.
Presumption
as to
offences.
Preventive
measures by
State and
District Anti-
Trafficking
Committees.
2 of 1974.5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2 of 1974.

11
(x) preparing an annual report on trafficking of persons in the State;
(xi) co-ordinating with the Bureau and other State Anti-Trafficking Committees,
especially with those States where source-transit-destination linkages exist, and
undertake all activities for joint action programmes by bringing in common policies
and programmes;
(xii) linking with the Bureau and the Central Government and other concerned
agencies, in case of trans-border trafficking of persons and ensure appropriate action.
CHAPTER VII
P
ROTECTION  AND REHABILITA TION OF VICTIMS
21. (1) The appropriate Government shall maintain either directly or through voluntary
organisations or non-Governmental organisations as many Protection Homes as necessary
and to be managed in the manner, as may be prescribed for the immediate care and protection
of the victims or any person rescued.
(2) The Protection Homes shall provide for shelter, food, clothing, counselling and
medical care that is necessary for the victims or any person rescued and such other services
in the manner, as may be prescribed.
22. (1) The appropriate Government, as it deems fit, shall maintain either directly or
through voluntary organisations or non-Governmental organisations, one or more
Rehabilitation Homes in each District managed in the manner as may be prescribed for the
purpose of providing long-term rehabilitation of victims or any person rescued.
(2) The appropriate Government may also utilise any existing shelter home for the
purposes of rehabilitation under sub-section ( 1).
23. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, a Protection Home and Rehabilitation Home shall be registered under this Act in such
manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(2) If any person in-charge of Protection Home and Rehabilitation Home providing
shelter and rehabilitation to victims or any person rescued contravenes any of the provisions
of sub-section (1), he shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to one year or
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, or with both.
24. (1) A victim or any person rescued on behalf of him may make an application to the
Magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the victim or such other person is
trafficked or suspected to be trafficked for an order that he may be kept in a Rehabilitation
Home:
Provided that in case the victim or any person rescued is a child, the provisions of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 shall apply.
(2) The Magistrate may, pending inquiry under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of
section 17, having regard to the circumstances of the case, direct that the victim or any
person rescued to be kept in such care and protection as he may consider proper.
(3) The Magistrate shall consult the District Anti-Trafficking Committee before taking
a final decision with respect to the rehabilitation of the victim or such other person.
25. Where the person rescued is a victim, the District Anti-Trafficking Committee
shall ensure that the rehabilitation of the person is not contingent upon criminal proceedings
being initiated against the accused or the outcome thereof.
CHAPTER VIII
R
EPATRIATION
26. (1) The District Anti-Trafficking Committee or the Child Welfare Committee, as the
case may be, shall be responsible for the repatriation of victims by co-ordinating with their
counterparts in any other District.
Protection
Homes.
Rehabilitation
Homes.
Registration.
Application
for providing
care and
protection.
Rehabilitation
not to be
contingent
on criminal
proceedings.
Repatriation
of victims.
2 of 2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(2) Where the State Anti-Trafficking Committee is of the opinion that a victim from a
foreign country needs to be repatriated to the country of origin, it may deal with the matter
under any law for the time being in force.
(3) The State Nodal Officer shall obtain informed written consent from the victim for
repatriation purposes, and where needed, shall make arrangements for the counselling of
the victim by trained psycho-social professionals.
(4) The repatriation of the victims shall be completed within three months for inter-
State repatriation, and within six months in case of cross-border repatriation, from the date
of rescue by the District Anti-Trafficking Committee, or the Child Welfare Committee, or
State Police Nodal Officer, as the case may be:
Provided that any delay in repatriation shall be recorded for reasons in writing and
shall be reported to the National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee and
the Bureau forthwith.
CHAPTER IX
MONETARY RELIEF  AND COMPENSA TION
27. (1) Upon application for interim relief by the victim, the District Anti-Trafficking
Committee or Child Welfare Committee, as the case may be, shall take immediate steps to
award interim relief to the victim as deemed appropriate not later than thirty days, taking
into consideration all aspects, including physical, mental trauma and the other requirements
of the victim.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide adequate funds at the disposal of the
District Anti-Trafficking Committee for the purposes under sub-section (1), within a period
of one month from the date of commencement of this Act.
28. (1) The District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall take steps to ensure that
appropriate relief is provided to the victim, within sixty days from the date of filing of
charge-sheet.
(2) The relief amount shall be in addition to any other compensation including any
amount or benefit payable by way of any scheme of the appropriate Government or pursuant
to any order of the court under any law for the time being in force.
CHAPTER X
FORFEITURE  AND ATTACHMENT OF PROPERTY
29. (1) Where any property is, or is likely to be, used for the commission of an offence
under this Act and the property is concealed, transferred or dealt with, in any manner which
may result in frustrating any proceedings under this Act, the designated court may attach
such property:
Provided that the designated court shall give an opportunity to be heard to the
person who is the owner or occupier of the property.
(2) Where a person has been convicted of any offence under this Act, the designated
court shall, in addition to awarding any punishment, declare that any property, movable or
immovable or both, belonging to such person or held by any person on his behalf, which
has been used for the commission of that offence or accrued thereby, or which has been
attached under sub-section (1), shall stand forfeited to the appropriate Government and the
same may be authorised for the purpose of realisation of any fine imposed by the designated
court and the proceeds shall be remitted to the Rehabilitation Fund.
Interim relief.
Relief.
Forfeiture and
attachment of
property.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

13
CHAPTER XI
REHABILITATION  F UND
30. (1) There shall be constituted a fund by the Central Government to be called the
Rehabilitation Fund for the welfare and rehabilitation of the victims under this Act and there
shall be credited thereto —
(a) any grants and loans made by the appropriate Government;
(b) any voluntary donations, contributions or subscriptions, whether or not for
any specific purpose as may be decided upon by the Central Government;
(c) any fine recovered for the commission of an offence under this Act which
may include recovery of fine specified in section 421 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973;
(d) the amount seized from any bank account frozen under sub-section ( 4) of
section 18; and
(e) any other sums as may be received.
(2) The State Government may supplement the Rehabilitation Fund.
(3) The Rehabilitation Fund shall be utilised under this Act by the appropriate
Government for —
(i) the establishment and administration of Protection Homes and Rehabilitation
Homes;
(ii) supporting innovative programmes for the welfare and rehabilitation of the
victims;
(iii) strengthening legal assistance and support;
(iv)  providing entrepreneurial support, skill development training or vocational
training;
(v) providing aftercare facilities for capital and infrastructure to the victims who
are ready to integrate  into mainstream society by setting up small business or
profession;
(vi)  providing victim and witness protection;
(vii) awareness generation programmes for the prevention of trafficking of
persons;
(viii) creating community-based programmes to identify, report and prevent
trafficking of persons;
(ix) providing specialised professional services, counsellors, translators,
interpreters, social workers, mental healthcare professionals, vocational trainers or
such other specialised professionals for the victims; and
(x) any other activity which may be required for effective implementation of this
Act.
(4)  The Rehabilitation Fund shall be maintained and monitored by the National Anti-
Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee.
(5) The Rehabilitation Fund shall be made available to the State and District Anti-
Trafficking Committees towards prevention, protection and prosecution of matters relating
to trafficking of persons.
(6) Any fine recovered for the commission of an offence under this Act shall also be
remitted to the Rehabilitation Fund which includes recovery of fine specified in section 421
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(7) The generation, dissemination and utilisation of Fund shall be regulated in the
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Rehabilitation
Fund.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
CHAPTER XII
OFFENCES  AND PENALTIES
31.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever commits an offence of trafficking of  person—
(i) for the purpose of forced labour or bonded labour by using violence,
intimidation, inducement, promise of payment of money, deception or coercion or by
subtle means including, allegations of accumulated debt by the person, retention of
any identity paper, threats of denunciation to authorities; or
(ii) for the purpose of bearing child, either naturally or through assisted
reproductive techniques; or
(iii) by administering any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or alcohol
on a person for the purpose of trafficking or forcing him to remain in exploitative
condition; or
(iv) by administering any chemical substance or hormones on a person for the
purpose of early sexual maturity; or
(v) for the purpose of marriage or under the pretext of marriage trafficks a
woman or child after marriage; or
(vi) by causing serious injury resulting in grievous hurt or death of any person,
including death as a result of suicide as a consequence of trafficking of person; or
(vii) who is a pregnant woman or the offence results in pregnancy of the
person; or
(viii) by causing or exposing the person to a life-threatening illness including
acquired immuno deficiency syndrome or human immuno deficiency virus; or
(ix) for the purpose of begging; or
(x) who is a mentally ill person as defined in clause (l) of section 2 of the Mental
Health Act, 1987 or a person with disability as defined in clause (s) of section 2 of the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, or as a consequence of trafficking, the
person becomes mentally ill or disabled; or
(xi) by encouraging or abetting any person to migrate illegally into India or
Indians in to some other country,
is said to commit an offence of aggravated form of trafficking of the person.
32. Whoever commits the offence of aggravated form of trafficking of a person shall
be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years
but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not
be less than one lakh rupees.
33. Whoever is convicted of the offence of trafficking on more than one occasion
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder
of that person’s natural life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than two
lakh rupees.
34. (1) Whoever keeps or manages, or acts or assists in the keeping or management
of a premises to be used as a place for trafficking of any person shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years and with fine
which may extend to two lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever—
(i) being a tenant, lessee, occupier or person in-charge of any premises, uses, or
knowingly allows any other person to use, the premises or any part thereof as a place
for trafficking of persons; or
Aggravated
form of
trafficking of
persons.
14 of 1987.
49 of 2016.
Punishment
for
aggravated
form of
trafficking of
persons.
Trafficking
of persons on
more than
one occasion.
Punishment
for keeping
or  allowing
premises to
be used as
place for
trafficking of
persons.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(ii) being the owner, lessor or landlord of any premises, or the agent of such
owner, lessor, or landlord, lets out the same, or any part thereof with the knowledge
that the same or any part thereof is intended to be used as a place of exploitation of
the victim, or is wilfully a party to the use of the premises or any part thereof as a place
for trafficking of persons,
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in the event of a second
or subsequent conviction, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
years and with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section ( 2), it shall be presumed until the
contrary is proved that any person referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) of that sub-section
has not exercised due diligence in allowing to use or letting out the premises or in allowing
the premises or any part thereof to be used as a place of exploitation or, as the case may be,
and has knowledge that the premises or any part thereof was being used as a place of
exploitation of the victim.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
on conviction of any person referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) of sub-section (2) of any
offence under this Act in respect of any premises or any part thereof, any lease or agreement
under which such premises have been leased out or held or occupied at the time of the
commission of the offence, shall become void with effect from the date of the said conviction.
35. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Magistrate shall, on receipt of information from the police or otherwise, that any
premises or any part thereof is being used for the purpose of trafficking of persons, issue
notice to the owner, lessor or landlord of the premises or part thereof, or the agent of the
owner, lessor or landlord, or on the tenant, lessee, occupier of, or any other person in-
charge of such premises or part thereof, to show cause within seven days of the receipt of
the notice why the same should not be sealed or attached for improper use thereof; and,
after hearing the person concerned, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the premises or part
thereof is being used for trafficking of persons, then, the Magistrate may pass an order—
(i) directing eviction of the occupier or any person from the premises, within
seven days of the passing of the order;
(ii) directing that the owner, lessor, or landlord, or the agent of the owner, before
letting out the premises or any part thereof, which, during the rescue or search has
been found to be used for the purpose of trafficking, shall obtain the previous
permission of the Magistrate and the Magistrate shall pass appropriate orders within
thirty days from the date of order and where no permission is granted within such
period, the permission shall be deemed to have been granted.
(2) If the Magistrate, after the notice issued under sub-section ( 1), finds that the
premises or any part thereof was used for trafficking of any person, the owner, lessor,
landlord the agent of the owner, lessor, landlord exercised due diligence in letting out
premises or any part thereof, then, the same shall be restored to the owner, lessor or
landlord, or the agent of the owner or lessor or landlord as the case may be, with an
undertaking that the premises or any part thereof shall not be leased out, or otherwise given
possession of, or for the benefit of the person who was allowing the improper use therein,
within two months from the date of issuing the notice by the Magistrate.
(3) If the Magistrate is satisfied that the premises or part thereof was not used for
trafficking of any person, he shall cause the same to be restored to the owner, lessor or
landlord, or the agent of the owner, lessor, landlord, tenant, lessee, occupier or any other
person in-charge of the premises or part thereof within two months of the issuance of the
notice.
(4) When an owner, lessor or landlord, or the agent of the owner, lessor or landlord
fails to comply with a direction given under clause ( ii) of sub-section ( 1), he shall be
punished with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
Closure of
premises and
eviction of
offenders
from
premises.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

16
36. (1) A person is said to promote, procure or facilitate the commission of trafficking
of person, if that person—
(i) produces, prints, issues or distributes unissued, tampered or fake certificates,
registration or stickers as proof of compliance with Government requirements; or
(ii) advertises, publishes, prints, broadcasts or distributes, or causes the
advertisement, publication, printing or broadcast or distribution by any means,
including the use of information technology or any brochure, flyer or any propaganda
material that promotes trafficking of person or exploitation of a trafficked person in
any manner; or
(iii) assists in the conduct of misrepresentation or fraud for the purposes of
procuring or facilitating the acquisition of clearances and necessary documents from
Government agencies for the purpose of trafficking of any person.
(2) Whoever commits an offence under sub-section (1) shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
seven years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
37. Whoever abets any person to commit any offence under this Act and if the act
abetted is in consequence of the abetment, shall be punished with the punishment provided
for that offence under this Act.
38. Notwithstanding  anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever knowingly or having reason to believe that a person has been trafficked, fails to
perform a duty, which he is entrusted under this Act for providing care, protection and
rehabilitation to a victim or performs duty but knowingly causes physical or mental injury or
hardship or trauma to the victim shall be punished with fine which shall not be less than
fifty thousand rupees and in the event of a second or subsequent offence with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less
than one lakh rupees.
39. (1) Whoever buys or sells any person for a consideration, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever solicits or publicises electronically, taking or distributing obscene
photographs or videos or providing materials or soliciting or guiding tourists or using
agents or any other form which may lead to the trafficking of a person shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand
rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.
40. Whoever hires or otherwise obtains possession, or lets to hire, or in any manner
disposes of a person, for the purpose of trafficking of person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than three years but
may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees.
41. (1)Whoever commits trafficking of a person with the aid of media, including, but
not limited to print, internet, digital or electronic media, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but may extend to ten
years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever distributes, or sells or stores, in any form in any electronic or printed
form showing incidence of sexual exploitation, sexual assault, or rape for the purpose of
extortion or for coercion of the victim or his family members, or for unlawful gain shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but
may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one
lakh rupees.
Punishment
for abetment.
Punishment
for omission
of duty.
Punishment
for promoting
or facilitating
trafficking of
person.
Buying or
selling of any
person.
Hiring or
obtaining
possession,
etc., for
trafficking of
person.
Offences
related to
media.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

17
42. (1) No report or newspaper or magazine or news-sheet or audio-visual media or
any other form of communication regarding any inquiry or investigation or judicial
proceedings at any stage shall disclose the name, address or any other particulars, which
may lead to the identification of a victim or witness of trafficking of person under this Act
shall be published:
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the designated court may permit
such disclosure, if in its opinion, such disclosure is in the best interest of the victim.
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend
to one lakh rupees, or with both:
Provided that in case, the victim is a child, the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 shall apply.
43. (1) Where an act or omission constitutes an offence punishable under this Act
and also under any other law for the time being in force, then, notwithstanding anything
contained in any such law, the person found guilty of such offence, shall be liable to
punishment under such law which provides for punishment which is greater in degree.
(2) A designated court convicting a person of any offence under this Act may also
pass an order for the auction of the premises or any part thereof and the proceeds of such
auction shall be ordered to be remitted to the Rehabilitation Fund.
(3) When an occupier or any other person fails to comply with a direction given under
clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 35, he shall be deemed to have committed an offence
under section 34 and shall be punished accordingly.
44. Whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable by this Act with imprisonment,
or to cause such an offence to be committed, and in such attempt does any act towards the
commission of the offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of any description provided
for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the imprisonment or, as the case
may be, one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such
fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.
45. Nothing is an offence which is committed or attempted to have been  committed by
a victim, punishable with death or imprisonment for life or for imprisonment for ten years,
if the offence is committed or attempted to have been  committed, under coercion or compulsion
or intimidation or threat or undue influence by any person and where, at the time of committing
the offence, the victim is subjected to reasonable apprehension of his death, grievous hurt
or any other injury to him or to any other person whom he is interested in.
CHAPTER XIII
D
ESIGNATED  COURTS
46. For the purposes of providing speedy trial of any offence under this Act, the
State Government shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court, by
notification, within two months from the date of commencement of this Act, designate in
each district, the Court of Session as a Designated Court.
47. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint Special Public
Prosecutors for every designated court for conducting cases under this Act.
(2) Every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under sub-section (1) shall
be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause ( u) of section 2 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and provisions of that Code shall have effect accordingly.
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in section 301 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, the victim shall be entitled to the assistance of a legal counsel of his choice
for any offence under this Act:
Provided that if the victim is unable to afford a legal counsel, the Legal Services
Authority shall provide a counsel to him.
Punishment
for disclosure
of identity.
Applicability
of
punishment.
Punishment
for attempt to
commit
offence under
this Act.
2 of 2016.
Act
committed by
victim under
coercion,
compulsion,
etc.
Designated
courts.
Special Public
Prosecutors.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

18
48. (1) The designated court shall complete the trial,  as far as possible, within a
period of one year from the date of taking into cognizance of any offence under this Act.
(2) The designated court may record the statement of any victim through video
conferencing in  any case, where the victim is unable to appear before the court for the
reasons of safety or confidentiality.
(3) In all matters of trans-border and inter-State crimes where the victim has been
repatriated to any other State or country is unable to attend the court proceedings, the
court may order video conferencing to record his statement.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the inquiry and trial of offences
under this Act, may be conducted in camera, if an application is made in this regard by the
victim.
49. ( 1) The designated court may order, where applicable, any backwages of the
victim to be paid to him.
(2) The designated court shall on its own motion or on an application filed by or on
behalf of the victim, award compensation under section 357A of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, or under any other law for the time being in force or otherwise at any stage
of the proceedings.
(3) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the relief ordered by the designated
court is paid within sixty days from the date of receipt of the order.
50.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
an appeal shall lie from any judgment, sentence or order, not being an interlocutory order, of
the designated court to the High Court.
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of sixty days
from the date of judgment, sentence or order  appealed against:
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal
within the said period.
CHAPTER XIV
PROTECTION  OF VICTIM , WITNESS  AND COMPLAINANT
51. (1) The designated court, if on an application made by a victim, witness or a
complainant in any proceeding before it or by the Special Public Prosecutor in relation to
such victim, witness or a complainant or on its own motion, is satisfied that the life of such
victim, witness or a complainant is in danger, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
take such measures to protect such victim, witness and the complainant.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of
sub-section (1), the measures which a designated court may take under that sub-section
may include—
(a) the holding of the proceedings at a place to be decided by the designated
court;
(b) the avoiding of the mention of the names and addresses of the witnesses in
its orders or judgments or in any records of the case accessible to public;
(c) the issuing of any directions for securing that the identity and address of
the witnesses are not disclosed; and
(d) a decision that it is in the public interest to order that all or any of the
proceedings pending before such a court shall not be published in any manner.
Period and
manner for
recording of
evidence of
person who is
trafficked and
disposal of
cases.
Payment to
the victim.
Appeal.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Protection of
victim,
witness and
complainant.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
CHAPTER XV
MISCELLANEOUS
52. (1) All offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973—
(a) nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply in relation to any case involving
the arrest of any person on an accusation of having committed an offence under this
Act with imprisonment of more than two years;
(b) no person accused of committing an offence under this Act shall be released
on bail or on his own bond unless—
(i) the Special Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose
the application for such release;
(ii) where the Special Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the
court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused
is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence
while on bail; and
(c) the victim shall have a right to be heard in all bail matters.
(3) The conditions for granting of bail specified in clause (b) of sub-section (2) shall
be in addition to the conditions provided under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
53. No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or the State Government or any person acting under the directions of the
Central Government or the State Government as the case may be, acting in good faith, or
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act, or of any rules made thereunder.
54. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
55.  (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of
two Houses, or where such State Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
56. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removal of the difficulty:
Provided, that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
Cognizance of
offences.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
Power of
State
Government
to make
rules.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

20
57. The provisions of section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the
provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 shall not apply to any person who is
found guilty of having committed an offence under this Act.
58. The provisions of sections 193, 195, 199 and 203 of the Indian Penal Code shall
apply to any person who is guilty of having committed an offence under this Act.
59. The provisions of this Act, shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any inconsistency, the
provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on the provisions of any such law to the
extent of the inconsistency.
Section 360
of the Code
of Criminal
Procedure,
1973 and the
provisions of
the Probation
of Offenders
Act, 1958
not to apply.
2 of 1974.
20 of 1958.
45 of 1860.Sections 193,
195, 199 and
203 of Indian
Penal Code to
apply.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent trafficking of persons, especially women and children and to provide care, protection
and rehabilitation to the victims of trafficking, to prosecute offenders and to create a
legal, economic and social environment for the victims and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
MGIPMRND—1071LS(S3)—26.07.2018.