THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
(FOR PROTECTION OF WATER BODIES) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI M ULLAPPALLY R AMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide financial assistance to the State Governments for protection of water bodies.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Financial Assistance to the State Governments (for
Protection of Water Bodies) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 89 of 2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "aquatic eco-system" means all organic and inorganic matter and all living
organisms living in or located in or on water or the beds or shores of a water body;
(ii) "drain" included gutters, waste water canals, sewers and all outlets or flow
of waste water including overflow of rain water;
(iii) "groundwater" means all water under the surface of the ground, whether in
solid or liquid form;
(iv) "water" means all surface water and ground water, whether in solid or liquid
form; and
(v) "water body" means anybody of flowing or standing water, whether natural
or artificial and whether the flow or presence of water is continuous, intermittent or
occurs only during a flood, including but not limited to a lake, river, creek, stream, tank,
well, pond and wetland.
3. Every State Government shall inform the Central Government—
(i) about the existence of water bodies in the respective State; and
(ii) requirement of financial assistance to protect the water bodies in the State.
4. Every State Government shall, before informing the Central Government under
section 3, make the regulation for the purpose of—
(a) designating any area as a water quality control zone for the purpose of
protecting water, aquatic eco-system or drinking water source;
(b) governing, regulating or prohibiting any use or activity in a water quality
control zone or any part of a zone;
(c) improving the drainage and sewerage system;
(d) ensuring clear separation between sewerage/waste water and sources of
clean water to avoid contamination; and
(e) ensuring quick absorption or clear flow of rain water for conservation.
5. Every State Government shall, before informing to the Central Government under
section 3, take into consideration the scientific, intrinsic and other information relating to—
(a) the physical characteristics of land in the area, including its topography and
soil types;
(b) the ability of the soil or water in the area to assimilate nutrients and other
pollutants;
(c) water bodies or groundwater in the area, including information relating to—
(i) the quality characteristics of the water;
(ii) the susceptibility of the water to contamination or adverse changes in
level; and
(iii) the extent to which the water is undisturbed by human activity;
(d) the area's aquatic eco-systems;
(e) whether the area contains a source or a potential source, of drinking water;
(f) whether the area supports species that are sensitive to alterations in water
quality or quantity resulting from human activity;
(g) whether the area provides habitat for endangered species; and
Definitions.
State
Governments
to inform the
Central
Government.
Power of State
Governments
to make
regulations.
State
Government
to consider
the scientific,
intrinsic and
other
information
relating to
water bodies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(h) the perception of farmers and native inhabitants of the area regarding quality,
quantity and prospects of water in a particular zone including—
(i) the possibilities of flood and/or water logging; and
(ii) any other matter which the Government considers relevant.
6. The Central Government shall render scientific and technical advice and assistance
to State Governments if so required to achieve the purposes of this Act.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by  Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide financial assistance to every State Government for protection
of water bodies and for promotion of rain harvesting and watershed management
programmes.
(2) The Central Government before releasing the money shall ensure that
State Government has complied with the provisions of this Act.
Central
Government
to render
scientific and
technical
advice.
Central
Government
to provide
financial
assistance to
State
Governments.
5
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Water is the most valuable natural resource of a country. However, the scarcity and
supply of clean water is a major concern for the sustenance of human, animal, plant and
ecology. The protection of water resources/water bodies available in the country is an
endless-task to be completed by the Government. The major constraint in this regard is the
lack of financial resources available with the States.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide financial assistance to the State Governments for
the protection of water bodies and promotion of rain harvesting and watershed management
programmes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MULLAPPALLY  RAMACHANDRAN
June 30, 2014.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for rendering of scientific and technical advice and
assistance to the State Governments. Clause 7 provides for financial assistance to every
State Governments for protection of water bodies, etc.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore  may be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to provide financial assistance to the State Governments for protection of water bodies.
————
(Shri Mullappally Ramachandran, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1880LS(S3)—01-08-2014.