Bill No. 89 of  2019
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RA VNEET SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. For article 248 of the Constitution the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“248. (1) Subject to article 246A, the Legislature of any State shall have the exclusive
power to make any law with respect to any matter not enumerated in the Union List, State List
or Concurrent List.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), Parliament shall have the exclusive power
to make any law imposing a tax with respect to any matter not enumerated in the Union List,
State List or Concurrent List.”.
Short title.
Substitution of
new article for
article 248.
Residuary
powers of
legislation.5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Amendment
of the Seventh
Schedule.
3. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) in List I-Union List, for entry 97, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“97. Any tax not mentioned in List II or List III.”.
(ii) in List II-State List, after entry 66, the following entry shall be added, namely:—
“67. Any other matter not enumerated in List I or List III subject to entry 97 of
List I.”.
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 248 grants residuary powers of legislation and taxation to the Centre. It has
been increasingly noticed that with residuary powers vested in Parliament, our Constitution
lean more towards a unitary structure, rather than, a federal structure as was intended by the
Constitution makers. Although the Constitution envisioned a strong Centre, the arbitrary
legislative powers embedded within it are too powerful and  goes against the increasingly
decentralised structure which has worked for the country.
The present Bill is not only in keeping with other decentralised countries such as the
United States of America, which directs that residuary power of legislation shall vest in the
States, but, it also follows the recommendations of the Sarkaria Commission which submitted
its report in 1988.
The Bill seeks to amend article 248 and the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution by
removing the residuary power of legislation (except taxation) from the Union List and
transferring it to the State List.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
June  10,  2019. RA VNEET  SINGH

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
* * * * * *
248. Residuary powers of legislation:
(1) Parliament has exclusive power to make any law with respect to any matter not
enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List.
(2) Such power shall include the power of  making  any law imposing a tax not
mentioned in either of those Lists.
* * * * * *
SEVENTH SCHEDULE (Article 246)
LIST I- UNION LIST
97. Any other matter not enumerated in List II or List III including any tax not
mentioned in either of those Lists.
* * * * * *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
————
(Shri Ravneet Singh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—498LS(S3)—19-06-2019.