5 
10 
4 of 1924. IS 
43011981 
43 of 1961. 20 
• 
As INTRODUCED IN Lo~ SABRA ON 
28TH FEBRUARY. 1963 
Bur No.8 of 196, 
THE SUPER. PROFITS TAX BILL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
to impose a special tax on certain compllnie •. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Super Profits Tax Act, 1963. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
Shorttltl~ 
and extent 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.- Deftnition~. 
(1) "assessee" means a person by whom super profits tax 
or any other sum of money is payable under this Act and 
includes every person in respect of wh,;m any proceeding under 
this Act has been taken for the assessment of his chargeable 
profits or of the amount of refund due to him; 
(2) "assessment" includes re-assessment; 
(3) "assessment year" means the period of twelve months 
commencing on the 1st day of April, every year; 
(4) "Board" means the Central Board of Revenue consti-
tuted under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924; 
(5) "chargeable profits" means the total income of an 
assessee computed under the Income-tax Act, 1961 for any pre-
vious year or ~ars, as the case may be, and adjusted in 
accordance with the provisions of the First Schedule; 
(6) "rncome-tax Act" means the Income-tax Act. 1961; 
(7) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 
(8) "standard deduction" means an amount equal to six 
per cent. of the capital of the company as computed In &£:cor-
dance with the provisions of the Second Schedule: 
Provided that where the previous year is greater or lea 
than a period of twelve months, the aforesaid amount of Iix 
per cen5- of the capital shall be increased or decreased propor-
tionately: 
1110 (I) tS-I. 

2 
Provided further that where an assessee has difterent 
previous years in respect of his income. profits and gains. the 
aforesaid increase or decrease. as the case may be. shall be 
calculated with reference to the length of the previous year of 
the longest duration; and 5 
(9) all other words and expressions used herein but not 
defined and defined in the Income-tax Act shall have the mean-
ings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
Taxautbo-
ritiel. 
3. (1) Every Director of Inspection. Commissioner of Income-
tax, Appellate Assistant Commissioner of Income-tax, Inspecting 10 
Assistant Commissioner of Income-tax and Income-tax Officer shall 
have the like powers and perform the like functions, under this Act 
Returnot. 
ineome. 
as he has and performs, under the Income-tax Act, and for the exer-
cise of his powers and the performance of his functions, his 
. jurisdiction under this Act will be the same as that he has under the IS 
Income-tax Act. 
(2) All officers and persons employed in the execution of this Act 
shall observe and follow the orders, instructions and directions of the 
Board: 
Provided that no such orders. instructions or directions shall be 20 
given so as to interfere with the discretion of the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner in the exerci')e of his appellate functions. 
(3) Every Income-tax Officer, employed in th~ execution of this 
Act, shall observe and follow the orders, instructions and directions 
issued for his guidance by the Director of Inspection or by the Com- 25 
missioner or by the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner under whose 
jurisdiction he performs his functions. 
4. Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, there shall be 
charged for every assessment year commencing on and from the 1st 
day of April. 1963, a tax (in this Act referred to as the super profits 30 
tax) in respect of the chargeable profits of the previous year or 
previous years. as the case may be, of every company, at the rate or 
rates specified in the Third Schedule. 
5. (1) In the case of every company whose chargeable profits 
assessable under this Act exceeded during the previous year the 35 
amount of standard deduction, its principal officer, or in the case of a 
• non-resident company if it has no principal officer in India, the 
person treated as its agent under section 163' of the Income-tax Act. 
shall furnish a return of the chargeable profits of the company during 
the previous year in the prescribed form and verified in the prescrib- 40 
eel manner and settini forth such other particulars as may be 
preeertbed, before the 30th day of September of the lae_ent year: 

LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
I 
THE SUPER PROFITS TAX BILL, 1963 
(As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
LRe-print with line number!7 
1. Page 5, line 1,-
!2.!:.-"nothwithstanding" read "notwithstanding" 
2. Page 7, line 8,-
. for "Appeallate" read "Appellate" - -
3. Page 15, l~ne 7 from bottom,-
!2!: II counts" read "accounts" 
NEW DELHI, 
March 6. 1963 
Ph-alguna 15, 10884 (Saka) 

3 
• Provided that on an application made in this beha11, the Income-
tax Officer may, in his discretion, extend the date for the furnislainl 
of the return. 
(2) In the case of any company which in the Income-tax Officer's 
S opinion is assessable under this Act, the Income-tax Officer may, 
before the end of the relevant assessment year, serve a notice upon 
its principal officer, or in the case of a non-resident company if it 
has no principal officer in India upon any person who is treated as 
its agent under section 163 of the Income-tax Act, requiring him to 
10 furnish within thirty days from the date of service of the notice, 
a return of the company's chargeable profits during the previous 
year in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner 
and setting forth such other particulars as may be prescribed: 
Provided that on an application made in this behalf, the Income-
15 tax Officer may, in his discretion. extend the date for the furnishing 
of the return. 
(3) Any assessee. who has not furnished a return during the time 
allowed by the Income-tax Officer under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), or having furnished a return under sub-section (1) or 
.10 sub-section (2) discovers any omission or wrong statement therein, 
may furnish a return or a revised return, as the case may be, at any 
time before the assessment is made. 
6. (1) For the purposes of making an assessment under this Act, ~_ 
the Income-tax Officer may serve on any person who has made a menta. 
25 return under sub-section (1) of section 5 or upon whom a notice has 
been served under sub-section (2) of section 5 (whether a return has 
been made or not) a notice requiring him on a date therein to be 
specified, to produce or cause to be produced such accounts or docu-
ments as the Income-tax Officer may require for the purposes of this 
30 Act and may from time to time serve further notices requiring the 
production of such further accounts or documents or other evidence 
as he may require. 
(2) The Income-tax Officer, after considering such accounts, 
documents or evidence, if any, as he has obtained under sub-section 
3S (1) and after taking into account any relevant material which he has 
gathered, shall, by an order in writing, assess the chargeable profits 
and the amount of the super profits tax payable on the basis of such 
assessment. 
'7. (1) The Income-tax Officer, before proceeding to make an assess- Provisional 
40 ment (in this section referred to as the regular assessment) under ~:~ 
section 6, may; at any time after the expiry of the period allowed . 
423 M. tt>f Fin-2 

• 
• under sub-section (1) or sub-seetion (2) of section 5 for the furnish-
ing of the return and whether the return has or has not been fur-
nished, proceed to make in a summary manner a provisional 
assessment of the chargeable profits and the amount of the super 
proflts tax payable thereon. S 
(2) Before making such provisional assessment, the Income-tax 
Officer shall give notice in the prescribed form to the person on whom 
the provisional assessment is to be made of his intention to do so, and 
shall with the notice forward a statement of the amount of the 
proposed assessment, and the said person shall be entitled to deliver 10 
to the Income-tax Officer at any time within fourteen days of the 
service of the said notice a statement of his objections, if any, to the 
amount of the proposed assessment. 
(3) on expiry of the said fourteen days from the date of service 
of the notice referred to in sub-section (2), or earlier, if the assessee 15 
agrees to the proposed provisional assessment, the Income-tax Officer 
may, after taking into account the objections, if any, made under 
su1:Hection (2), make a provisional assessment, and shall furnish a 
copy of the order of the assessment to the assessee: 
Provided that assent to the amount of the provisional assessment, 20 
or failure to make objection to it, shall in no way prejudice the 
assessee in relation to the regular assessment. 
(4) There shall be no right of appeal against a provisional assess-
ment made under this section. 
(5) After a regular assessment has been made, any amount paid 25 
or deemed to have been paid towards the p'rovisional assessment 
made under this section shall be deemed to have been paid towards 
the regular assessment; and where the amount paid or deemed to 
have been paid towards the provisional assessment exceeds the 
amount payable under the regular assessment, the excess shall be 30 
refunded to the af4sessee. 
8. If-
(a) the Income-tax Officer has reason to believe that by 
reast'n 0' the omission or failure on the part of the assessee to 
make a return under section 5 for any assessment year or to 35 
discloB\! fully and truly all material facts necessary for his 
."'lID.ent for any assessment year, chargeable profits for that 
year have escaped assessment or have been under~aasessed or 
aJSeII8Ci at too low a rate or have been made the subject of 
.rwl've relief under this Act, or ,. 

• • , b) nothwithstanding that there has been no omiulon ·or 
failure as mentioned in clause (a) above on the part oftbe 
assessee, the Income-tax Officer has in consequence of informa-
tion in his possession reason to believe that chargeable profits 
S assessable for any assessment year have escaped assessment or 
have been under-assessed or assessed at too low a rate or have 
been the subject of excessive relief under this Act, 
he may, in cases falling under clause (a) at any time, and in cases 
falling under clause (b) at any time within four years of the end of 
10 that assessment year, serve on the assessee a notice containing all or 
any of the requirements which may be included in a notice under 
section 5, and may proceed to assess or re-assess the amount charge-
able to super profits tax, and the proviSions of this Act shall, so far 
as may be, apply as if the notice were a notice issued under that 
I'section. . 
t. If the Income-tax Officer, in the course of any proceedings PenalUt& 
under this Act, is satisfied that any person has, without reasonable 
cause, failed to furnish the return required under section 5, or to 
produce or cause to be produced the documents, accounts or other 
~o evidence required by the Income-tax Officer under sub-section (1) 
of section 6, or has concealed the particulars of the chargeable profits 
or has deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars of such profits, 
he may direct that such person shall pay, by way of penalty, in 
addition to the amount of super profits tax payable, a sum not 
25 exceeding-
(a) where the person has failed to furnish the return requir-
ed under section 5, the amount of super profits tax payable; 
(b) in any other case, the amount of super profits tax which 
would have been avoided if the return made had been accepted 
30 as correct: 
Provided that the Income-tax Officer shall not impose any penalty 
under this section without the previous authority of the Inspecting 
Assistant Commissioner. 
10. No order imposing· a penalty under section 9 shall be made ~pportu-
35 unless the assessee has been given a reasonable opportunity of being ~\~f 
hea.rd. heard. 
11. (1) Any person objecting to the amount of super profits tax ApPeals 
for which he is liable as assessed by the Income-tax Officer or deny- ~p~!late 
ing his liability to be assessed under this Act, or objecting to any Acssistani t onvn s-
,.0 penalty or fine imposed by the Income-tax Oftlcer, or to the amount sioner. 
allowed by the Income-tax Officer by way of any relief under any • 

8 
provisions of this Act, or to any refusal by the Incom~tax omcer to 
grant relief or to an order of rectification or amendment having 
the effect of enhancing the assessment or reducing the refund, or to 
an order refusing to allow the claim made by the assessee for a 
rectift.cation under section 13 or amendment under section 14 may , 
appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner. 
(2) Every appeal shall be in the prescribed form and shall be 
verified in the prescribed manner. 
(3) An appeal shall be presented within thirty days of the follow-
ing date. that is to say- 10 
(a) where the appeal relates to assessment or penalty or 
fine, the date of service of the notice of demand relating to the 
assessment or penaltY or fine, or 
. (b) in any other case. the date on which the intimation of 
the order sought to be appealed against is served: IS 
Provided that the Appellate Assistant Commissioner may admit 
an appeal after the expiration of the said period if he is satisfied that 
the appellant had suJRcient cause for not presenting it within that 
period. 
(4) The Appellate Assistant Commissioner shall hear and deter- 20 
mine the appeal and, subject to the provisions of this Act, pass such 
orders as he thinks fit and such orders may include an order enhan-
-cing the assessment or a penalty: 
Provided that an order enhanCing an assessment or a penalty shall 
not be made unless the person affected thereby has been given a 25 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement. 
(5) The procedure to be adopted in the hearing and determination 
of the appeals shall, with any necessary modification, be in accord-
ance with the procedure applicable in relation to income-tax. 
Appeals to 12. (1) Any assessee aggrieved by an order passed by a Com- 30 
Appellate missioner unde!" section 15, or an order passed by an Appellate 
Tribunal. Assistant Commissioner under any provisions of this Act, may 
appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against such order. 
• 
(2) The Commissioner may, if he objects to any order passed 
by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner under any 'provisions of 3S 
this Act, direct the Income-tax Officer to appeal to the Appellate 
Tribunal against the order. 
(3) Every appeal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall 
be filed within sixty days of the date on which the order sought to 
be appealed against is communicated to the assessee ~r to the Com-
missioner, as the case may be. ,,40 

t 
(4) The IDCome-tax Officer or the assessee, as the case may be, 
on receipt of notice that an appeal against the order of the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner has been preferred under sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (2) by the other party may, notwithstanding that he 
, may not have appealed against such order or any part thereof, with-
in thirty days of the receipt of the notice, file a memorandum of 
cross-objections, verified in the prescribed manner, against any part 
of the order of the Appeallate Assistant Commissioner, and such 
memorandUm shall be disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal as if it 
10 were an appeal presented within the time specified in sub-section 
(3). 
(5) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal or permit the 
filing of a memorandum of cross-objections after the expiry of the 
relevant period referred to in sub-section (3) or sub-section (4), if 
IS it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it 
within that period. 
(6) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the pres-
cribed form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner and, shall, 
except in the case of an appeal referred to in sub-section (2) or a 
20 memorandum of cross-objections referred to in sub-section (4), be 
accompanied by a fee of rupees one hundred. 
(7) Subject to the provisions of this Act, in hearing and making 
an order on any appeal under this section, the Appellate Tribunal 
shall exercise the same powers and follow the same procedure as it 
2S exercises and follows in hearing and making an order on any appeal 
under the Income-tax Act. . 
13. (1) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the Reetiflca-
record, the Commissioner, the Income-tax Officer, the Appellate ~~:es. 
Assistant Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal may, of his, or 
30 its, own motion or on an application by the assessee in this behalf, 
amend any order passed by him or it in any proceeding under this 
Act within four years of the date on which such order was passed. 
(2) An amendment which has the effect of enhancing the assess-
ment or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the liability of 
3S the assessee shall not be made under this section unless the autho-
rity concerned has given notice to the assessee of its intention so to 
do and. has allowed the assessee a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard. ' I '!'II" 
(3) WhJ!re an amendment is made under this secti9n, the order 
40 shall be passed in writing by the authority concerned. 
(4) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, where any such 
amendment has the effect of reducing the assessment, the Income-
tax officer slvtll make any refund which may be due to such 
asaM,,". . ........... 
• 

Other 
amend-ments. 
• 
(5) Where any such amendment has the effect of enhancing the 
assessment or reducing the refund already made, the Income-tax 
Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand in the pres-
cribed form specifying the sum payable. 
14. Where as a result of any order made under section 154 or S 
section 155 of the Income-tax Act, it is necessary to recompute the 
chargeable profits determined in any assessment under this Act, the 
Income-tax Officer may proceed to recompute the chargeable profits, 
and determine the super profits tax payable or refundable on the 
basis of such recomputation and make the necessary amendment and 10 
the provisions of sE;ction 13 shall, so far as may be, apply thereto, 
the period of four years specified in sub-section (1) of that section 
being reckoned from the date of the order passed under the afore-
said sections of the Income-tax Act. 
Revision 15. (1) The Commissioner may call for and examine the record IJ 
~::~~al of any proceeding under this Act, if he considers tDat any order 
to revenue. passed therein by the Income-tax Officer is erroneous in so far as it 
is prejudicial to the interests of the revenue, he may, after giving 
the assessee an opportunity of being heard and after making or 
causing to be made such inquiry as he deems necessary, pass such 20 
order thereon as the circumstances of the case justify, including 
an order enhancing or modifying the assessment, or cancelling the 
assessment and directing a fresh assessment. 
(2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1)-
(a) to revise an order of re-assessment made under section 25 
8, or 
. (b) after the expiry of two years from the date of the order 
sought to be revised. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), an 
order in revision under this section may be passed at any time in 30 
the case of an order which has been passed in consequence of, or 
to give effect to, any finding or direction contained in an order of 
the Appellate Tribunal, the High Court or the Supreme Court. 
Ezplanati011..-In computing the period of limitation for the 
purposes of sub-section (2), any period during which any proceeding 35 
under this section is stayed by an order or' injunction of any court 
shall be excluded. 
Revision of 16. (1) The Commissioner may, either of his own motion or on 
~.:::~ an appUcation by the assessee for revision, call for the record of any 
Ilone: proceeclini under this Act which has been taken by an Income-tax_ 
Offt~r or Appellate Assistant Commissioner subordinate to him 

• 
and may make such inquiry or cause such inquiry to be made anct. 
subject to the provisions of this Act, may pass such orders thereon. 
not being an order prejudicial to the assessee, as he thinks fit. 
. (2) The Commissioner shall not of his own motion revise any 
S order u!lder this section if the order has been made more than one 
year previously. 
(3) In the case of a{l application for revision under this section 
by the assessee, the application shall be made within one year from 
the date on which the order in question was communicated t9 him 
10 or the date on which he otherwise came to know of It, whichever 
'is earlier: 
Provided that the Commissioner may, if he is satisfied that the 
assessee was prevented by sufficient cause from making the appli. 
cation within that period, admit an application made after the expiry 
IS of that period. 
(4) The Commissioner shall not revise any order under this 
section in the following cases--
.(a) where an appeal against the order lies to the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner or to the Appellate Tribunal but hu 
ao not been made and the time within which such appeal may be 
made has not expired, or, in the case of an appeal to the Appellate 
Tribunal, the assessee has not waived his right of appeai; or 
(b) where the order is pending on an appeal before the 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner; or 
25 (c) where the order has been made the subject of an appeal 
to the Appellate Tribunal. 
(5) Every application by an assessee for revision under this 
section shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty.·five rupees. 
Explanation I.-An order by the Commissioner declining to 
30 interfere shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed not to 
be an order prejudicial to the assessee. 
Explanation 2.-For the purposes of this section, the' Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner. shall be deemed to be an authority subordi-
nate to the Commissioner. 
35 17. The provisions of the following sections and Schedules of the App1ica--
Income.tax Act shall apply with such modifications, if any, as may Up of 
d . . " i f thO A t ProvlalODl be prescribed, as if the sai prOVIsIons were proVls ons 0 18 C of AcUI 
and referred to super profits tax instead of income-tax:- of. U8l. 
2 (4!), 131 to 138 (both inclusive), 140, 156, 180, 161, 162, 163, 
40 166, 167, 170. 173, 175, 176, 178, 179, 220 to 229 (both incluaive), 
3780 (B)LS-2 

10 
231, 232, 233, 237 to 245 (both inclusive), 254 'to 262 (both 
inclusive), 265 to 269 (both inclusive), 281, 282, 284, 286 to 293 
(both inclusive), the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule: 
Provided that references in the said provisions to the 
uassessee" shall be construed as refereI)ces to an assessee as S 
defined in this Act. 
Income-to: 18. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax 
C:~;:il~ Aet, all information contained in any statement or return made or 
able for furnished under the provisions of that Act or obtained or collected the pur-poses of for the purposes of that Act may be used for the purposes of this Act. 10 
this Act. 
Failure to 
deliver 
returns, 
etc. 
(2) All information contained in any statement or return made 
or furnished under the provisions of this Act or obtained or collected 
for the purposes of this Act may be used for the purposes of the 
Income-tax Act. 
19. If any person fails without reasonable cause to furnish in due IS 
time any return under section 5 or to produce, or cause to be produc-
ed, any accounts or documents required to be produced under section 
6, he shall be punishable with fine which. may extend to five hundred 
rupees, and with a further fine which may extend to ten rupees 
for every day during which the default continues. 20 
False 20. If a person makes in any return required under section 5, any 
statements. statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to 
be false, or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with 
simple imprisonment which may extend to ~ months, or with fine 
Abetment 
of false 
returns, 
etc. 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 2S 
21. If a person 'makes or induces in any manner another person 
to make and deliver any account, statement or declaration relating to 
chargeable profits liable to super profits tax which is false and which 
he either mows to be false or does not believe to be true, he shall 
be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to six 30 
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
Institution 22. (1) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence 
of proceed. under section 19 or se~tion 20 or section 21 or under the Indian Penal 
~=~~ Code except at the instance of the Commissioner. 3S 
lion of 
ofteneet. (2) The Comrrrissioner may, either before or after the institution 
of proceedings, compound any offence punishable undF section 18 
or section 20 or Sf!(tion 21. 

11 
~. If the eentral Government considers it necessary or expedient Power to 
io to do for avoiding any hardship or anomaly or removing any :~~Ptlon, 
difficulty that may arise as a result of the application of this Act, to etc., ~ 
the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Daman and ~:~\~ to 
$ Diu and Pondicherry, the Central Government may, by general or Uni'?ton • 
'I d ak t' d' th difi terrI nee. specla or er, mean exemp lon, re uctlon in rate or 0 er mo ' ~ 
cation in respect of super profits tax in favour of any class of assessees 
or in regard to the whole or any part of the chargeable profits of any 
class of assessees, 
10 24, (l) The Board may, subject to the control of the Central Power to 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for ma1ke ru es. carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow· 
1 S ing matters:-
(a) the' form in which returns under section 5 may be 
furnished and the manner in which they may be verified; 
(b) the form in which notice for making provisional 
assessment shall be given; 
20 (c) the form in which appeals under section 11 or section 12 
may be filed and the manner in which they shall be verified; 
(d) the procedure to be followed on applications for rectifi-
cation of mistakes and applications for refunds; 
(e) any other matter which by this Act is to be, or may be, 
25 prescribed. 
(3) The Central Government shall cause every rule made under 
this section to be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days, which may be comprised in one session or in two successive 
30 sessions, and, if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid 
or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made, that rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that 
35 any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of an~thing previously done under that rule. 
25. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to any company Savini. 
which has no ~are capital. 
• 

12 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (5)] 
, RULES FOR COMPUTING THE CHARGEABLE PROFITS 
tD computing the charg~able profits of a previous year, the total 
income computed for that year under the Income-l ax Act shall be 5 
adjusted as follows:-
1. Income, profits and gains falling within the following sub-
rules shall be excluded from such total income, namely:-
(i) any income chargeable under the Income-tax Act 
under the head "capital gains"; 10 
(ii) any compensation or other payment as is referred to 
in clause (ii) of section 28 of the Income-tax Act; 
(iii) profits of any business of life insurance. 
2. On the balance of the total income, income-tax and super-
tax shall be calculated at the rates in force in the financial year, IS 
as if such income had been the total income no portion of which 
had been exempt from the payment of income-tax or super-tax 
and on no portion of which any deduction of income-tax or super-
tax had been admissible under any provisions of the Income-tax 
. Act or the annual Finance Act; and the tax so calculated shall be 20 
deducted from the amount of the income aforesaid. 
3. The net amount of income calculated in accordance with 
rule 2 shall be increased by any expenditure incurred on account 
of commission, entertainment and advertisement, to the extent 
such expenditure, in the opinion of the. Income-tax Ofticer, is 25 
excessive having regard to the circumstances of the cue: 
Provided that the previous authority of the IDSpeCting 
Assistant Commissioner is obt:iined for holding such expenditure 
to be excessive. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See aection 2(8)1 
RuLl'S FOR COMPUTINC THE CAPITAL or A COMPANY FOR TH& 
PURPOSES OF SUPER PROFITS TAX . 
1. Subject to· the other provisiOns contained in this Schedule, the 
capital of a company shall be the sum of the amounts, as on the first 3S 
day of the previous year relevant to the assessment Srear, of its paid 
up share capital and of its reserves in so far as the amounta credited 
thereto have not been allowed in computing its profits for the purposes 

13 
11 ot 1922-
41 011861. of the Indja~ Income-tax Act, 1922 or the Income-tax Act, 1961 
diminished by the amount by which the cost to it of the asset.; the 
income from which in accord~ce with the First Schedule L not 
includible in its chargeable profits. exceeds any money borrowed by 
5 itwhieh remains outstanding. 
ExpZtl:nation 1.-A paid up share capital or reserve brought into 
existence by creating or increasing (by revaluation or otherwL:.e) any 
book asset is not c:1pital for computing the capital of a company for 
the purposes of this Act. 
10 Explanation 2.-Any premium received in cash by the company 
on the issue of its shares standing to the credit of the share premium 
account shall be regarded as forming part of its paid up share capital. 
2. Where aiter the first day of the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year, the paid up share capital of a company is increased 
J 5 or reduced by any amount during that previous year, the .capital 
computed in accordance with rule 1 shall be increased or decreased, 
as the caSe may he, by a portion of that amount which is proportional 
to the portion of the previous year during which the increase or the 
reduction of the paid up share capital remained effective. 
20 3. Where a part of the income, profits and gains of a company are 
not includible in its total income as computed under the Income-tax 
Act, its capital shall be the sum ascertained in accordance with rules 
1 and 2, diminished by an amount which bears to that sum the same 
proportion as the amount of the aforesaid income, profits and gains 
25 bears to the total amount of its income, profits and gains. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 4) 
RATES or SUPER PRoFITS TAX 
Super profits tax shall be charged on the amount by which the 
30 charges,ble profits exceed the amount of the standard deduction, at 
the following rates, namely:-
3S 
(i) on an amount equal to four per cent. of the amount 
of capital as computed in accordance with the 
Second Schedule. 
(U) on the balance 
50% 
. . 

~TATEMEN'i' OF OBJECTS AND RtAs6NS 
The object of this Bill is to impose a special tax on certain com-
panieson their income and profits as reduced by the income-tax 
and super-tax chargeable thereon, in so far as such reduced amount 
exceeds six per cent. of their capital. The Notes on Clauses explain 
the various provisions contained in the Bill . 
.. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 28th February, 1963. 
c 
14 

15 
• Notes on Clausel 
Clause 2 contains definitions of the various terms and expressions 
Used in the clauses of the Bill. 
Sub-clause (5) defines 'chargeable profits' to mean the total 
income of the assessee for the previous year relevant to the assess-
ment year as computed under the Income-tax Act, 1961 and adjusted 
in accordance with the provisions of the First Schedule. 
Sub-clause (8) defines the term 'standard deduction' to mean an 
amount equal to six per cent. of the capital of the company as 
computed in accordance with the Second Schedule and adjusted in 
relation to the length of the previous year. 
Sub-clause (9) says in general that all words and expressions 
used in the Bill but not defined therein and defined in the Income-
tax Act, 1961 shall have the same meanings as in that Act. 
Clause 3 seeks to give jurisdiction to the same authorities as have 
jurisdiction under the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 4 seeks to provide for the charging of super-prQfits tax for 
the assessment year 1963-64 and subsequent assessment years on the 
chargeable profits of every company during the previous year or 
years at the rate or rates specified in the Third Schedule. 
Clause 5-
Sub-clause (1) seeks to impose a liability on the principal officer 
of every company, or in the case of a non-resident company if it 
has no principal officer in India, the person treated as its agent under 
section 163 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 tet furnish a return of the 
chargeable profits of the company l~y the 30th day of September of 
the relevant assessment year. 
Sub-clause (2) seeks to enable the- Income-tax Officer to issue a 
notice requiring the filing of a return l.r the chargeable profits within 
thirty days from the date of service of the notice. 
Under both the sub-clauses, the Income-tax Officer has been 
81lthorised to extend the time for furnishing the return. 
Clause 6 provides that the Income-tax Officer may call for 
!counts, documents or other evidence from the assessee for the 
purpose of his assessment, and shall make the assessment after 
considering all the material so obtained h y him. 
Clause 7 enables the Income-tax Officer to make a provisional 
assessment of the chargeable profits of the assessee at any time after 
the expiry of the period allowed for filing a return subject to the 
tl8\le of ~ 1" days' llotice to him inviting his ob1ections, if any, tq 
• 

18 
the proposed assessment. It has been provided that "here shall be 
no right of appeal. against such a provisional assessment and that the 
tax paid on the provisional assessment shall be deemed to have been 
paid towards the regular assessment. 
Clause 8 relates to the assessment or re-assessment of chargeable 
profits which have escaped assessment or have been under-aBBeSSed 
etc. This provides that in the case of omission or failure on the part 
of the assessee to file a return or to disclose fully and truly all the 
materials necessary for his assessment, such procet'dings may be 
initiated at any time, and in other cases within four years of the end 
of the relevant assessment year. 
CZause 9 relates to the imposition of penalties for the assessee's 
failure without reasonable cause to furnish a return of his chargeable 
profits or to produce th~· accounts, documents or evidence required 
by the Income-tax Officer, and for any concealment or. deliberate 
furnishing of inaccurate particulars of his chargeable profits. 
Clause 10 provides that the assessee shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard befor.e any penalty under clause 9 is 
imposed upon him. 
Clause 11 relates to appeals by the assessees to the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner against any order passed by the Income-tax 
Oftlcer. The provisions in this clause are on the lines of the corres-
ponding provisions in the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 12 relates to appeals to the Appellate Tribunal by 
assessees or by the Income-tax Officer under the directions of the 
Commissioner against any order made by the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner. It has been provided that in disposing of such 
appeals, the Tribunal.shall exercise the same powers and follow 
the samE' procedure as it exercises and follows in disposing of any 
appeal under the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 13 provides for the rectification of mistakes apparent 
from the record of any proceedings by the Commissioner, the Income-
ta:, Officer, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Appellate 
Tribunal, suo motu or at the instance of the assessee, within four 
years of the date on which the order sought to be rectified has been 
passed. The provisions in this clause are on the lines of the ~orre .. 
ponding provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 14 seeks to enable the Income-tax Officer to re-compute 
the chargeable profits of the assessee in consequence of any order 
of rectification or amendment passed by him under section 154 or 
section 155 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, ·in relation to the relevant 
income-tax assessment of the assessee, within four years from the 
date of the latter order. 
Clause 15 enables the Commissioner to revise any orden passed 
by the Income-tax Officer which are prejudicial to r1!venue, within 
• 

17 
a period of tW() yeats from the date of the order sought to be revised. 
This provision corresponds to section 263 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 16 enables the Commissioner to give relief to the assessee 
on revision of any orders passed by the lncome-tax Officer or the 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner subordinate to him, either of his 
own motion or on an application by the assessee. The proVlslons 
in this clause correspond to the provisions in section 264 of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 17 seeks to make applicable to the proceedings relatma to 
super-profits tax, certain provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961, 
pertaining to various matters for which no separate provision has 
been made in the Bill, e.g., issue and service of notice of demand, 
recovery of arrear tax dues, assessment proceedings against non-
residents through an agent, liability of directors of private com-
panies in liquidation, reference to High Court, appeal to the Supreme 
Court, etc. 
Clause 18 provides that all information contained in any state-
ment or returns made by the assessee or furnished in any proceeding 
under the Income-tax Act, 1961, may be used for the purposes of 
proceedings relating to the super-profits tax and vice-versa. 
Clauses 19 to 22 (both inclusive) relate to prosecution for various 
offences by way of failure to deliver returns without any reasonable 
cause, making of false statements, abetment of false returns, and 
composition of such offences. These provisions substantially 
correspond to the relevant provisions in the Income-tax Act, 1961 • . 
Clause 23 seeks to enable the Central Government to make an 
exemption, reduction in rate or other modification in respect of 
super-profits tax in favour of any class of assessees or in regard to the 
whole or any part of the chargeable profits of any class of assessees 
in order to remove any difficulty or avoid any hardship that may 
arise as a result of application of super-profits tax to the Union 
territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Daman and Diu and 
Pondicherry . 
Clause 24 seeks to enable the Central Board of Revenue to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this enactment. 
Clause 25 seeks to exclude companies which have no share capital 
from the purview of super-profits tax. 
The First Schedule lays down rules for computing the chargeable 
profits. 
The Second Schedule lays down rules for computing the capital 
of a company for_the purposes of super-profits tax. 
The Third Schedule lays down the rates at which super-profits tax 
are sought to be levied on chargeable profits exceeding the amount of 
the standard deduction. 
2780 (B) J...S...,8. 

18 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM • 
The Bill seeks to impose a new tax on all companies other thlJ'l 
companies having no share capital. This tax will be administered 
by the Income-tax Department but its proceedings relating to assess-
ment, collection and revision and appeals will be separate from that 
of income-tax. The administration of this tax will, therefore, necessi-
tate the employment of some additional staff. The expenditure on 
account of additional staff together with incidental expenses on 
administration is estimated at about Rs. 4 lakhs. 
REQUIREMENT OF PERSONNEL AND FINANCE 
I. Of~'-
Conunissioner of Income-tax 
Assistant Conunissioners 
Income-tax Officers (CI. I) 
II. Sf(~l/-
Inspectors 
Supervisors 
Headclcrks 
Stenographers . 
• 
Upper division clerks 
Stenotypist» 
Lower division clerks 
III. Incid.nral,lrP'ru.s-
IuciJenl81 expenses including Cla •• IV 
staff . 
TOTAL • 
No. 
1 
3 
13 
4 
8 
7 
4 
50 
Ia 
18 
or,S8Y 
Annual emolwnents 
lXRs. zo.400 
3xRs. 14.400 
IaXRs. 5.400 
4xRs. a.880 
8xRs. 4,32.0 
7xRs. 3,000 
4xRs. 1.800 
50 xRs. 1,800 
I2XRs. 1.680 
18xRs. 1,500 
Coat 
RI. 
Z00400 
43,aoo 
64,800 
11,520 
34,560 
al,ooo 
7,200 
90,000 
20,160 
27.000 
50.000 
3,90,000 

• 
MtMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 24 empowers the Board to make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of the Act. The matters in respect of which such rules may 
be made pertain to the form in which returns under section 5 may 
be furnished, the form in wh~ch notice for making provisional 
assessment shall be given, the form in which appeals under the Act 
may be filed and the procedure that may be followed on application 
for rectification of mistakes and application for refunds. The matters 
in respect of which rules will be made are matters of procedure, 
form or detail. 
The delegation of legislative ,power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 
'. 
l' 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to impose a special tax on certain companies. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the Lok Sabha, 
the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri M orar;; Desai, 
Minister 0/ FII'IIJJ'IC4.) 
• 