As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA on

11 JAN 1991

Bill No. 8 of 199i
‘THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY BILL, 1991

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

Causes
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. The University.
4. Objects of the University.
Powers of the University.
Jurisdiction.
University open to all classes, castes and creed
The Visitor.
Officers of the University.
10. The Chancellor.
. The Vice-Chancellor.
12. The Deans and Directors. 6
13. The Registrar.
14. The Comptroller. |
15. Other officers.
16. Authorities of the University.
17. The Board. eee
18. The Academ‘c Council.
19. The Finance Committee.
20. The Research Programme Committee.

Ser Re

=

21. The Extension Education Advisory Committee

22. The Board of Studies.

23. The Faculties.

24. Other authorities.

25, Powers to make Statutes.

26. Statutes how to be made

27. Power to make Ordinances.

28. Regulations. ie hal

29. Annual report.

30. Annual accounts, aa Mi ci,
31.

Conditions of service of employees.


ai)
CLAUSES

32. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against
students.

33. Right to appeal.

34. Provident and pension funds.

35. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities.

36. Constitution of Committees,

37. Filling of casual vacancies.

38. Proceedings of University authorities not invalidated by vacancy.

39. Protection of action taken in good faith.

49. Mode of proof of University recorded.

41. Power to remove difficulties.

42. Transitional provisions.

43. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the
Official Gazette and to be laid before Parliament.

THE SCHEDULE


8 of 1991

THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY BILL, 1991

re
BILL

to provide for the establishment and incorporation of a University, for
the North-Eastern region, for the development of agriculture and
for the furtherance of the advancement of learning and prosecution
of research in agriculture and allied sciences in that region.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic

of India as follows:— 1

1. (1) एफांड Act may be called the Central Agricultural University
Act, 1991.

5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context
otherwise requires —
(a)“Academic Council” means the Academic Council of the
10. University; :

(b) “academic staff” means such categories of staff as are
designated as academic staff by the Ordinances;

(ले “agriculture” means the basic and applied sciences of the ©

soil and water management, crop production including production

Short
title
and
commen.
cement.

Defini-
tions,


2

of all garden crops, control of plants, pests and diseases, horticulture
including floriculture, animal husbandry, including veterinary and
dairy science, fisheries, forestry including farm forestry, home-
science, agricultural engineering and technology, marketing and
processing of agricultural and animal husbandry products, land use
and management;

w

(@) “Board” means the Board of Management of the University;

(९) “Board of Studies” means the Board of Studies of the Uni-
versity;

60) “Chancellor” means the Chancellor of the University; 10

(9) “College” means a constituent college of the University
under the direct control and management of the Board whether
located at the headquarters, campus or elsewhere;

(h) “Department” means a Department of Studies of the Uni-
versity; 15

(0 “employee” means any person appointed by the University
and includes teachers and other staff of the University;

(0) “extension education” means the educational activities
concerned with the training of orchardists, farmers and other groups
serving agriculture, horticulture, fisheries in improved practices 20
related thereto and the various phases of scientific technology
related to agriculture and agricultural production including post
harvest technology and marketing;

(k) “Faculty” means Faculty of the University;

0) “North-Eastern region” means the North-Eastern region of 25
India comprising the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Sikkim and Tripura;

(m) “Ordinances” means the Ordinances of the University;

(n) “Regulations” means the Regulations made by any authority
of the University; 30

(०) “Research Advisory Committee” means the Research
Advisory Committee of. the University;

(0) “Statutes” means the Statutes of the University;

(q) “student” means a person enrolled in the University for
undergoing a course of studies for obtaining a degree, diploma or 35
other academic distinction duly instituted;

0) “teachers” means Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant
Professors, Teaching Faculty Members and their equivalent appoint-
ed for imparting instruction or conducting research or extension
education programmes or combination of these in the University, 40
college or. any Institute maintained by the University and designated
as teachers by the Ordinances;


10

15

20

25

35

40

(5) “University” means the Central Agricultural Un‘versity
established under this Act;

@) “Vice-Chancellor” means the Vice-Chancellor of the Uni-
versity;

(u) “Visitor” means the Visitor of the University.

3. (0) There shall be established a University by the mame of the “Central
Agricultural University”.

(2) The headquarters of the University shall be af Imphel in the
Manipur and it may also establish campuses af such other places
jurisdiction as it may deem fit.

(2) The first Chancellor and the first Vice-Chancellor and the lirst mrembers
of the Board, the Academic Council and all persons who may heresiter become
such officers or members, so long as they continue to hold such office 07 member
ship, are hereby constituted, 8 body corporate by the name of the Central
Agricultural University.

(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and 2 commo:s seol and
shall sue and be sued by the said name.

4. The objects of the University shall be—

(a) to impart education in different branches of agricultural
‘and allied sciences as it may deem fit;

(b)to further the advancement of learning and prosecution of
yesearch in agriculture and allied sciences;

हि (०0 to undertake programmes of extension education specially

to the rural people of the States under its jurisdiction; and

(d) to undertake such other purposes as it may, from time to
time, determine.

5. The University shall have the following powers, namely:—

(® to provide for instructions in agricultural and allied sciences;

(ii) to make provision for conduct of research in agricultural
and allied branches of learning;

(iii) to make provision for dissemination of the findings of
research and technical information through extension programmes;

(iv) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may
determine, diplomas or certificates to, and confer degrees or other
academic distinctions on the basis of examination, evaluation or any
other method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such
diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic distinction for good
and sufficient cause;

(v) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the
manner prescribed by the Statutes;

‘The
Univer-
sity,

Objects
of the
Univer-

sity.

Powers
of the
Univer-
sity.


4

(vi) to provide lectures and instructions for field workers,
village leaders and other persons not enrolled as regular students
of the University and to grant certificates to them as may be pres-
cribed by the Statutes;

(vit) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other 5
University or authority or institution of higher learning in such
manner and for such purposes as the University may determine;

(viii) to establish and maintain colleges relating to agriculture,
fisheries, dairying, veterinary medicine and animal science, home-
science, agricultural engineering, forestry and allied sciences; 10

(ix) to establish and maintain such campuses, special centres,
specialised laboratories, libraries, museums or other units for research!
and instruction as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary
for the furtherance of its objects;

(0) to institute teaching, research and extension education 15
posts and to make appointments thereto;

(wi) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to
make appointments thereto;

(wii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, student-
ships, medals and prizes; 20

(viii) to determine standards of admission to the University,
which may include examination, evaluation or any other method
of testing;

(viv) to institute and maintain residential accommodation for
students and employees; 25

(ev) to supervise the residences of the students of the University
and to make arrangements for promoting their health and general
welfare; !

(evi) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of em-
ployees, including their code of conduct; 30

(evit) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students
and the employees, and to make such disciplinary measures in this
regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;

(xviii) to fix, demand and receive such fees and other charges
as may be prescribed by the Statutes; 35

(xix) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government,
on the security of the property of the University, money for the pur-
pose of the University:

(wx) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquirs,
hold, manage and dispose of any property, movable or immovable, 40
including trust and endowment properties for the purposes of the
University; 1

(एक) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary,
incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any of its objects.


LOK SABHA

CORRIGENDA
to
THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY BILL, 1991

(To _be/As introduced in Lok Sabha)

Page (i), in clause 12,=
omit - "The"
Page (i), in clause 23,-
omit "The"
Page (ii), in élause 40,-
for "recorded" read "record"
Page 6, line 26,-
for “Deans;* real "Deans"-
Page 6, line 249,=
for “"Directers;™ read "Director;"
Page 7, in the marginal heading to clause 12,-
for "The Deans" xegd "“Dean¥
Page 8, in the marginal heading to claise 23,—
६307 "The Faculties" 28430. "Faculties"
Page 9 line 2,-
for"clause (1)" read "clause (7)"
29698 9, lines 6 dnd 7)=
omit “and other bodies"
Page 9, line 10,-
enit Wand Bedies,”
Page 9, lines 11 ard 12,- 3

omit “andtether bodies®


3, line (27.6
Ler  “anirloyeet aee8 “employeat
1. Page 195: Line 5 ५ Bow

utc: Sinmicn

14. Page 13, Line 27,»

४७8, 7.६ Laseny > hye

is. Page 13, ANS! BO je

GME MOR boty iy
1) Page 13, in the marginal ead ing to clause 38,6
for *Broceadings ‘of Uneversity® tiers
ead "Procesd ings of University"

176! Page. 14; in the Marginal heading to clause 40, « |
for University: recorded f2ad "University record®
AB 6 s Page, 14, line 32,«७ ४
५. Mwhot
19.) Page 14) dine 36, >
: omit 4। 3

Page 15, dine hye

ior "Statutes , Ondinances™ f

aad "Statute; Onlinancan

eet 8007 Page-17,

"office om ants) the? hae
028 9499-18, lina 2am न
Lor “Oxndificto ८९२५ + "७५ ‘of Picio®
Page 18, line 6,4 a है a
ond opt

Page 18, line Tas



eS
x 55%. Ore
256. Page 18, line 9,-

omit “or body"
26. Pag? 18, line 26,-

for “sixty year” xread “sixty years”

"pe whole time” ead "be a whole time"

+ध
।
।क्‍
। 27% Page 19, line 39,-
i
।
।

28. line ll,-

*
ba Yond" read an™
है 29.! Page 24, line 1,-

or "set up" read "set-up"
30. Page 24, line 2,+
| for “sections" gead "section bias
eae Page 26, line 15,-

for “set up" read "set-up"

32, Page 27, line 20,-

omit "and"
33. Page 27, line 21,-
or "“Visitor:" read "Visitor; and"

Hh

Page 28, line 2

Wnivesity," zead University,"

Page 39, line 31,-
be" read "by"

Page <

gbead “authorities”
Page 32, line 20,-

for "of showing" read "to show"
Page 32, lines21,—

omit “action”
Page 34, line 26,-

for “ex-officio” xead “ex officio"

iva gle



40. Page 38, line 2355
cash, "Couneil for" xead "Council of"
41. ie 40, line 5,— मे है
हक gnit "also"
‘72 ee ann Line 25,-
for Mine Ceca and examination Board's"
: kead "instruction and examination, Board"
43. Bage 40, Tine 33,5
for "relating" read “relate!

NEW DELHI;

Pe esr ay
aka

Pausa 20,. 1912


aw

20

25

20

40

45

5

6. (1) The jurisdiction and responsibility of the University with res-
pect to teaching, research and programmes of extension education at the
University level, in the field of agriculture shall extend to the States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Sikkim and Tripura.

(2) Al! colleges, research and experimental stations or other institu-
tions coming under the jurisdiction and authority of the University shall
be its constituent units under the full management and control of its

cificers and authorities and no such units shall be recognised as affiliated

units, {

(3) The University may assume responsibility for the training of
field extension workers and others and may develop such training centres
as may be required in various parts of the States under its jurisdiction.

7. The University shal! be open to persons of either sex and of what-
ever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the Univer-
sity to adopt or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious
belief or profession in order io entitle him to be appointed as a teacher
of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a
student in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise
any privilege thereof:

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the
University from making special provisions for the employment or ad-
mission of women, handicapped or of persons belonging to the
weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes.

8. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4), the Visitor
shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made, by such person
or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, laboratories,
libraries, museums, workshops and equipments, and of any institution or
college and also of the examination, instruction and other work conduc-
ted or done by the University, and to cause an inquiry to be made in like
manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration and

finances of the University. ।

(3) The Visitor shall, in every case, give notice to the University of
his intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made and the Univer-
sity shall, on receipt of such notice, have the right to make, within thizty
days from the date of receipt of the notice or such other period as
the Visitor may determine, such representations to him as it may consi-
der necessary. | i

(4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the Uni-
versity, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as
is referred to in sub-section (2).

(5) Where an inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by
the Visitor, the University shall be entitled to appoint a representative
who shall have the right to appear in person and to be heard on such
inspection or inquiry.

(6) The Visitor may address the Vice-Chancellor with reference to
the results of such inspection or inquiry together with such views and

Jurie-
diction.

Univer-
sity.
open

io all
classes,

and
creed.

‘The
Visitor,


Ofticers
of the
Univer.
sity.

The

Chancel-

lor,

‘The
Vice.
Chancel
lor.

6

advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon as the Visitor may
be pleased to offer and on receipt of the address made by the Visitor, the
Vice-Chancellor shall Communicate forthwith to the Board the results of
the inspection or inquiry and the views of the Visitor and the advice
tendered by him upon the action to be taken thereon. $

(7) The Board shall communicate through the Vice-Chancellor to
the Visitor such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken
by it upon the results of such inspection or inquiry

(8) Where the Board does not within a reasonable time, take action
to the satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any 10
explanation furnished or representation made by the Board, issue such
directions 88 he may think fii and the Board shail be bound to comply
with such directions.

(®) Without prejudice to the for2g3‘ng provisions of this section, the
Visitor may, by an order in writing annul any proceeding of the Univer- 15
sity which is not in conformity with this Act, the Statutes or the
Ordinances:

Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the

University to show cause why such an order should not be made and,
if any cause js shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider the same. 20

(10) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be specified
by the Statutes. हि

9, The following shall be the officers of the University, namely: —
(1) the Chancellor;
(2) the Vice-Chancellor; 45
(3) Deans; ! !
(4) Directors; 1
(5) the Registrar:
(6) the Comptroller; and

(7) such other officers as may be prescribed by the Statutes to 30
be the cffcers of the University.

30. (1) The Chancellor shali be appointed by the Visitor in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

(2)—**e Chancellor shali, by ue of his office. be the Head of the
University. \ 1 35

(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocations of
the University held for conferring degrees.

वा, (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and acade- 40
mic officer of the University. and shall exercise general supervision and
control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the decisions
of all the authorities of the University. i e


20

w
BR

0

7

(3) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immesiate
ection is necessary on any matter, exercise any power conferred en any
authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to
such authority the action taken by him on such matter:

Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such
action ought not to have been taken, it may refer the matter to the
Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:

Provided further that any person in the service of the University who
is aggrieved by the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under this sub-
section shall have the right to appeal against such action to the Board
within three months from the date on which decision on such action is
communicated to him and thereupon the Board may confirm, modify or
reverse the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor.

(4) The Vice-Chancellor, if he is of opinion that any decision of
any authority of the University is beyond the powers of the authority
conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordi.:ances or
that any decision taken is hot ih the interest of the Universitv, may ask
the anthority concerned to review its decision within sixty days of such
decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision either in
whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of
sixty davs, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose des
thereon shall be final. |

(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers ard per-
form such other duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the
Ordinances. Mi

12, Every Dean and every Director shall be appointed in such
tanner and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may
be prescribed by the Statutes.

13. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Statutes. ) |

(2) ‘The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreement,
sign documents and authenticate records on behalf of the University and
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed
hy the Statutes. i

14. The Comptroller shall be appointed in such manner and shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by
the Statutes. \

45, The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other
officers of the University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.

16. The following shall be the authorities of the University,
namely:— । tr ie ;
(1) the Board; | j
(2) the Academic Council; 1

‘The
Deans
and
Directors.

The

Comptrol-
ler, हे

Other
officers. |”



The
Board.

‘The
Academic
Council.

The
Finance
Com-
mittee.

The
Research
Program-
me Com-
mittee.

The
Exten.
sion
Educa-
tion .
Avisory
Com.
mittee.

The
Board
of
Studies.

‘The
Pacuk,
tes.

8

(3) the Finance Committee;
(4) the Research Programme Committee;

(5) the Extension Education Advisory Committee;
(6) The Board of Studies; and

(7) such other authorities as may be prescribed by the Siatu’ >:
to be the authorities of the University.

17. (1) The Board shall be the principal executive bod; of the

University. 3
(2) The constitution of the Board, the term of office of its members
and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.

48. (1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body
of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, t'e
Statutes and Ordinances, have the control and general regulation of, and
be responsible for, the maintenance of standards of learning. ecucation,
instruction, evaluation and examination within the University and shall
exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be
conf»rred or imposed upon it by the Statutes.

(2) The constitution of the Academi- Conncil and the term of office
of its members shall be prescribed by the Statutes.

19. The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.

20, The constitution, powers and functions of the Research Progrem-
me Committee shall be prescribed by the Statutes.

21. The constitution, powers and functions of the Extension Educa-
tion Advisory Committee shall be prescribed by the Statutes:

22. "The: constitution, powers and-functions of ‘the Board of -Siudies
shail be prescribed-by the Statutes.

20

23. The University shall have such Faculties as may be prescribed-by,,

the Statutes. .


5

30

8

40

24, The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities
of the University referred to in clause (1) of section 16 shall be such as
may be prescribed by the Statutes.

25. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may pro-
vide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

_ (@) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities and
other bodies of the University, as may be constituted from time to
time; :

(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members

of the said authorities and bodies, the filling up of vacancies of mem-
hers, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other

bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;

(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officer: of the

University and their emoluments;

(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and otner emp-
soyees of the University and their emoluments;

(e) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working in any
other University or organisation for a specific period for undertaking
a joint project;

(f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for
pension, insurance and provident fund, the manner of termination of
service and disciplinary action;

(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of the emp-
loyees of the University;

(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between
employees or students and the University;

(i) the procedure for appeal to the Board by any emrloyee or
student against the action of any officer or authority of the University;

(9) the: conferment: of autonomous status on.a College or an Ins-
titution or a Department; 2

(0 the establishment and abolition of Departments, Centres,
Colleges and Institutions;

()) the conferment of honorary degrees;

(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates ard other
academic distinctions;

(n) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships,
medals, and prizes; = ‘
(0) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities ‘or Officers
of the University; | 2
“(p) the maintenance of discipline among the employ2es and
students; :

(q) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be pres-
cribed by the Statutes.

Other
autho.
tities.

Powers
to make
Statutes.


Statutes
how

to be
made.

Power
to make
Ordt-
mances

10

26. (1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.
(2) The Board may from time to time make Statutes or may amend

or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-section (1):

Provided that the Board shall not make, amend or repeal any Statute
affecting the status, powers or constitution of any authority of the Uni-
versity until such authority has been given an opportunity of expressing
an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expres-
sed shall be considered by the Board.

(3) Every Statute or any amendment or repeal of a Statute
shall require the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or with-
hold assent or remit to the Board for consideration.

(4 A Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing
Statute shall have no validity unless it has been assented to by the Visitor.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sec-
tions, the Visitor may make Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes
Teferred to in subsection (1), during the period of three years imme-
diately after the commencement of this Act:

Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of

three years, make, within one year from the date of such expiry, such

Statutes as he may consider necessary and such Statutes shall be laid 2,

before both Houses of Parliament.

‘(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sec-
tions, the Visitor may direct the university to make provisions in the
Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the Board is
unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the

Visitor may, after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the ~

Board for its inability to comply with such direction, make or amend the
Statutes suitably.

27. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —

(@ the admission of students to the University and their enrol-
ment as such;

(0) the courses of study to be laid down for ail degrees, diplo-
mas and certificates of the University;

(c) the medium of instruction ana examinat‘on;

(a) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates arid other acade-
mic distinctions, the qualifications for the same and the means to be
taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;

(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University

and for admission to the examinations, degrees, diplomas and certi-
ficates of the University; i

@ the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, stu-
lentships, medals and prizes; - !

10

35


11

> (g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office
‘and manner of appointment and the duties of examining bodies,
examiners and moderators;

(0. the conditions of residence of the students;

5 (i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the
residence, discipline and teaching of women students and the pres-
cribing of special courses of studies for them;

(j) the appointment and emoluments of employees other than
those for whom provision has been made in the Statutes;

(k) the establishment of Boards of Studies, special centres, spe-
cialized laboratories and other committees;

(0) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other
Universities and authorities including learned bodies or associations;

(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body
15 which is considered necessary for improving the academic life of the
University:

(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and
other academic staff as are not prescribed by the Statutes;

(0) the management of Colleges and Institutions established by
20 the University;

(p) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of
employees; and

(q) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be
provided for by the Ordinances.

25 (2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor with
the previous approval of the Central Government and the Ordinances so
‘made may be amended or repealed at any time by the Board in the manner
prescribed by the Statutes. {

28. ‘The authorities of the University may make Regu'ations, consis-

30 tent with this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of

their own business and that of the committees appointed by them and not

provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner
prescribed by the Statutes.

29, (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under

35 the direction of the Board, which shall include, among other matters, the
steps taken by the University towards the fulfilment of its objects and
shall be submitted to the Board on or after such date as may be prescrib-
ed by the Statutes and the Board shall consider the report in its annual
meeting.

40 (2) The Board shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along
with its comments, if any.

(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-section (1),
shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon
as may be, cause the same to pe laid before both Houses of Parliament,

Regula-
tions.

Annual
report.


Annual
accounts.

Condi:
tions of
service
ofemplo.
yees.

Proee-
dure of
appeal
and
arbitra.
tion in
discipli-
nary
cases
against
students,

12

30. (1) ‘The annual accounts and the balance sheet of the University
shall be prepared. under the directions of the Board and shall, once at
least every year and at intervals of not more than fifteen months, be
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or by such
persons as he may authorise in this behalf. =

(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report
thereon shall be submitted to the Board and the Visitor along with the
observations of the Board.

(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts
shall ke brought to the notice of the Board and the observations of the
Board, if any, shall be submitted to the Visitor.

0

(4)A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as
submitted to the Visitor, shall also be submitted to the Central Govern-
nient, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before
both Houses of Parliament. 15

(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both
Houses of Parliament shal! be published in the Official Gazette.

31. (1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a
written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy
of which shall be furnished to the employee concerned. 20

(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University
and any employee shall, at the request of the employee, be referred to a
Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Board,
one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire ap-
pointed by the Visitor. 25

(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie
in any civil court in respect of the matters decided by the Tribunal.

(4) Every request made by the employee under sub-section (2),
shall be deemed to be a submission to arbitration upon the terms of this
section within the meaning of the Arbitration Act, 1940. 30

(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.

32. (1) Any student or candidate for an examination whose name
has been removed from the rolls of the University by the orders or resolu-
tion of the Vice-Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Com- 35
mittee, as the case may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at
the examinations of the University for more than one year, may, within
ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution
by him, appeal to the Board and the Board may confirm, modify, or
reverse the decision of the Vice-Chancellor or the Committee, as the
case may be.

(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the
University against a student shall, at the request of such student, be
referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub-sections
(2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 31 shall, as far as may be, apply to a 45
reference made under this sub-section.

oo

2 06 18


wo

10

a

20

25

30

13

33. Every employee or student of the University or of a college
or institution maintained by the University shall, notwithstanding any-
thing contained in this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as
may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Board against the decision of
any officer or authority of the University or any college or an institu-
tion, as the case may be, and thereupon the Board may confirm, modify
or reverse the decision appealed against.

34, (1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its emplo-
yees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes
as it may deem fit in such manner and subject to such conditions as
may be prescribed by the Statutes.

(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constitut-
ed, the Central Government may declare that the provision of the Provi-
dent Funds Act, 1925, shall apply to such fund, as if it were a Government
provident fund.

35. If any question arises as to whether any person has been duly
appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority of the
University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision
thereon shall be final.

36. Where any authority of the University is given power by this
‘Act or the Statutes to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save
as otherwise provided, consist of the members of the authority concern-
ed and of such other person, if any, as the authority in each case may
think fit.

37. All casual vacancies among the members (other than ea officio
members) of any authority of the University shall be filled,
as soon as may be, the person who appointed or co-cpted the
member whose place has become vacant and person appointed or co-
opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority
or body for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he
fills would have been a member.

38. No act or proceedings of any authority of the Uni-
versity shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy
or vacancies among its members.

Right to
appeal.

Provi-
dent and
pension
funds.

rities

Consti-
tution of
Commit-
tees.

Filling
of casual

cies.

Proceed-
ings of
‘Unvver-
sity
autho-
rittes

invali.
dated by
vacancy.


14

Protec. 39. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against
tion of the Board, any authority or officer or other employee of the University
hay for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in
in good pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordi-
faith, nances. nae H 5 |
Mode of 40. A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding. reso-

proofef ution of any authority or Committee of the University, or other docu-
ae ments in possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly
paca: maintained by the University, if verified by the Registrar, shall be re-
ceived as prima facie evidence of such receipt, application, notice, order,
proceeding, resolution or documents or the existence of entry into the
register and shall be admitted as evidence of the matters and transac-
tions therein where the original thereof would, if produced, have been
admissible in evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 or in any other law for the time being in force. 15 i of 187

10

Power 41, (1) Tf any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
toremove Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official
“मम Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of
a this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the
difficulty: 20

Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of three years from the commencement of this Act.

(2) Every order made under this section shal! be laid, as soon as may
he after it is made, before each House of Parliament.

Transi. 42. Notwithstanding anything contoined in this Act and the 25

tional =
oe Statutes,

Bere (a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice-Chancellor shall be
appointed by the Visitor and shall hold office for a term of five years;

(b) the first Registrar and the first Comptroller sha'l be appointed
by the Visitor and each of the said o%icers shall hold office for a 30
term of three years;

(c) the first members of the Board who shall be nominated by
the Visitor and shall hold office for'a term of three years;

(व) the first members of the Atademic Council shall be nomi-
a nated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a term of three 35
: years: |

Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or autho-
tities, the same shall be filled by appointment or nomination, as the case
may he, by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or nominated shall
hold office for so long as the officer or member in. whose place ne is ap- 40
pointed or nominated would have held office, if such vacaney had not
occurred.


i 15 1

43. (1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act
shall be published in the Official Gazette.

(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
5 Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive ses-
sions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or heth Houses
10 agree that the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation should not be made,
the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, how-
ever, that any such modification or annulment shall he without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously dore under that Statute, Ordinance
or Regulation.

(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall
include the p-wer to give retrospective effect from a date not earlier
than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, Ordinances
or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given
to any Statute, Ordinance or Resulation so as to preiudicially affect
20 the interests of any person to whom such Statutes, Ordinances or Regu-

Jations may be applicable.

Statutes,
Ordi-
ances
and
Regu-
lations
to be
publish.
ed in the
Official
Gazette
and

to be
laid
before
Parlia-
ment,


THE SCHEDULE
(See section 26)

THE STATUTES Of THE UNrvERstty
The Chancellor

1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a
Panel of not less than three persons recommended by the Board from

amongst persons of eminence in education in general and agricultural
sciences in particular:

Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons
So recommended he may call for fresh recommendations from the Board.

(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall
not be eligible for reappointment,

Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the

Chancellor shall continue to hold office until his successor enters upon
his office.

The Vice-Chancellor

2. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from
@ panel of not less than three persons who shall be recommended by a
Committee as constituted under clause (2);

Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons
included in the panel, he may call for a fresh panel.

(2) The Committee referred to in clanse (1), shall consist of a no-
minee of the Visitor, the Director-General of the Indian Council of
Agricultural Research and the Secretary to the North-Eastern Council,
set-up under section 3 of the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971 (84 of

1971) and the nominee of the Visitor shall be the convenor of the
Committee,

(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole-time salaried officer of
the University.

(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a term 61
from the date on which he enters upon his office, or until
age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier,
for. reappointment:

f five years
il he attains the
and he shall not be eligible

Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five

years, he shall continue in office until his successor is appointed and
enters upon his office:

Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice-Chancellor
after his term has expired, to continue

in office for such period not
exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him.

16 %

5

25

30


i> & 7

(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vicé-
Chancellor shall be as follows: —

(i) The Vice-Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and
allowances other than the house rent allowance, at the rates fixed by
5 the Central Government from time to time and he shall be entitled,
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his
term of office and no charge shall fall on the Vice-Chancellor in tes-

pect of the maintenance of such residence.

(ii) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits
10 and allowances as may be fixed by the Board with the approval
of the Visitor from time to time:

Provided that where an employee of the University or a College or
an Institution maintained by it, or of any other University or any
Institution maintained by or affiliated to such other University, is

15 appointed as the Vice-Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to
contribute to any provident fund of which he is a member and the
University shall contribute to the account of such person in that pro-
yident fund at the same rate at which the person had been contri-
buting immediately before his appointment as the Vice-Chancellor:

20 Provided further that where such employee had been a member
of any pension scheme, the University shall make the necessary
contribution to such scheme.

(iii) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling
allowance at such rates as may be fixed by the Board.

(iv) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay

s at the rate of thirty days in a calendar year and the leave shall be
credited to his account in advance in two half-yearly instalments of
fifteen days each on the Ist day of January, and July every year:

Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor assumes or relinquishes

30 charge of the office of the Vice-Chancellor during the currency of a

half year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at the rate of
two and-a-half days for each completed month of service.

(v) In addition to the leave referred to in sub-clause (#0), the
Vice-Chancellor shall also be entitled to half pay leave at the rate
of twenty days for each completed year of service. This half pay

35. Teave may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medi-
cal certificate. When commuted leave is availed, twice the amount
of half pay leave shall be debited against half pay"leave due.

(6) If the office of the Vice-Chancellor becomes vacant due to death,
40 resignation or otherwise, or if he is unable to perform Mi duties due to
{ll health or any other cause, the senicr-most Dean or Director, as the
case may be, shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor until a
sew Vice-Chancellor assumes office of the Vice-Chancellor attends to
the duties of his office, as the case may be.
रू


18
Powers and duties of the Vice-Chancellor

3. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be ex-officio Chairman of the Board,
the Academic Council and the Finance Committee and shall, in the

absence of the Chancellor, preside at the convocations held for conferring

degrees. 5
(2) The Vice-Chancellor or shall be entitled to be present at, and

address, any meeting of any authority or other body of the University,

but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of such
authority or body

(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to see that this Act, 10
the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations are duly observed, and
he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such observance.

(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the
University and shall give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of
the University. 15

(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the
Proper maintenance of discipline in the University and he may delegate
any such powers to such person or persons as he may deem fit

(6) The Vice-Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to
be convened the meeting of the Board, the Academic Council and the 20
Finance Committee.

Deans of Colleges

4. (1) Every Dean of a
Chancellor from among the Pr.
years and he shall be el

College shall be appointed by the Vice-
ofessors in the College for a period of three
igible for reappointment: 25

Provided that a Dean on

attaining the age of sixty year shall cease to
hold office as such:

Provided further that if at an;
the Vice-Chancellor, or a Dean
behalf, shall exercise the powe

y time there is no Professor in a College,
authorised by the Vice-Chancellor in this
rs of the Dean of the College 30

(2) When the office of the Dean
reason of illness, absence or any oth
Of his office, the duties of the office
as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint

is vacant or when the Dean is,

shall be performed by such person
for the purpose.

(3) The Dean shall be the Hi

ead of the College and shall be respon- 35
sible for the conduct and mainte

enance of the standards of teaching and

all have such other functions as may be
Prescribed by the Ordinances,

(4) ‘The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any
meeting of the Boards of Studies or Committees of the College, as the 49
Sree Ly De butt shall not have the aise 60 एप thereat auieeeite isa
member thereof,


Dean of Students’ Welfare

5. (1) The Dean of Students’ Welfare snall be appointed from amongst
the teachers of the Universily, not below the rank of an Associate Pro-
fessor, by the Board on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor.

5 (2) The Dean appointed under clause (1) shall be a whole-time officer
and shall hold office for a term of three years and shall be eligible for
reappointment:

Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is considered neces-

sary, appoint, on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor, a teacher,
10 not below the rank of an Associate Professor to discharge the duties of
the Dean of Students’ Welfare in addition to his duties as such teacher,

and in such a case, the Board may sanction a suitable allowance to be
paid to him.

(3) A person who is appointed as the Dean of Students’ Welfare

15 Shall continue to hold his lien on his substantive post and shall be eligi-

ble to all the benefits that would have otherwise accrued to him, but
for his appointment as the Dean of Students’ Welfare.

(4) When the office of the Dean of Students’ Welfare is vacant or

when the Dean of Students’ Welfare is, by reason of illness or absence

20 or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties

of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor
may appoint for the purpose.

(5) The Dean of Students’ Welfare shall perform the following
duties, namely:—

मत (a) to make arrangements of housing of students;
(b) to arrange programme of student counselling;

(c) to arrange for the employment of students in accordance with
the plans approved by the Vice-Chancellor;

(a) to supervise the extra-curricular activities with the plans
approved by the Vice-Chancellor;

30
(e) to assist in the placement of the graduates of the University;
(f) to organise and maintain contact with the alumni of the Uni-
versity;
(g) to perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by
35 the Vice-Chancellor.

The Director of Research

6. (1) The Director of Research shall be appointed by the Board on
the recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose
and he shall be whole-time salaried officer of the University.

(2) The Director of Research shall hold office for a term of three
years and shali be eligible for reappointment:

Provided that the Director of Research on attaining the age of sixty
years shall cease to hold office as such.

G


20 j

(3) The Director of Research shall be responsible for the supervision
and coordination of research programmes in the University.

The Director of Extension Education

7. (1) The Director of Extension Education shall be appointed by the
Board on the recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for
the purpose and he shall be a whole-time officer of the University,

(2) The Director of Extension Education shall hold office for a term
of three years and shall be cligible for reappointment:

Provided that the Director of Extension Education on attaining the
age of sixty years shall cease to hold office as such.

(3) The Director of Extension Education shall be responsible for the
supervision and coordination of all Extension Education Programmes of
the University.

Registrar हे

8. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Board on the recom-
mendation of a Selection Commiitce constituted for the purpose and shall
be a whole-time salaried officer of the University.

* (2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible
for reappointment,

(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the
Registrar shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances:

Provided.that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty
years:

Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attain.
ing the age of sixty years, continue in office until his successor is appointed
and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a period of one year,
whichever is earlier,

(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar
is, by reason of illness, absence, or any other cause, unable to perform the
duties of his office, the duties of the office shall he performed by such
Person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.

(8) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action
agzinst such of the employees, excluding teachers as may be specified in
the order of the Board and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer
warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of censure or the with-
holding of increment:

Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person con-
then ins been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against
the action proposed to be taken in regard to him,

(0) An appeal shall lie to the Vice-Chancellor against any order of
the Registrar imposing any of the penalties specified in sub-clause (०).

10

35


21

(० In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond
the power of the Registrar is called for, the Registrar shall, upon conelu-
tion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice-Chancellor along with his
recommendations:

‘ Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Board against an order of the
Vice-Chancellor imposing any penalty.

(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio Secretary of the Board and the
Academic Council, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of
these authorities.

10 (7) It shall be the duty of the Registrar—

(a) to be the custodian of ihe records, the common seal and such
other property of the University as the Board shall commit to his

charges; हि

(0) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Board, the Aca-
1S demie Council and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;

(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Board, the
Academie Council and of any Committees appointed by those autho-
rities;
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Board and the
20. Academie Council;

(e) to arrange. for and superinteng the examinations of the
University in accordance with the manner prescribed by the Ordin-
ances;

(0) to supply to the Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings
25. the authorities of the University as soon as they are issued; and the
minutes of such meetings;

(g) to represent the University in suils or proceedings by or
against the University, sign powers-of-attorney and verify pleadings
or depute his representative for the purpose; and

30 (h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Stax
tutes, the Ordinances or the Regulations or as may be required, from
time to time, by the Board or the Vice-Chancellor,

The Comptroller

9. (1) The Comptroller shall be appointed by the Board on the re-
35 commendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and
he shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the University,

(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible
for reappointment.

(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the
40 Comptroller shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances:

Provided that a Comptroller shall retire on attaining the age of
sixty years:

Provided further that the Comptroller shall, notwithstanding his
attaining the age of sixty years, continue in office until his successor

45 18 appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a period
of one year, whichever is earlier,


22

(4) When the office of the Comptroller is vacant or when the
Comptroller is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, un-
able to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be

performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the
purpose.

(5) The Comptroller shall be ex officio Secretary of the Finance
Committee, but shall not be deemed to be a Member of such Com-
mittee.

(6) The Comptroller shall—

(@) exercise general supervision over the funds of the Uni-
versity and shall advise it as regards its financial policy; and

(b) perform such other financial functions as may be
assigned to him by the Board or as may be prescribed by the Statutes
or the Ordinances.

(7), Subject to the control of the Board, the Comptroller shall—

(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the
University including trust and endowed vroperty;

(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Board for recurring
and non-recurring expenditure for a year are not exceeded and
that all moneys are expended on the purpose fer which they are
granted or allotted;

(० be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and
the budget of the University and for their presentation to the
Board;

(7) keep a constant watch on the state of the cask and bank
halances and on the state of investments;

(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise
on the methods of collection employed;

(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and
equipment are maintained up-to-date and that stock-checking is
conducted, of equipment and other ‘consumable materials in all
offices, Specialised Laboratories, Colleges and Institutions main-
tained by the University;

(9) bring to the notice of the Vice-Chancellor unauthorised
expenditure and other financial irregularities and suggest discipli-
nary action against persons at fault; and

(h) call for from any office, Laboratory, College or Institution
maintained by the University any information or returns that he
may consider necessary for the performance of his duties.

20

25

30

35

(8) Any receipt given by the Comptroller or the person or persons 40

duly authorised in this behalf by the Board for any money payable to
the University shall be sufficient discharge for payment of such money.


23

Heads of Departments

» 10. (1) Each Department shall have a Head who shall be not

below the rank of an Associate Professor and whose duties and func-

tions and terms and conditions of appointments shall be prescribed by
5 the Ordinances:

Provided that if there is more than one Professor in any Depart-
ment, the Head of the Department shall be appointed by the Board on
the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor from among the Professors:

Provided further that in the case of Departments where there is
10 only one Professor, the Board shall have the option to appoint, on the
recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor, either the Professor or and
Associate Professor as the Head of the Department:
Provided further that in a Department where there is no Professor,
an Associate Professor may be appointed as the Head of the Depart-
5 ment by the Board on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor:
Provided also that if there is no Professor or Reader, in a Depart-
ment, the Dean of College concerned shall act as the Head of the
Department.
(2) It shall be open to a Professor or an Associate Professor to
20 decline the offer of appointment as the Head of the Department.
(3) A Professor or an Associate Professor appointed as the Head of
the Department shall hold office as such for a period of three years
and. shall be eligible for reappointment.

_ (4) A Head of a Department may resign his office at any time during
25 his tenure of office. A

(5) A Head of a Department shall perform such functions as may be
prescribed by the Ordinances.
Librarians

11. (1) Every Librarian shall be appointed by the Board on the

30 recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the pur-
\ pose-and he shall be a whole-time officer of the University.

(2) Every Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such
duties as may be’ assigned to him by the Board.
Constitution, powers and functions of the Board
35... 12. (1) The Board shall-consist of the following members, namely: —
6) the Vice-chancellor, ex officio Chairman;

(ii) two secretaries from among the secretaries in charge of the

Departments of Agriculture and Forests of a State in the North-Eastern

_ tegion to be nominated by the Visitor by rotation in the alphabetical
40 order to represent that State;

(8) two eminent scientists to be nominated by the Visitor;
(iv). two distinguished persons representing Agro-based industries
to be nominated by the Visitor; !
= (०) the Deputy Director-General (Education) _ representing
45... छाल Indian Council of Agricultural Research;


24

(vi) the Secretary to the North-Eastern Council set up under
sections of the North-Eastern Council Act, 1971 (84 of 1971);

(vii) two Deans of Colleges to be nominated by the Vice-Chan-
cellor on rotational basis;

(viii) two persons representing farmers in the States of the 5
North-Eastern region to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor by
rotation in the alphabetical order of those States;

(ix) an industrialist or a manufacturer having special knewledge
in agricultural development to be nominated by the Visitor;

(x) one woman social worker representing women social organi- 10
sation in the North-Eastern region;

(vi) an Advisor (Agriculture), Planning Commission;

(xii) a distinguished authority on forestry, social forestry or en-
vironment management to be nominated by the Visitor;

(xiii) three persons not below the rank of Joint Secretary repre- 15
senting respectively the Departments of the Central Government
dealing with Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Forestry; and

(wiv) the Registrar of the University, Secretary.

(2) The term of office of the members of the Board, other than ex

officio members, shall be two years.

(3) The Board shall have the power of management and administra-

tion of the revenue and property of the University and the conduct

of all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided

for.

(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordi- sd
nances, the Board shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it,

have the following powers, namely:—

(6) to create teaching and academic posts. to determine the
number and emoluments of such posts and to define the duties and
conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff and Deans

of Colleges, Directors and heads of other institutions maintained by
the University; >

(i) to appoint such teachers and other academic staff, as may
be necessary, and Deans of Colleges, Directors and heads of other _
Institutions maintained by the University on the recommendation 25
of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fll up
temporary vacancies therein;

(iii)to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary

posts and to make appointments thereto in the manner prescribed
by the Ordinances; 40

(iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University
other than the Chancellor and the Vice-Chancellor, and to make

necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of such
officer during his absence; F

(v) to regulate and enforce discinline among employees a accor- 45
dance with the Statutes and the Ordinances


: 25 पु
(vi) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments,
property, business and all other administrative affairs of the Univer-

ay. and for that purpose हे! appoint such agents as it may. think
hf

(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non-
recurring expenditure for a year on the recommendations of the
Finance Committee; |

(viii) to invest any money belonging to the University, including
any unapplied income, in such stocks, funds, shares or securities,
from time to time, as it may think fit or in the purchase of immova-
ble property in India, with the like powers of varying such invest-
ment from time to time; \ jolla

(ix) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immov-
able property on behalf of the University;

(x) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and
other means needed for carrying on the work of the University;

(zi) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf

of the University;

(wii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and, if thought fit, to redress

any grievances of the employees and students of the University who
may, for any reason, feel aggrieved;

(aiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary,
to remove them, and to fix their fees, emoluments and travelling
and other allowances, after consulting the Academic Council;

(aiv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for
the custody and use of such seal;

(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for
the residence and discipline of women students;

(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice-Chancellor, the
Deans, Directors, the Registrar or the Comptroller or such other
employee or authority of the University or to a committee appoin-
+e by it as it may deem fit;

(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals
and prizes;

(cviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors,
Emeritus Professors; Consultants and Scholars and determine the
terms and conditions of such appointment; and
,wers and perform such other duties

(zis) to exercise such other po'

as may be conferred or imposed on it by the Act, or the Statutes.

40 Quorum for meetings of the Board

13. Seven members of the Board shall form a quorum for a meeting of

the Board.


526

Constitution and powers of the Academic Council

14. (1) The Academic Council shall consists of the

following mem-
“bers, namely: —

() The Vice-Chancellor, ex officio Member;
(i) all the Deans of the colleges of the University;

(iii) the Director of Research of the University;

(#2) the Director of Extension Education of the University;

(०) the Dean of Students’ welfare;

(vi) a Librarian;

10
(vii) five outstanding teachers to be co-opted from outside the
sUniversity representing different Faculties;

(viii) seven heads of the Department to be nominated by the
Vice-Chancellor; 1 | तर

(ix) the Education Officer or his representative to be nominated -
by the North-Eastern Council set uj

ip under section 3 of the North- 15
Eastern Council Act, 1971 (84 of 1971);

(x) the Registrar of the University, ex officio member-Secretary;

(2) The term of office of the Members of the Academic Council
other than ex officio Members shall be two years.

(3) Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic 20
Council shall, in addition to all other Powers vested in it, have the fol-
Jowing powers, namely:—

(०) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies
of the University and to give directions regarding methods of instruc-
tions, co-operative teaching among colleges and institutions, evalu- 25
ation of research or improvements in academic standards;

(०) to bring about inter-college co-ordination to establish or

appoint committees or boards, for taking up projects on an inter-
college basis;

(०) to consider matters of general academic interest either on 30
its own initiative or on a reference by a college or the Board and to -
take appropriate action thereon; and |

(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the
‘Statutes and the Ordinances regarding the academic functioning of
the University, discipline, residences, admissions, award of fellow- 35

ships and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life and atten.
dance.

Quorum for meetings of the Academic Council

15. Nine members of the Academic Council shall form a quorum
for a meeting of the Academic Council. 40

Board of Studies

16. (1) Each Department shall have a Board of Studies,

(2) The Constitution of a Board of Studies and the term of office
of its members shall be provided by the Ordinances,


21

(3) The functions of a Board of Studies shall be to approve subjects
for research for various degrees and other requirements of research deg-
rees and to recommend to the concerned Board in the manner prescribed
by the Ordinances—

5 (a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses,
but excluding research degrees;

(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and

(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching
and research:

10 Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during
the period of three years immediately after the commencement of the
Act, be performed by the Department.

Finance Committee

17. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following mem-
15 bers, namely:— *

(i) the Vice-Chancellor;

(8) the Financial Adviser, Indian Council of Agricultural Re-
search; |
(iii) three persons to be nominated by the Board, out of whom at
20. 4४४ one shall be a member of the Board; and

(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor;
(७) the Comptroller of the University, member-Secretary,

(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for
a meeting of the Finance Committee,

25 (3) The members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio
members, shall hold office for a term of three years.

(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to
record a minute of dissent if he does not agree with any decision of the
Finance Committee.

30 (5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice a year
to examine the accounts and to scrutinise proposals for expenditure.

(6) Every proposal relating to creation of posts, and those items which
have not been included in the Budget, should be examined by the Fin-
ance Committee before they are considered by the Board.

(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University

35 prepared by the Comptroller shall be laid before the Finance Committee

for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to the Board
tor approval.

(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total

40 recurring expenditure and the total non-recurring expenditure for the

year, based on the income and resources of the University (which, in the
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).


28

Selection Committees

18. (1) There shall be a Selection Committee for making recommend-
ations to the Board for appointment to the posts of teachers, comptroller,
Registrar, Librarian, Deans of Colleges, Directors and heads of other
Institutions maintained by the University.

(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified
in column 1 of the Table below shall consist of the Vice-Chancellor,
Director of Research, Director of Extension Education, a nominee of the
Visitor and the persons specified in the corresponding entry in column 2
of the said Table:

Taste

Professor =. =. + . « 0) The Hoad of the Department concerned if he
is a Professor,

(ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice-
rcellor.

(ii) Three persons not in the service of the Uni-
Versity, nominated by the Board, out of a panel
of names recommended by the Academic Council
for their special knowledge of, or interest in,
the subject with which the Professor will be
concerned,

Associate Professor/Assistant Professor (i) The Head of the Department concerned,

(0 One Professor to be nominated by the Vice-
*hancellor,

(ii) Two persons not in the service of the Univesity,
nominated by the Board, out of a panel. of
names recommended by ‘the Academic Council
for their special knowledge of, or interest in, the
subject with which the Associate Professor)
Assistant Professor will be concerned,

Registrar, Comptroller 4 . . (i) Two members of the Board nominated by it;
ant

(४) One person not in the service of the University,
nominated by the Board, ये
Librarians 5. «|. 0) Two persons not in the service of the University,
Who have special knowledge of the subject of
the Library Science/Library Administration to
be nominated by the Board,

(i) One person not in the service of the University,
nominated by the Board,

Dean of College, Directors ot head of | Throo persons not in the service of the University
Gther Institution maintained _by the of whom two shall be nominated by the Board wud
aUnivertity. ५ ७ sero fone by the Academic Council for their special
knowledge of, or interest in, a subject in which
instruction is being provided by the College_or
Institution.
El]

Nore: 1. Where the appointment is being made for an inter-discip-
linary project, the head of the project shall be deemed to be
the Head of the Department concerned.

2. The Professor to be nominated shall be Professor concerned
with the speciality for which the selection is being made and
that the Vice-Chancellor shall consult the Head of the Depart.
ment and the Dean of College before nominating the Professor.

10

15 *

20

25

50

35

40

45

50


29 \
(3) The Vice-Chancellor, or in his absence, his nominee shall preside
at the meetings of a Selection Committee:

Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed
after prior consultation with, and subject to the convenience of Visitor’s
5 nominee and the persons nominated by the Board under clause (2):

Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committee
shall not be valid unless,—

(a) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nomi-
nated by the Board is four in all, at least three of them attend the
10 meeting; and

(b) where the number of Visitor’s nominee and the persons
nominated by the Board is three in all, at least two of them attend
the meeting. 84 H

(4) The meeting of a Selection Committee shall be convened by the
15 Vice-Chancellor or in his absence by his nominee.

(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in mak-
ing recommendations shall be laid down in the Ordinances.

(6) If the Board is unable to accept the recommendations made by a
Selection Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to
20 the Visitor for final orders.

(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner
indicated below: —

(i) If the temporary vacancy is for a duration longer than one

academic session, it shall be filled on the advice of the Selection

25. Committee in accordance with the procedure indicated in the fore-
going clauses:

Provided that if the Vice-Chancel'or is satisfied that in the
interests of work it is necessary to fill the vacancy, the appointment
may be made on a purely temporary basis by a local Selection Com-

30 mittee referred to in sub-clause (ii) for a period not exceeding six
months.

(i) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an
appointment to such vacancy shall be made on the recommendation
of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the College

35 concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice-
Chancellor:

Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and
the Head of the Department, the Selection Committee may contain
two nominees of the Vice-Chancellor:

40 Provided further that in case sudden casual vacancies of teaching
posts caused by death or any other reason, the Dean may, in consul-
tation with the Head of the Department concerned, make a temporary
appointment for a month and report to the Vice-Chancellor and the
Registrar about such appointment.

_


; 30

(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recom-
mended by a regular Selection Committee for appointment under the
Statutes, be continued in service on such temporary employment,
unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee of
a-regular Selection. Committee, for a temporary or permanent
appointment, as the case may be.

Special niode of appointment

5

_ 19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the Board
may invite a person of high academic distinction and professio:al attain-
ments to accept a post of Professor or Associate Professor or any other
academic post in the University, as the case may be, on such terms and
conditions as it deems fit, and.on the person agreeing to do so appoint
him to the post.

10

(2) The Board may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff
working in any other University or organisation for undertaking a 15
joint project in accordance with the manner laid down in the Ordinances.
Appointment for a fixed tenure

20. The Board may appoint’ a person selected in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Statute 18 for a fixed tenure on such terms and 20
conditions as it deems fit.

Recognised teachers

21. (1) ‘The qualifications of recognised teachers shall be such as may
be prescribed by the Ordinances.

(2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be-made in 25
sueh manner-as ‘may be laid down in the Ordinances.

(3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the recom-
mendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose in the
manner laid down in the Ordinances.

(4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined by 30
the Ordinances made in that behalf.

(5) The Academic Council may, be a special resolution passed by a
majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting,
withdraw recognition from a teacher:

Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing
has been given to the person concerned calling upon him. to show cause,
within such time as may be specified in the notice, why such resolution
should not be passed and uritil his objections, if any, and any evidence
he may produce in support of them have been considered by the Academic
Council.

(6) Any person aggrieved by an order of withdrawal under clause 40
(5) may, within three months from the date of communication to him of
‘such order, appeal to the Board which may’ pass such orders thereon as
it thinks fit.


31

Committees H

22. (1) The authority of the University specified in section 16 may
appoint as many standing or special committees as it may deem fit, and
may appoint to such Committees persons who are not members of such
authority.

5 (2) Any such Committee appointed under clause (1) may deal with
any subject delegated to it subject to confirmation by the authority
appointing.

Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, ete,

23. (1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University

10 shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be governed by

the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are specified in
the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.

(2) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University
shall be appointed on a written contract, the form of which shall be
15 prescribed by the Ordinances.

(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause (2) shall be depo-
sited with the Registrar.

Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees

24, All the employees of the University, other than the teachers and
20 other academic staff of the University, shall, in the absence of any contract
to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and
code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the
Regulations.
Seniority list
25 25. (1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to
hold an office or be a member of an authority of the University by rotation
according to seniority, such seniority shall be determined according to
the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and, in
accordance with such other principles as the Board may, from time to
30 time, prescribe.

(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain, in
respect of each class of persons to whom the provisions of these Statutes
apply, a complete and up-to-date seniority list in accordance with the
provisions of clause (1).

35 (3) Tf two or more persons have eaual length of continuous service
in a particular grade or the relative seniority of anv person or nersons
is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar mav. on his own motion and shal!
at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Board
whose decision thereon shall be final.

40 Removal of employees of the University

26. (1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct aginst a teacher,
a member of the academic staff ar other emnlovee of the Tniversity. the
Vice-Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or member of the academic
staff, and the authority competent to anooint (hereinafter referred to as
the appointing authority) in the case of other employee, may, by order


32

in writing place such teacher, member of the academic staff or other
employee, as the case may be, under suspension and shall forthwith

report to the Board the circumstances in which the order was made:

Provided that the Board may, if it is of the opinion, that the circum-
stances of the case do not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a 5
member of ihe academic staff, revoke such order.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract
of appointment or of any other terms and conditions of service of the
employees, the Board in respect of teachers and other academic staff,
and the appointing authority, in resp2et of other employees, shall have 10
the power to remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff, or as
the case may be, other employee on grounds of misconduct.

(3) Save as aforesaid, the Board, or as the case may be, the appoint-
ing authority, shall not be entitled to remove any teacher, member of
the academic staff or other employee except for a good cause and after 15
giving three months’ notice or on payment of three months’ salary in
lieu thereof.

(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee
shall be removed under clause (2) or clause (3) unless he has been
given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action pro- 20
posed action to be taken in regard to him.

(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other

employee shall take effect from the date on which the order of removal
is made:

Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or 25
other employee is under suspension at the time of his removal, such re-
moval shall take effect from the date on which he was placed under
suspension.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions
of this Statute, a teacher, member of the academic staff or other em- 29
ployee may resign.—

(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three
months’ notice in writing to the Board or the appointing authority,
as the case may be, or by paying three months’ salary in lieu thereof;

(0) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one 35
month's notice in writing to the Board or, as the case may be, the

appointing authority or by paying one month’s salary in lew
thereof:

Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date
on which the resignation is accepted by the Board or the appointing 40
authority, as the case may he.

Honorary degrees

27. (1) The Board may, on the recommendation of the Academic
Council and by 8 resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-
thirds of the members present and voting, make proposals to the Visitor 45
for the conferment of honorary degrees:

Provided that in case of emergency, the Board may, on its own
motion, make such proposals 4


33

(2) The.Board may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less
than two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw, with
the previous sanction of the Visitor, any honorary degree conferred by
the University.

5 Withdrawal of degrees, ete.

28. The Board may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of
not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw
any degree or academic distinction conferred on, or any certificate or
diploma granted to, any person by the University for good and sufficient

10 cause:

Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in
writing has been given to that person calling upon him to show cause
within such time as may be specified in the notice why such a resolu-
tion should not be passed and unti] his objections, if any, and any

15 evidence he may produce in support of them, have beer considered by
the Board.

Maintenance of discipline among students of the University

29. (1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in
relation to students of the University shall vest in the Vice-Chancellor.

20. (2) The Vice-Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as
he deems proper to such officers as he may specify in this behalf.

(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to
the maintenance of discipline and taking such action, as may seem to
him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice-Chancellor

5 may, in exercise of his powers. by order. direct that any student or
students be expelled, or rusticated, for a specified period, or be not ad-
mitted to a course or courses of study in a college, institution or Depart-
ment of the University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for
an amount to be specified in the order, or be debarred from taking an

30 examination or examinations conducted by the University, college.
institution or Department for one or more years, or that the results of
the student or students concerned in the examination or examinations
in which he or they have appeared be cancelled.

-. @ The Deans of colleges. institutions and Heads of teaching De-

36 partments in the University shall have the authority to exercise all such
disciplinary powers over the students in their respective colleges,
institutions and teaching Departments in the University as may be
necessary for the proper conduct of such colleges, institutions and teach-
ing in the Departments.

40 (5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice-Chancellor, — the
Deans and other persons specified in clause (4), detailed rules of dis-
cipline and proper conduct shall be made by the Univerity. The Deans
of colleges, institutions and Heads of teaching Department in the Uni-
versity may also make the supplementary rules as they deem necessary

45 for the aforesaid purposes. . 4


34

(6) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign
a declaration to the effect that he submits himself to the disciplinary juris-
diction of the Vice-Chancellor and other authorities of the University.

Maintenance of Discipline among Students of Colleges, etc.

30. All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in rela- 5
tion to students of a college or an institution maintained by the Uni-
vers'ty, shall vest in the Dean of the college or institution, as the case
may be, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Ordinances.

Advisory Committee

31. Every college or institutions maintained by the University shall 10
have an Advisory Committee consisting of not more than fifteen persons
which shall consist of among:others, three teachers including the Dean
of the college or institution, and two teachers of the University no-
minated by the Board.

Convocations 15

32, Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees

or for other purposes shall be held in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Ordinances,

Acting Chairman

33. Where no provision is made for a Chairman to preside over a 20
meeting of any authority of the University or any committee of such
authority or when the Chairman so provided for is absent, the mem-

bers present shall elect one from among themselves to preside at such
meeting,

Resignation 25

34. Any member, other than an ez-officio member of the Board,
Academic Council or any other authority of the University or any
committees of such authority may resign by letter addressed to the
Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter
is received by the Registrar. 30

Disqualifications

35. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for
being, a member of any of the authorities of the University, —

(i) if he is of unsound mind;
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent; 35

(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence
involving moral turpitude and sentenced in Tespect thereof to im-
prisonment for a period of not less than six months.

(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been
subjected to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the 40
question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision thereon shall
be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court
against such decision.


35

Residence condition fot membership and office

36. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person
who is not ordinarily resident in India shall be eligible to be an officer
of the University or « member of any authority of the University,

3 Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies

37. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person
who holds any post in the University or is a member of any authority
of the University in his capacity as a member of a__ particular
authority or as the holder of a particular appointment shall hold such
office or membership only for so long as he continues to be a member
of that particular authority or the holder of that particular appoint-
ment, as the case may be.

10

Alumni Association
38. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.

15... (2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association
shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.

(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote
or stand for election unless he has been a member of the Association for
at least one year prior to the date of the election and is a degree holder

20 of the University of at least five years standing:

Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one year’s
membership shall not apply in the case of the first election.

Students’ Council

39. (1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Students’
25 Council for every academic year, consisting of —

(i) the Dean of Students’ Welfare who shall be the Chairman of
the Students’ Council;

(0) all students who have won prizes in the previous academic
year in the fields of studies, fine arts, sports and extension work;

30 (iii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council
on the basis of merit in studies, sports, activities and all-round
development of personality;

Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to
bring up any matter concerning the University before the Students’ Coun-
cil if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the right to parti-
cipate in the discussions at any meeting when the matter is taken up for
consideration.

(2) The functions of the Students’ Council shall be to make sugges-
tions to the appropriate authorities of the University in regard to the
programmes of studies, students’ welfare and other matters of importance
in regard to the working of the University in general and such sugges-
tions shall be made on the basis of consensus of opinion.

40

(3) The Students’ Council shall meet at least once in an academic
year preferably in the beginning of that year.


36
Ordinances how made

40. (1) The first Ordinances made under sub-section (2) of section 27
may be amended or repealed to at any time by the Board in the
manner specified below.

(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in section 27, 5
other than those enumerated in clause (n) of sub-section (1) thereof,
shall be made by the Board unless a draft of such Ordinance has been
proposed by the Academie Council,

(3) The Board shall not have power to amend any draft of any
Ordinance proposed by the Acedemic Council under clause (2), but may
reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic Cowncil for re-
consideration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment
which the Board may suggest.

0

(4) Where the Board has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordin-
ance proposed by the Academic Council, the Academic Council may 15
consider the question afresh and in case the original draft is reaffirmed
by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and
voting and more than half the total number of members of the Acade-
mic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Board which shail either
adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final. 20

(5) Every Ordinance made by the Board shall come into effect im-
mediately.

(6) Every Ordinance made by the Board shall be submitted to the
Visitor within two weeks from the date of its adoption. The Visitor
shall have the power to direct the University within four weeks of the 2,
receipt of the Ordinance to suspend the operation of any such Ordinance
and he shall, as soon as possible, inform the Board about his objection to
the proposed Ordinance. The Visitor may. after receiving the comments
of the University, either withdraw the order suspending the Ordinance

or disallow the Ordinance, and his decision shall be final. 30

Regulations

41. (1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations con-
sistent with the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the following
matters, namely: —

(i) laying down the procedure 10 be observed at their meetings
and the number of members required to form a quorum;

(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the
Statutes or the Ordinances to be prescribed by Regulations;

(iii) providing for all other matters concerning such au-
thorities or committees appointed by them and not provided for by 40
the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.

(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations provi-
ding for the giving of notice to the members of such authority of the
dates of meeting and of the business to be considered at meetings and for
the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings. 4s


——

a

TET

Se

7

(3) The Board may direct the amendment in such manner as it may
specify, of any Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of
any such Regulation.

Delegation of Powers

42. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer
or authority of the University may delegate his or its powers to any
other officer or authority or person under his or its respective control and
stibject to the condition that overell responsibility for the exercise of the

10 Powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority dele-
gating such powers.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Since the establishment of the first Agricultural University at Pant-
nagar in Uttar Pradesh, all the States except eight have established
Agricultural Universities. Though each State was encouraged to set up
an Agricultural University, the size and population of States in North-
Eastern Region do not warrant a separate Agricultural University for
each State in that Region.

2, The manpower requirement by 2000 AD for all North-Eastern
States excluding Assam is estimated to be 500 agricultural graduates and
300 each in other areas of specialisation such as horticulture, forestry,
animal production, veterinary science, fisheries, agricultural engineering
and home science.

3. The Indian Council of Agricultural Research had appointed a
Committee under the National Agricultural Research Project to study
the agricultural situation in North-Eastern Region. Study disclosed that
the said States had vast potential for agricultural development and, if
tapped properly, could lead to increased agricultural production and pro-
ductivity which will ultimately lead to prosperity and well being of the
people.

4, Based on economic and population considerations, poor production
and productivity in the Region, the Committee had recommended for
establishment of a Central Agricultural University for that Region to be
fully funded and technically supported by the Indian Council for Agri-
cultural Research.

5. With the establishment of the Central Agricultural University a
long and cherished desire of the people in the region will be fulfilled for
the furtherance of the advancement of learning and prosecution of the
research in agriculture and allied sciences in that Region.

6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New DEL; J. V. SHAH.
The 8th January, 1991.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Central
Agricultural University at Imphal in Manipur. The total estimated
expenditure on the establishment of the Central Agricultural University
would be approximately Rs. 64.30 crores. A major part of this expenditure
is likely to be incurred during the Eighth Plan period. The balance
amount would spill over into the subsequent Plans.

2. The above mentioned expenditure will be met by the Indian
Council of Agricultural Research from its plan allocation.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 26 of the Bill provides for the first Statutes as specified in the
Schedule to the Bill, It also empowers the Board to make, amend or
repeal the Statutes of the University subject to the assent of the Visitor.
Sub-clause (5) of the aforesaid clause, empowers the Visitor also to make,
amend or repeal the Statutes of the University during the period of three
years immediately after the commencement of the Act. Sub-clause (6)
of the said clause empowers the Visitor to direct the University to make
provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and
if the Board is unable to implement such directions within sixty days of
its receipt, the Visitor may after considering the request if any, com
aunicated by the Board for its inability to comply with such directions,
make or amend or repeal the Statutes,

2. The matters in respect of which the Board and the Visitor may
make, amend or repeal Statutes include the constitution, powers and
functions of the authorities of the University, the appointment of officers
and teachers of the University, the conditions of service of the employees
of the University and matters connected therewith,

3. Clause 27(2) of the Bill empowers the Vice-Chancellor to make
the first Ordinances of the University with the previous approval of
the Central Government. It also provides that the Ordinances so made
may be amended or repealed at any time by the Board in the manner
prescribed by the Statutes. The Ordinances may also be made, amended,
repealed in respect of matters relating to admission of students,
courses of study, medium of instructions and examination Board’s of
Studies, special centres, specialised laboratories and the manner of
cooperation and collaboration with other Universities and authorities,
the management of colleges and institutions established by the University
and such other matters,

4. Clause 28 of the Bill enable the authorities of the University to
make Regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act.

5. The matters for which Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations may
be made relating to matters of procedure, The delegation of legislative
power is therefore of a normal character.

40


’ LOK SABHA :

A
BILL

to provide for the establishment and incorporation of a University, for
the North-Eastern region, for the development of agriculture and
for the furtherance of the advancement of learning and prosecution
of research in agriculture and allied sciences in that region.

i (Shri Jayantilal Virchandbhai Shah,
% Minister of State in the Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation and Agriculture Research Education.)