• 
As Im1'0DUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 8 of 1982 
THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948. 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: - ' 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Industrial Finance Corporation Short 
. (Amendment) Act, 1982. Ut]e 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
BDd com. 
mence. 
ment. ' 
II of 1MB. Z. In section 2 of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 (here· Amend. 
inafter referred to as the principal Act),- ment of section 2. 
(4) for clause (ba), the following clause shall be substituted, 
10 namely:- .I 
C (ba) "Court" means the High Court (or where there is no 
High Court and the powers of the High Court are exercised by 
the Court of Judicial Commissioner, such Court) within the 
local limits of whose jurisdiction,-
(i) the defendant Or respondent, or where there is more 
than one defendant or respondent, anyone of them-
(1) has his registered office; or 

Amen40. " 
ment of 
.ection 4. 
(2) carries on the whole or part of his business, 
at the time of the commencement of any legal proceedings 
against him u.ude:r Uris Actj or 
(ii) the cause of action 'for such legal proceedings, 
wholly or in part, arisesj'; 5 
(b) for clause (e), the following clause'shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(e) "industrial concern" means any limited company or c0-
operative society incorporateci. by a Central Act or an Act of the 
Legislature of a State or under any law for the time being 10 
in force and registered in India which is engaged or is to be 
engaged in-
(i) the manufacture, preservation or processing of goods; 
(ii) shipping; 
(iii) mining; 
(iv) the hotel industry; 
(v) the generation or distribution of electriCity or any 
other form of powerj 
(vi) the transport of p!:lssengers or goods by road or by' 
water ,~J" by air or by, ropeway or by lift; 20 
(vii) the maintenaDce. repair, testing or serviCing of 
machinery of any description or vehicles or vessels or motor-
boats or trailers or tractors; 
(viii) assembling, repairing or packing any article with 
the aid of machinery or power; IS 
(ix) the development of any contiguous 8l"~ Qf I .. as 
an industrial estate; 
(x) fishing or providing shore facilities for flt~ or 
maintenance thereof; 
(xi) providing special or technical knowledge or other SO 
servi'Ces for the promotion of industrial growth; or 
(xii) the research and development of any process or 
product in relatiO'n to any of the matters aforesaid, 
Explanation.-The expression '·proce.ssmg of goods" MeW. 
any art or process for producing, preparing or making an article 35 
by subjecting any material to a manual, mechanical, dhemical, 
electrical or cmy other like operationj'; 
(c) clause (g) shall be omitted. 
3. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
(a) after sub-section (lA)., tlw,.! following sub-s~~Ilf·1I1aall be 40 
inserted, namely:-
"(1B) On oJ: after the CODUP~n~, ~, ..... In_trial 
Finance Corporation (Amendmeat) Act, 1182, the autlaoriH4l 

1 • P~ge' 4, line 18,.l 
~ "right" n'-ld "right s" 
r'1ge 4, line 32,-
fQ.!: "0 c curirl e" ~ "0 ccurring" 
3. P'1ge 5, lines 12 and 13, -
!.or.. "subcribing" uad "subscribing" 
4. Plge " lice 25,-
~r "sh all" inse;rt "be" 
5. Page 9,-
~ line 7, ~-
"the shares of the Cornoration shall be 
guar3,nt'eed by the Central (kIvern-l" 
JIJ 3~J DbL.~ I· , 
Februar.y 18, 10 82 
M tt,gh ~ 29, 190 3 (Sak a) 

110f18N. 
lot 1118. 
3 
.j:I'lt fill • Corpondloa .may be_reased to luell JUDOUm not. 
tl:l'efledjDg ODe hundred eror. of rupeeI8 _ tbe central o.v ..... 
meat may, from time to time, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, fix. 
5 (1C) The authorised capital increased under sub-section 
Q.~) shall be divided into such number of shares of five thousand 
"rUPees each as may be nece~sary and the shares representing 
the capital so increased may be issued, with the sanction of the 
Central Government, as and when the Corporation may deem 
10 flt.'~; 
(OJ :in. aub-section (B), (i) for the words "I'll this section", the 
~, ftgUre and letter "In this section and in section 4A" 
shall be substituted; (ii) after the words and figures "under sec-
tion 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956", the follow-
ing shall be inserted, namely:-
", the General Insurance Corporation of India fotmed and r~­
gistered under the Companies Act, 1956, its subsidiaries and 
such other -institution or institutions dealing with general insu-
ll'&aCe business as may be notified by the Central Government 
in· the OJIicial Gazette in this behalf". 
4. In Sub-5ec1:ion (2) of sec:tion 4A of the principal Act, in the pro-
vSiO for the wordS "Provided that", the following shall be substituted 
tia-m'ely:-
'tpravtdQd that such holders shall have the right to renounce 
25 the shares so offered to them. in favour of atiy scheduled bank, any 
i,J?turance company, any investment trust or any other lik~finan­
cial institution or any co-operative bank, whether or not any SUCh 
institution is a shareholder: 
, Provided further that if any such holder does not accept the 
., , IIIUifttr isb t«ered or cWies not e1tercise the right at renunciation in 
~t, Of Mty such shares in favour of any institution referred to 
'tar Chi prec:ledirig f*'Oviso within. the time fixed therefor, the Board 
~' anot sach shares to any ~uch institution with. the concurrence 
of the Development Bank: 
< .5 Provided also that". 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 4A. 
5. In section 11 of the principal Act, in the proviso to sub-section (3), AluDc:k 
*, .. ,,:\votas "'t~ -months", the words "six niont'Q.s" shall 'be substituted. :;~~~fll. 
G. For section 16 of the principal Act, the following section shall beSubsti-tution of substituted, namely:-
"18. The Corporation. may appoint such number df officers an~ 
otIrei' entploifts as it considers necessary or desirable for the effi-
cient performance of its functions and determine the terms and con-
ditions of their appointment and service.". 
. T.'Jri section 18 of the principal Act, the words "with the previous 
45· ~~ ~~ the Development Bank," shall be omitted. 
new sec-
tion for 
section' 16. 
Staff of 
Corpora. 
tion. 
Amend • 
ment of 
section 18. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 19. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 21. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
21C. 
Power to 
acquire 
rights. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new 
.ection for 
section 22. 
Deposits 
with the. 
Corpora_ 
tion. 
Amend-
ment of 
aeCt10D 21. 
4-
8. In section 19 of the principal Act, .the words lIin consultation with 
-the Reserve Bank," shall be omitted. 
9. In section 21 of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-section 0), the proviso shall be omitted; 
('b) in sub-section (3), in tbe proviso, for the words "three 5 
crores", the words "fifteen crores" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (4) ,-
(i) after the words "the Development Bank", the words "or 
with the general or special approval of the Central Government, 
from any other authority or institution in India" shall be in- 10 
serted; 
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted. 
10. After 6.ection 21B of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"21C. The Corporation shall have the right to acquire, by trans- 15 
fer or assignment, the rights and interests of any public financial' 
institution as defined in section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956 
(including any other right incidental thereto) in relation to a~y 
loan or advance granted, or any amount recoverable, by such institu-
tion, either in whole or in part, by the execution or issue of any 20 
instrument, or by the transfer of any instrument by endorsement -
or in any other manner.". 
11. For section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"22. The Corporation may accept deposits repayable after the·!Z5 
expiry Cif a period which shall not be less than twelve months from 
the date of the making of the deposit on such terms and conditions 
as may, generally or specially, be approved by the Development 
Batik.... . 
12. In section 23 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) the brackets and figul'1! "(1) occurring in the beginning 
shall be omitted; 
(ii) in c1aUfJe (a),-
(1) the words "on such terms and conditions as may 35 
be agreed _ upon ", shall be omitted; 
(~) in sub-clause (i), the words "are repayable within. 
a ~enod not exceeding twenty-five years, and" shall be 
omItted; 
. (3) in Rub-clause (iti), for the words "or State Co-opera-
tlve Banks", the words ", State Co-operative Banks or such 40 
other financial institutions as may be notified by the Cen .. 
tral Government in this behalf" shall be substituted' 
I 
1 of 1956. 

5 
(iii) for clause (b), the fcllowing clause shall be subBtitu~d, 
namely:-
II (b) guaranteeing deferred payments due from any in-
dustrial concern;"; 
5 (iv) in clause (e), the words ", on such terms and conditions 
JO 
~o 
as may be agreed upon," shall be omitted; 
(v) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(I) subscribing to, or purchasing, the stock, shares or 
bonds of any industrial concern;"; 
(vi) in clause (i) ,-
(1) for the portion beginning with t.be wotds "or sub-
cribing to debentures" and ending with the words "as the-
case may be:" the words "or suoocribing to, or purchasing. 
debentures of, industrial concerns:" shall be substituted; 
(2), in the proviso, after the words "subscribing to", the 
words ", or purchasing," shall be inserted; 
(3) in the Explanation. 'for the words "loan or 
advance" at both the places where they occur, the words 
"loan, advance or debenture" shall be substituted; 
(vii) after clause (i), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(j) undertaking research and surveys for evaluating or 
dealing with marketing or investments and undertaking and 
carrying on techno-economic studies in connection with the 
development of industry; 
(k) providing technical and administrative assistance 
to any industrial concern 'for the promotion, management or 
expansion of any industry; 
(1) undertaking merchant banking operations; 
(m) performing functions entrusted to, or required of, 
the Corporation by this Act or by any other law for the time 
being in force;"; 
(viii) clauses (ii) and (iii) shall be re-Iettered as clauses 
35 (n) and (0) respectively; 
d.O . 
. (i;r) clause (j) shall be re-Iettered as clause (p), and 
10 clause (p) as so re-Iettered. after the words "under this Act" 
the words "or under any Qther law for the time being in force': 
shall be inserted; 
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted, 

Omission 
of section 
24.. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 26. 
Amend-
ment of 
aection 33. 
Ineertiorl of 
hew sec-
tion MA. 
Appoint-
ment of 
local 
auditors. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 85. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 39. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 43. 
II. .c~lon 24 ,of ,the prin~ Act .hall be omitW. 
1 •. In section 26 of the prinCipal Act, in sub-eecUon (3), after clause 
(ii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(iii) shall not apply to any industrial concern in respect of 
which the Corporation is satisfied that it is neceSsary, in the pubUc 5 
interest, to enter into bUsiness with that cOncern: 
~ovided that such business shall be ente&-ed into in accordance 
with and subject to such conditions and limitations B8IWlY be pre ... 
cribed by. regulations made in this behalf.". 
15. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the 10 
wordli "three months", the words "four months" shall be substituted. 
16. After section 34 of the principal Act, the 'folloWing section shall be 
iAserted, namely:-
"34A. The Board may, in consultation with the Buaitors appoint-
ed under section 34, appoint lOcal auditors to audit the affairs of J 5 
any office or agency of the Corporation and the report of such audi-
tors shall be taken into consideration by the auditors appointed under 
section 34 for the purpose of audithlg the affairs 'of the Corporation.". 
17. In section 35 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub~ectjon (1), for the words "all shareholders", the 20 
words '~the Development Bank" sh'-tll be substituted; 
(6) in sub-section (3), for the words "four months", the wordl!l 
"five uw.nths" shall be substituted. 
1~. In section 39 of the principal Act, after the wo,4' ~tor,". the 
words "local auditor," shall inserted. 25 
19. In section 43 df the principal Act,~ 
{G) 'in sub-section (2) ,for claUPoe (h), the foltowit1g clause shan 
be substituted, namely:-
"(h) the conditions and limitations subject to which the 
~ may enter 'into b~irress updel" the proviso to 30 
..... (tit) CJf su.b-section (3) of section 28;"; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(3) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, 
as soon as may be a'fter it is made, bef-ore each House of Parlia- 35 
ment, while it is in session, for'a total periodcif thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and, if, before the expiry of the se.3sion imme-
diately followmg the session or the suceestive sessions aforesaid. 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulatiOll.4 o 
or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, 
the reg;ulation shat! thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form Of be of n~ effect, as the esse may be; 10, ~W'ever, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be wtthout prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done uDder that regula- 45 
tion.". 

SXATEM.e:NT OF OBJECTS AND REASON'S 
fte . experience gained in the fun~tioning of t}:le Indusf1ial. naance 
~ration of' India sincE' the Industrial Finance Corporation A:ct" 1948 
establtshit:tg that Corporation was last amended has brought to light the 
need' to make certain amendments in the Act. These amendm.enf4; are 
iimed mai~ly at increasing the resources of the Corporation to meet its 
r8pktfy increasing requirements and expanding operations, removing un-
nect!ssary and irrelevant restrictions in the procedures and operational 
matters of the Corporation, expanding the list of businesses which the 
Corporation can undertake and the kinds of activit,ies which it can 
_ist so ~, inter alia, to allow the Corporation to participate effectively 
HrUltlsortium lending with other financial institutions. 
2. The main proposals for amendments ar~ as follows:-
ftt)lt is proposed to widen the definition of "in4,usp-tal c:on~ 
as contained in the Act so as to enable the Corporation to finance 
all kinds of industrial concerns being financed by the Industrial 
BRelapment Baak of India and the ICICI. 
(b) In view of the constantly expanding business of the Corpo-
ration, it is proposed to raise, its aU,tborised capital from Rs. 20 crares 
to such amount, not exceeding Rs. 100 crores, as may be fix8c:l b:f 
~ -Ceo.tral: GoY8n:uneBt. I 
(CI) The Act at present enables the Corporation to appoint only 
on~ General Manager ancl no other officer senWr to the General 
Manager can, be appointed. With Its expandln, activities, it 1s aeeetl-
sary for the Corporation to have more officers at senior levehl liII& 
Executive Director, General Manager, etc. It is proposed to aillend 
t~e." rel~,,~nt section de~liAg with the appointment of staft" of the 
C9tpo.r~t~on, to provide for an enabling provision for the appoint-
nl~~i. 'cit. su.c:h senipr oflicers. 
(<<I) At pt8llent tile borrowfni,S of the Corpo~atiDn frQaa. aU 
sources cannot exceed ten times the aggregate of the paid up capital 
and reserves. This limitation puts a serious const~aint on the 
Corporation's ability to raise resources, particularly through loans 
and issue of bonds in the market which are the principal sources 
for raising funds. This limit is expected to be reached by the 
Corporation soon and its assistance programme would be seriously 
hampered thereafter. It is, therefore, proposed to remove this 
IJmtt on the borrowing powers of the Corporation. To increase its 
capac~ty to raise more resources, the Corporation will be empowereeJ 
to ratse funds from Indian institutions other than thelnstitutions 
referred to in the Act. 
(e) The Act is proposed to· be amended to enable the Corpora-
tion to borrow from the Reserve Bank of India up to a sum of 
RI. 15 crores instead ol Rs. 3 crores at present. 
7 

8 
(f) The Corporation will be authorised to acquire by way of 
transfer the rights and interests of other financial institutions in 
relation to loans and advances granted by them. 
(g) It is proposed to expand the list of businesses which the 
Corporation could undertake so as to enable it to effectively parti-
cipate, in general, the financing of projects with the Industrial 
Development Bank of India and other financial institutions. These 
would include guaranteeing loans raised by industrial concerns from 
other financial institutions, the purchase of stock, shares, bonds and 
debentures from existing holders, doing merchant banking opera-
tions, undertaking research to carry out techno-economic studies in 
connection with indu~trial development, etc. 
(h) The Corporation will also be enabled to grant assistance to 
industrial concerns in which its Directors have substantial interest 
it the Corporation is 9:ltiosfl.ed that it is necessary in the public 
interest to do so. I 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects and to make certain 
other minor and consequential amendments in the Act. 
NEW DELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
The 10th February, 1982. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 2 (49) /I.F.-1/81, dated the 15th February, 
1982 from Shri Pranab Kumar Mukherjee, Minister of Finance to the 
Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill, recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution, the introduction of the Industrial Finance Corporation 
(Amendment) Bill, 1982, in Lok Sabha and also recommends to Lok 
Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 4 of the Industrial Finance 
Co~ration Act, 1948, so as to empower the Central Government to in-
crease the authorised capital of the Corporation to such amount not ex-
ceeding one hundred crort's of rupees as the Central Government may 
fix from time to time by notification. Since under section 5 of the Act, 
dividend at such minimum rate as may be fixed by the Central Govern-
ment as to the repayment of the principal and the payment of an aDDual 
dividend at SUC~l minimum rate as may be fixed by the Central Govern-
men~ at the time of issuing the shares, if the Corporation were to issue 
further share capital out of the increased authorised capital, the Central 
Government may have to give similar guarantee for the capital issued. 
Further, in the event of the Central Government at any ~ deciding, 
in terms of the power conferred by sub-section (1) of section 36 of the 
Act, to acquire the shares of the Corporation held by shareholders other 
than the Industrial Development Bank of India, the Central Govern-
ment will be.required to pay to the shareholders an amount equal to the 
paid up value of the shares together with a premium calculated at the 
rate of one per cent of the paid up value for every year from the date of 
issue to the date of acquisition by the Central Government, subject to a 
maximum of ten ~r cent. In such an eventuality, to the extent of the 
additional shares issued out of the increased share capital, the liability of 
the Central Government will increase. It is, however, not possible at this 
stage to antiCipate the expenditure that is likely to be incurred on this 
account as this will depend on the amount of shares issued at the time 
f1f acquisition. If and when such shares are required to be acquired, the 
same will have to be covered by appropriate budget sanction at the 
relevant time. 
2. Clause 9 (b) of the Bill seeks to amend section 21 of the Act to en .. 
hance the borrowing powers of the Corporation. As a consequence, it fa 
likely that the Corporation may be able to raise more bonds and deben-
tures. Under sub-section (2) of that section, the liabilities under the 
bonds and debentures of the Corporation are to be guaranteed by ~e 
Central Government. It is, therefore, likely that its contingent liabilitia 
in respect of the guarantees will also be increased. 
3. The Bill will not involve any other expenditure either reeurrini 
or non-recurrina. 

tdMORANDUMREGkRDING DELEGATED LEGlSUATlOX 
ClaUse. 3 of th8 Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (1B) in secijon 
.- of.the Industdal Finance Corporation Act, 1948, which would enable 
U. Central Government to increase the authorised capital of the Cor.po-
~tioa uP to one hundred erores of rupees by notifkation in the O1fI.cial 
Gazette. I 
2. C1aUse 14 of til! Bm seeks. to amend section 26 of the Act 110 as to 
ft¥pfriver~e ebrJktrati~n t~ enter into busfness wi'ftl an, inc:lUtfti!al 
~ tll whleh 8fty of itB directors is a direetor, meager, agefrt,etc., 
it·~ is eo1$ldeted by the COrpotation to be neeessary to doao in tile 
.~ intel'e8t. Thfs wm be- subject to such conditions em\! limitatlODs 
ill Ifll1 bept.elcribed by reguhltions to be made by the CtJrpm'afioJlI . 
. & The- po~ that is propo_ to be CODferred on the CaI:dftl 
Go.veJ'Qment to ielue a notibtion· as mentioned aboYe is. sa}jjeet to. the 
limi~. of ·0B8.hua.dred Cl'OI'eI af rupees. The matters in reapeet of 1rtddl 
0.,. Corporation may make regulations as mentioned above relate to 
~ . of. detail 01' ·ptocadun. As such, the deleeatlcm fit l~ 
powent "is B01'm81 incharaew. 
11 

31 of 1956. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRAC'l'S PROM THE bmuSftIAL Fm.ura: COItPO&A'I'ION Act, 1MB 
(15 OF 1948) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject OJ' 
context,-
• • • • • 
(ba) "Court" means the High Court (or where there is no High 
Court and the powers of the High Court are ex~ed by the Court cit 
:Judicial Commissioner, such Court) within the locel limite of ·wheIe 
jurisdiction the defendant or respondent carries on the whole or a 
substantial part of his business, and where the Central Government 
has by notification in the Official Gllzette and subject to such restric-
tioDl, limitations and conditions as it thinks fit, empoweNd any 
Court of civil jurisdiction subordinate to the High Court to U8DCWe 
all or any of the powers conferred by this Act, such Court; 
• • • • 
(c) ·'industrial concern" means any limited company or co-opera-
tiYe society incorporated by a Central Act or an Act of the LegWa. 
ture of a State or under any law for the time baing in force and: ft>-
gistered in India which is engaged or is to be engaged in the mam6e-
ture, preservation or processing of goods or in shipping or in mlrung 
or in hotel industry or in the generation or distribution of electricity 
or any other form of power. 
Explanation.- The expression "processing of good8" includes any 
art or process for producing, preparing or making an article })y .ubjoMt-
ing any material to n manual, mechanical, chemical electrical ~ .aa,y 
other like operation; 
• ... • • • 
(g) "underwriting" means contraeting, with or without cODd!-
tions, to subtscribe for stocks, shares, bonds or debentures of an incWs-
trial eoncem with a view to the resale of the whole or any part there~i. 
• • • .. 
4. (1) • • • • • 
(S) In this section the expression "insurance companies" gr "insUI'aDQe 
company" includes the Life Insurance Corporation of India established 
under ACtion .3 of the Life InSl1l'anee Corporation Act, tt56. 
4A. (1) ... • • ... • 
(2) If and when the remaining shar~ 1n the capital of the Corpot'Ation, 
or any part thereof, are issued, such further shares shall be offered to the 
holder .. of the shares of the Corporation in proportion, as nearly as 
cir.cumstances admit, to the apital paid-l1p on thole shares at the date 
uf such further ilsue: 
11 
Inter-
pret.-
tion . 
Share 
capital 
and· 
abare 
holder. . 
Transfer 
otShares 
and 
il'Jueue 
of Capi-
tal. 

Appolnt-
men' 
ed 
o1Ilcen, 
advi8en. 
ate. 
omce. 
and 
apaclel. 
12 
Provided that if any such shares remain unallotted, they shall be 
subscribed! for by the Development Bank. 
• • • • • 
11. (1) • •• • • 
(3) A casual vacancy !in the office of an elected Director shall be ftlled 
by election and a Director so elected shall hold office for the unexpired' 
portion of the term of his predecessor: 
Provided that no casual vacancy occurring within three months of the 
date of expiry of the normal term df office of an elected Director need be 
ftlled under this sub-section. 
• • • • • 
1'. The Corporation may appoint a General Manager and such otlier 
omeers, employees and advisers as it considers necessary for the eftldent 
performance of its functions under this Act. 
• • • • • 
18. The Corporation shall establish its head office in Delhi and ofBeet 
in Bombay, Calcutta, Kanpur and Madras, and may, with the previous 
sanction of the Development Bank, establish offices or agencies in other 
places in India. 
18. The Corporation may open Deposit A~ounts witli tlie Reserve 
Bank or with any ageney of the Reserve Bank other than a Govemment 
treasury or In consultation with the Reserve Bank, with a scheduled 
bank or a State CQ-Operative Bank. 
• • • • • 
%1. '(1) The Corporation may issue and sell bonds and debenture. 
carrying interest for the purpose of rafsing its working capital: 
Provided that the total amount ot bonds and debentures issued and 
outstanding and of the contingent liabiHties of the Corporation in the form 
of guarantees given by it or underwriting agreements entered into by it 
shall not at any time exceed ten times of such amount as is the aggregate 
ciI. the paid-up share capital. the reserve fund established under sub-
section (1) of section 32, the special reserve fund established under section 
32A, the benevolent reserve fund established under section 32B and any 
other reserves of the Corporation (not being reserves for bad and 
doubtful debts or for depreciation of assets or a reserve created or mafn-
. tained to meet any specific contingency). 
• • • $ • 
'(3) The Corporation may, for the purpose of carrying out its functions 
under thJs Act, borrow money from the Reserve Bank,-
·(a) repayable on demand or on the expiry ot fixed periods not 
ex~eeding ninety days from the date on which the money is so 
borrowed against securities of the Central Govemment or of any 
State Government; or 
. (b) repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeCung 
eighteen months from the date on which the money is so borrowed, 
against securities of the Central Government of any maturity or 
against bonds and debentures issued by the Corporation under sub-
section (1) and guaranteed by the Central Government and maturfn, 

13 
within a period not exceeding eighteen months from the date on 
which the money is 80 borrowed: 
Provided that the amount borrowed, by the Corporation under clause 
(b) shall not at any time exceed three crores of rupees in the aggregate. 
(4) The Corporation may also, for the purpose of carrying out its 
functions under this Act, borrow money 'trom the Central Government 
or the Development Bank on such terms and conditions as may be agreed 
upon: 
Provided that the total amount borrowed by the Corporation from the 
Central Government and the Development Bank under this l11b-Hetion 
and from the Reserve Bank under clause (b) of sub-section (3) together 
with the amount of bonds and debentures issued under sub-section (1) 
and outstanding shall not at any time exceed, in the aggregate, the limit 
specified in the proviso to sub-section (1). ' 
• • • • 
22. The Corporation may accept from any State Government or local 
authority, or any person deposits repayable after the expiry of a period 
which shall not be 1es8 than five years from the date of the making of the 
deposit, and on such other terms as it thinks fit: 
Provided that the total amount of Ruch deposits shall not at any time 
exceed ten crores cif rupees. 
23. (1) The Corporation shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, 
be authorised to carryon and transact the following kinds of business, 
namely:-
«(I) guaranteeing, on such terms and conditions as may be agreed 
upon,-
(i) loans raised by industrial concerns which are repayable 
within a period not exceeding twenty-five years, and are floated 
in the public market; 
(ii) loans raised by industrial concerns from scheduled 
banks or State Co-operative Banks; . 
(b) guaranteeing, on such terms and conditions as may be agreed 
upon, deferred payments due from any industrial concem-
(i) in connection with ita import of capital goods from out-
side India; or 
(ii) in connection with its purchase of capital goods within 
Indiaj 
(c) guaranteeing, on such terms and conditions as may be agreed 
upon, loan, raised from, or credit arrangements made with, any bank 
or finecla1 institution in any country outside India by indUstrial 
concemsfn foreign currency: 
Provided that no such guarantee shall be given wiihout the prior 
approval of the Central Government; 
• • • • 
DepoeitI 
with 
the 
Corpora-
tion. 
Bualn .. 
which 
the 
Corpora-
tka 
me,. 
tranl.ct. 

Limit 
of 
accommo-
dation. 
Prohibit.-
ed busi· 
n .... 
(1) subscribing to the stack or shares of any industrial concern; 
• • • • • 
(i) granting loans or advances to, or subscribing to debentures ot, 
m&.trial concerns, repayable within a period not exceeding twenty· 
five years from the date on which they are granted or subscribed to, 
.. the cae may be: 
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed 
to preclude the Corporation from granting loans or advances to, or 
subscribing to debentures or, an it)riustrial concern, the amounts out-
standing thereon may be convertible at the option of the Corporation 
iato stock or !Ii hares of that concern within the period the loan, 
adnnce or debenture is repayable; 
E,'t"Planation.-In this clause, the expression "the amounts out-
standing thereon", used in relation to any loan or advance, shall mean 
the principal, interest and other charges payable on such loan or 
advance as at the time when the amounts are sought to be converted 
into stocks or shares: 
(ii) acquiring with the approval of the Development Bank the 
undertaking including the business, assets and liabilities of 8JJ.y instf-
tutton the principal object of which is the promotion or development 
of industry in India, or the grant of financial assistance for such 
promotion or development; 
(iii) doing any kind of business which the Central Government 
may, on the recommendation of the Development Bank, authorise; 
and 
(j) generally, the doing of all such matters and things as may be 
incidental to or consequential upon the exercise of its powers or the 
di.s('harge of its duties under this Act. 
(2) In granting accommodation under clause (a), clause (b), clause 
(c) orelBuse (i) of sub..ge~tion (1). the Corporation may have it secured 
by:pledge, mortgage, hypothecation or assignment of Government or other 
securities, stocks, shares or secured debentures, bullion, movable or 
immovable property or other tangible ~.ssets in the manner preSCribed by 
regulations or may have it guaranteed as to the repayment of principal 
and the payment of interest by the Central Government, State Govern-
ment, a scheduled bank or a State Co-operative Bank. 
24. The Corporation shall not enter into any arrangement under 
claus€15 (a) and (i) of sub-section (1) of section 23 with any single 
industrial concern for an amount which, together witb the amount out-
standing in . respect of any arrangemE'nt already entered into by the 
Corporation with that concern, exceeds two crores of rupees in the 
aggregate: 
ProVided that the aforesaid limit of two crores of rupees may be 
~d with the prior approval of t he Development Bank. 
• • • • • 
• , (1) • <II 
'" • • 
(3) The prOvisions of sub-section (2) -
• • • • • 

1,5 
33. (1) A general meeting (hereinafter referred to as the annual 
general meeting) shall be held annually at a place in India where there 
is an office of the Corporation within three months from the date on 
which the annual accounts of the Corporation are closed; and a general 
meeting may be convened by the Board at any other time . 
• • • .. • 
35. (1) The Corporation shall furnish a statement in the prescribed 
form of its assets and liabilities as at the close of business on the last 
Friday of each month, or if that day is a public holiday under the Nego-
General 
meetm ••. 
2fl of 1881. tiable Instruments Act, 1881, as at the close of business on the preceding Retums. 
working day, to all shareholders within ten days from the date to which 
the statement relates . 
.. .. • • .. 
(3) The Corporation shall furnish to the Central Government, the 
Reserve Bank and the. Development Bank within four months of. the 
clese of the financial year a statement in the prescribed form of its assets 
and liabilities as at the clOse of that year together with a profit and 1088 
account for the year and a report of the working of the Corporation 
during the year, and copies of the said statement, account and report 
shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall be laid before Parlia-
ment. 
.. .. .. .. • 
39. Every Director, member of any Advisory or other Committee, 
auditor, officer or other employee of the Corporation shall, before 
entering upon his dUties, make· a . declaration of fidelity and secrecy in 
the form set out in the Schedule, 
• .. .. • • 
43. ,(1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
i0ing power, such regulations may provide for-
• • • • • 
(h) the manner of determining the sufficiency of the security 
taken under sub-section (2) ot section 23; 
• .. • 
Declara-
tion of 
fidelity 
and 
secrecy. 
Power Of 
Board to 
make 
reeuJa-
tion.. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, IlKS 