15 BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

ys LEB IVBE

Bill No, 8 of 1886

emma ac aE
THE RAVI AND BEAS WATERS TRIBUNAL BILL, 1986
A
BILL
n of a Tribunal for the verification of the
t usage oc; water claimed by the farmers of Punjab,
Haryana. and Rajasthan from the Ravi-Beas system as on the 1st

day of July, 1985, and the waters used for consumptive purposes and
Punjab and Haryana regarding:

WHEREAS paragraph 9.1 of the Punjab Settlement provides that the
farmers of the States of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan will continue
to get water not less than what the ere using from the Ravi:Beas
system as on the Ist day of July, 1985, and that waters used for ron-
‘o remain unaffected and the quantum of usage
so claimed shall be verified by a Tribunal referred to in paragraph 9.2:
of the said Settlement;

AND WHEREAS paragraph 9.2 of the said Punjab Settlement also pro-
vides that the claim of the States of Punjab and Haryana regarding the
| shares in their remaining waters will be referred for adjudication tc a
Tribunal to be presided over by a Supreme Court Judge;

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the
Republic of India as follows: —

1. (1) This Act may be calied the Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal Act, Short

| कु 1986. title,
(2) It extends to the States of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. see
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 24th day’ of mae ,

January, 1986.



Definitions.

. Consti-
tution of
Tribunal.

Adjudica-
tion of
matters.

Filling
up of
‘vacancies,

‘Powers of
the
‘Tribunal,

2
2, In this Act, unless the context, otherwise requires,—

(a) “Punjab Settlement” means the Memorandum of Settle-

ment on the Punjab problem signed at New Delhi on the 24th day
of July, 1985;

(b) “Tribunal” means the Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal con- 5
stituted under section 3.

3. (1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the
Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Tribunal to be known as the Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal
for the verification and adjudication of the matters referred to in paragraph 9 10
of the Punjab Settlement,

(2) The Tribunal sha!l be a single member Tribunal presided over by
a person nominated by the Chief Ju of India from amongst persons
who: at the time of such nomi are Judges of the Supreme Court

(3) The Tribunal. may appoint two or more persons as assessors to advise 15
it im any proceeding before it.

(4) The pr
under sub-sectior
fees as may be spi

Tribunal and the assessors appointed
e such remuneration, allowances; or
fied by the Central Government.

4. (1) When a Tribunal has been constituted under section 3 the:2°
Central Government डक] refer the matters specified in paragraph 9 of
the Puniab Settlement to the Tribunal for verification and adjudication.

(2) The Tribunal shall investigate the matt referred to it and
forward to the Central Government a report, within such period as may
be specified in the reference under sub-section (1), setting out the facts 25
as found by it and giving its decision on the matters referred to it.

(3) The Central Government shall publish the decision of the T: ‘ribunal
in the Official Gazette, and such decision shall be final and binding on the
parties to the proceeding before it and shall be given effect to by them.

5. If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) 3°
occurs-in the office of the presiding officer of the Tribunal, such vacancy
shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of
section 3 and the investigation of the matters referred to the Tribunal
may be continued by the Tribunal after the vacancy is filled from the
stage at which the vacancy occurred. 36

6. (1) The Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a
civil court under the Code. of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the
following matters, namely: —

(a) summoning ‘and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath; 40

“{b) requiring the discovery and production of documents and
material objects;

“(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or for
local investigation.

"Sof 1908.


(2) The Tribunal may require any State Government to carry out.
or permit to be carried out, such surveys and investigation as may he
considered necessary for the verification or adjudication of any matter referred
to it. >
_. (3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Tribunal may, by order,
regulate its own practice and procedure.

7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, no court
‘shall have, or exercise, jurisdiction in respect of the matters which may
be referred to the Tribunal under this Act.

8. The Central Government shall dissolve the Tribunal after -it has
forwarded its decision to the Central Government,

ie “9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding
यु anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.

3 of 1986. 10. (1) The Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal Ordinance, 1986, is hereby

repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or.any action taken
under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken
under the corresponding provisions of this Act.

Bar of
juris-
diction ०
courts,

Dissolu-
tion of
the
‘Tribunal,

Act to
have
over-
riding
effect.
Repeal
and

_ saving.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Paragraph 9 of the Punjab Memorandum of Settlement signed at.
New Delhi on the 24th July, 1985 provides as follows: —

“9.1 The farmers of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan will
continue to get water not less than what they are using from the
Ravi-Beas system as on 1-7-1985. Waters used for consumptive
purposes will also remain unaffected. Quantum of usage claimed
shall be verified by the Tribunal referred to in para 9.2 below;

9.2 The claim of Punjab and Haryana regarding the shares in
their remaining waters will be referred for adjudication to a Tribunal
to be presided over by a Supreme Court Judge. The decision of this
Tribunal will be rendered within six months and would be binding
on both parties, All legal and constitutional steps required in this
respect be taken expeditiously.”

2. The Tribunal contemplated under paragraph 9 of the Punjab
Settlement could not be set up earlier due to certain unavoidable adminis-
trative reasons. As the intention was to give effect to all the terms of
the Punjab Settlement from the 26th January, 1986, the Ravi and Beas

Waters Tribunal Ordinance, 1986 (2 of 1986) was promulgated by the ij

President on the 24th January, 1985 so as to enable the constitution of
the Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal to give effect to the provisions of
paragraph 9 of the Punjab Settlement. The Tribunal under the provisions
of the Ordinance has also been set up on the 25th January, 1986.

3. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.

New Detar;

The i5th February, 1986. 8. SHANKARANAND.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Tribunal to be
known as the Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal consisting of a single
member for the verification and adjudication of the matters referred to
in paragraph 9 of the Punjab Settlement. Sub-clause (3) of that clause
also provides that the said Tribunal may appoint two or more persons

_as assessors to advise it in any proceeding before it. Sub-clause (4) of
that clause further provides that the presiding officer of the Tribunal and
the assessors appointed under sub-clause (3) shall receive such re-

muneration, allowances or fees as may be specified by the Central
Government.

2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 6 enables the said Tribunal to carry out
such surveys and investigation as may be considered necessary by it for
the verification or adjudication of the matters referred to it.

3. In addition. to the presiding officer of the Tribunal and the
assessors, certain posts will be required for a period of six months to
assist the Tribunal in its functioning.

4, The total expenditure involved in the functioning of the said
Tribunal for six months has been assessed ait Rs. 25.25 lakhs. The said
expenditure will be charged to “Non-Plan” head and will be accounted
for under Major-head 296 of the Ministry of Water Resources. The said
expenditure will be met through a Supplementary Grant to be obtained
for the said Ministry.

5. The Bill will not involve any other recurring or non-recurring
expenditure,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the constitution of a Tribunal for the verification of the
quantum of usage of water claimed by the farmers of Punjab,
Haryana and Rajasthan from the Ravi-Beas system as on the 1st day
of July, 1985, and the waters used for consumptive purposes and for

the adjudication of the claim of Punjab and Haryana regarding the
shares in their remaining waters.

(Shri B, Shankaranand, Minister of Water Resources)