As IN1'llODUCED IN LoIt SABIIA oN' 
.,-
i " 
~ ... 1 
Bill No. 8 of 1985 
THE CALCUTTA METRO I,lAlLWAY (OPERATION AND 
MAINTENANCE) TEMPORARY PROVISIONS BILL, 1985 
BILL 
to make temporary prooisiOons for the operatiOn and maintenance Of the 
Calcutta metro railway and for matters c<mnected therewith, pending 
the making at regular ammgefn.ents for such operation and mainten-
ance. 
BE it enacted. by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Calcutta Metro Railway (Operation Short 
10 
and Maintenance) Temporary Provisions Act, 1985. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 22nd day of 
October, 1984. 
'(8) It aha11 apply to the metropolitan city of Calcutta. 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Calcutta metro railway administration" or "metro railway 
administration" means the General Manager of the metro railway 
appointed under section.3 of the. Cons~ction Act; 
(b) /~~mmiuloner"means a commissioner of the met.ro railway 
appointed under section 1fT of the Construction Act; 
" 
title, 
com-
mence-
ment 
and 
applica.. 
-tion. 
Defini-
tions. 

Calcutta 
metro 
railway 
admtDil-
traUon 
to be 
respond-
bletorthe 
operatiOG 
aud 
main-
tenance 
oftbe 
metro 
railway. 
Previous 
1IIUlCti0l1 
Of the 
Ceatral 
Gonrn· 
meat 
~ 
for the 
apea.lacof 
metro 
railWll'Y. 
2 • 
(c) "Construction Act" means the Metro Railways (Construction 
of Works) ; Act, 1978; • 83 of 1978. 
(d) "metro railway" means such portion of the metro railway 
constructed in the metropolitan city of Calcutta under ~e provisions 
of the Construction Act as may. for the time being, be available for 5 
public carrjage of passengers, and includes-
(i) all land within the boundary marks indicating the limits 
of the land appurtenant to the metro railwaYi 
(ii) all lines otrails, sidings, yards or branches worked over 
for the purposes of, or in connection with, the metro railway; 10 
Act. 
(iii) all stations, offices1 ventilation shafts and ducts, ware-
houses, workshops, manufactories, ftx~d plants and machineries, 
sheds, depots and other works constructed for the purpose of, or 
in connection with, the metro railway; . 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 15 
(2) All other words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
defined in the Indian Railways Act, 1890, or the Metro Railways (Com- D of 1890. 
truction of Works) Act, 1978, shall have the meanings, respectively, 83 of 1978. 
assigned to them in those Acts. 20 
CHAPl'ER II 
THE CALCUTl'A METRO RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION 
3. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Calcutta metro 
rllilway administration shall be responsible for the operation and maiD-
teJaaDce of the metro railway. I 25 
« 
(2) The Calcutta metro rail~ay administration may, I.or the eftident 
perfol'llWlee of its functions under this Act, appoint, such ofBeers and 
other employees as it eonsiders neeessary on such terms and conditions 
of seniee as may be prescribed. 
'- (1) No metro railway sDall be opened for the pu~lic carriage of 30 • 
passengers except with the Previous san·etion of the Central Government. 
(2) Before giving its sanction under sub-section (1), the Central Gov-
ernment shall, after considering the report given· (wh'ether before or 
after the commencement of this Act) by the commissioner under clause 
~(a) of sub-section (2) of· section 27 of the Construction Act and other 35 
relevant factors, satisfy itself that the metro railway can be opened with-
out danger to the public using it. . 
(3) A sanction given under this section may be either absolute or·sub-
ject to such conditions as the Central Government thinks necessary for 
the safety of the public. . 40 
-. 

" 
5 
• 3 
(4) Where any sanction for the opening of the metro railway under 
this section is given subject to any conditions, such raUway shall not be 
worked or used until such conditions are fulfilled to the satisfaction of 
the Central Government. 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR THE RUNNING OF THE METBO RAD..WAY 
5. (1) No person shall, while travelling in the metro railway, carry 
with him any goods other than a small baggage containing personal be-
longings not exceeding such volume and weight as may be prescribed. 
10(2) Where any person travels in the metro railway in contravention of 
the provisions of sub-section (1), he shall, notwithstanding that he holds 
a valid pass or ticket for any travel in such railway, be liable to be re-
moved from the trailll by any metro railway official authorised 1:)y the 
. metro railway administration in this behalf or by any other person whom 
15 such metro' railway official may call to his aid. 
!lO 
6. It shall not be necessary for the metro railway administratio' 1 to 
reserve any compartment in any train for the exclusive use of females. 
T. (1) No person shall take or cause to be taken any dangerous or 
'offensive goods ,!pon the metro railway. 
(2) . If any metro railway official ha~ reason to relieve that any such" 
goods are "contained in a package in the cuostody of any passenger, he may 
cause the package to be opened for the purpose of ascertaining its con-
tents. 
8. (1) If. in contravention of sub-section (1) of <;ection 7, a person takes !l5 . 
or causes to be taken anv offensive /toods upon the metro railway, he 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
(2) If, in contravent~on of ~ub-section (1) of section 7, a person takes 
or causes to be taken anv dangerous goods upon the metro railway. he 
shall b~ punish!lble with impr1sonment for a term which mav extend to 
30 four yea.rs and with fine which mav extend to five thousand rupees, 
(.1) In ad'dition to the penaltie~ specified in ~ub-sectfon "(1) or sub-
~ection '(2). a per~on taking or causing to he taken any offensive goods 0'1' 
dangerous .!!Ood~ upon the metro railway shall be responsible also for anV' 
loss. i1\;ury or damage which may be caused bv rea~on of such goods 
. 35 having been so brought upon the metro railway. 
9. (1) No person shall smoke in any ('ompartment Or carnage of the 
metro railway or in any underr.rroul1d mp.tro raHway stetfon. 
(2) Whoever contrAvenes the provision~ of flub-flection (n Rhel1 be 
punjflhable with fine which may extend to two hundred and fittv ".nee!!. a . . 'r' 
40 (3) !fanv T'n~on persists in 1';0 sm'lkinp-' AftP.T beina' warned by Anv 
mp.tro railway official to desist. hI' m:w. in q(hHtion to {nrumn(/' the lia-
bility mentioned in rub-section (Z). be removed from the compartment 
or carriage hI which he is travelling (')1' from the underground 8tation at 
Carriage 
of gooda. 
ReservL 
tiQn of 
compart-
mentsfor 
females 
not 
necessary. 
Dangerous 
or otlen-
sive ., 
goods. ' 
Pmalty 
for taking 
or causing 
to take 
offensive 
or dan-
geroUs 
goods 
upon the 
metro 
railway. 

Drunken-
ne .. ar 
n1Paance 
upon. 
the metro 
·railway. 
Proh1bl 
tkm of' 
demonstra-
tiona 
UpOn the 
metro 
railway: 
Peaa1ty 
for travel-
Unac on 
roof, etc., 
ofa 
tram. 
• 
which he may be found smoking by any metro railway ofBcial authorised 
by the metro railway administration in this behalf. 
10. (1) If any person,-
(a) is in a state of intoxication; or 
(b) commits any nu~ance or act of .indecency, or uses obscene 5 
or abusive language; or 
(c) Wilfully or without excuse interferes in any way with the 
comfort of any passenger, 
in any carriage or upon any part of the metro ral1way, he mall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees· aa6 10 
shall also be liable to forfeitlU'e of the fare which he may have paid or 
'any pass or ticket which he may have obtaln8ci or purchased, or be re-
moved from such carriage or part by any metro raUway oftlcial authorised 
by the metro railway administration in this behalf. 
(2) If any metro railway official i1; in a .state of intoxication while on 15 
duty. he sh8il be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred 
. and fifty rupee!;. or. where the improper performanee of the duty would 
be likely to endanger the safety of any passenger travelling or being upon 
the metro railway, with imprisonment for, a term which may' extend to 
two years. or with fine which may extend to five hundrearupees, or with 110 
both. . 
11. (I) No demonstration of any kind~hatsoever shall be held on any 
part of the metro railwav or other premises thereof and it shall be open 
to the metro railwaY administration to exclude from such premises any 
person attenninlt such demonstrations whether or not he is in possession !l5 
of a pass or ticket entitling him to be in the saM Premises. 
. (2) No Pf!l'snn shall paste or 1mt up any pOSter or write or draw any-
thin,! orma"ff-erin any compartment or carriage of the metro 'railway. ot' 
any premi~efl thereof. without anv lawful authoritv' and any person found 
en(!8Eted in dninEt anv such act mav be removeCl from the compartment, 30 
carrill!te or prP.mises by any metro railway official authorised Jjy the metro 
railw8v administration in this behalf. . 
(3) Whoever -contravenes any of the pro~ons of suo..section (1) or 
sub-section (2). or being asked by any metro railway official to leave anv 
comnartment.c::lrria~e or premises refuses to do RO. shall be punishable 35 
\\Titft imprisonment for a term which may extend to three mcnths, or 
with fine which may extend to five .hundred rupees. or with both: 
12. If any passenR'er travels on the roof of a train or persists in travell-
inLY in :lnv pal't of a train not intended for the use pf passengers or projects 
llny part of his body out of a train after being warned by any metro rail- 40 
way official to desist. he . shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
wh~h may extend to on~ month, or with fine which may extend' to fifty 
rupees, or with both, and shall also be liable to be removed from tM 
train bv .anv metro railwav official authorised by the metro railway ad-
minis~ration in this behalf. 45 

• 
• 
13. (1) If a peraon enters into or upon the metro ;railway without any 
lawful authority or haYing entered with la;wf~l authority remains there 
unlawfully.and refuses to leave on being requested to do so by.,any metro 
railway ofti(lial, he shall be punishable with imprisonment ~or a term 
5 which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two 
hundred and fifty rupees, 'or with both. 
(2) If any PerSon-walks on the inetro railway line without any lawful 
authority, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
10 rupees, or with b~th. 
14. It any metro railway official, when on duty, endangers the safety of 
any passenger,-
(a) by ~y rash or 'negligent act 'or omission; or 
(b) by disobeying any rule or order which such oftlclal was 
bound by the terms of his employment to obey, and of which he had 
notice, 
he shall be J)Unishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to :five years, or with fine which may extend to six thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
110 15. If any metro railway official, when on duty, is entrusted with any 
resnonsibility connected with the nmning of a train, or any other rolting 
sto~k from one station or place to another statton or place, and he aban-
dons his duty before reachin!;! such station ot' place, without authorfty or 
without prope:rlv handin~ over such train or roUinrr stock to another 
!l5 autliorised metro railway oftlcial, he shRll be tmnishable witl} imorison-
mimt for a term which may extend to four. vea~, Itr with. fine which may 
extend to five tliousand rupees. or with both. . , ," 
16, If any person obstructs or eauses to be obstructed nr attemots to 
obstruet any train or nther rol1in~ stock unon -the metro railwRv bY' squat-
30 tin!;!, picK-pHn!!. 01' keepina without authoritv ~nv rollinl! stock on toe 
metro raiJwav or tamoerin!! with any si'!nalJine in~tRllations or bv fnter-
- feTin!;! with the workin~ mechanism thereof. or otherwfse, he shall be 
liable to be remowd bv any metro railway offl('iRl Ruthorfsen bv the metro " 
l"ailwav administration in tn!s behalf ann :c;ha11 ~1~ he nunfshablp wUb 
35 fmpriso~ment for a term whfch m.av p.'!I:tp.ntl tn_ fonr VeRT'S, orwfth fine 
which may extend to five thousanrt rupees. ot" with both 
1'7. '(1) Where an oft'ence unVier this Act lias been committed by a 
aomnanv. evel'V nerson who. at the time the offence w~o: committed, was 
in charlte of. and was re8pOnsible to, the comnanv, for flip. conduct of thp. 
40 bt,s;ne~ of thecomoanv. ~R well 38 th.- !'omnRnv, ~hRll he tipemed to be 
Jtnilhr of' th,. offenp" And shRll be liable to be prOCf'eC1ed M'ainst and 
punished accordingly: 
'P"ovirt"!rt thllf noi:lrin!! contllil'l~ in thillf lIfuh-spp.tfnn roIhal1 render anv 
snch TIP..t'snn li'lhle tn A~V punishment H' he Tlmv~R thAt the ofl'PDC'e was 
45 committed without hiA '/mnwledQ'e nr -thJlt 1, .. hptl e"Cerd!'led All due ~ili­
Ilenrp to Dl'~\1imt thp. ~ommission of such offence. 
(2) NotwithmandinP.' anvthin!;! contained in suO-section (1) wheT'p. anv 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company an..d it is proved 
Penalty 
for un-
!awfully 
enterm, 
orremaill-
ing upan 
the metro 
railway 
orwalkinl 
on the 
metre 
railway 
Une. 
lDndanger-
in, the 
safety .f1f. 
pasaen-
gen. 
Abandon.. 
mgtraln, 
etc., 
without 
authority, 
Obstruct-
ing 
runningot 
trams, etc. 

AppUca.. 
tion 
,of Act 
9 of 1890 
and the 
rules, 
etc., 
made 
there. 
under to 
the metro 
railway. 
Effect of 
Act and 
rules, etc., 
inconsis_ 
tent with 
other en-
actment&. 
Protection 
of actlOlt 
tala!ul in 
gOOd 
faith. 
Pewerto 
remove 
c:UmcuJ.. 
ties. 
6 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or conniv81'lce 
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, an;V director, manager, 
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secre-
tary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall 
be lia-ble to be proceeded against and pUnish:d accordingly. 5 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 
other a13sociation of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a finn, means a partner in the ftrm. 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELlANEOUS 
18. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the provisions 
10 
of the Indian Railways Act, 1890, and the rules, orders or notifications 
made or issued thereunder shall, so far as may be, and subject to such 
modifications as may be necessary, apply to the operation andmainten- IS 
ance of the metro railway, as if such metro railway were a railway as 
defined under that Art, and the referenr.es to "railway administration" 
and "inspector" in that Act shall be construed as references to the "metro 
railway administration" and "commissioner" respectively. 
19. The provisions of this Art or any rule made o,r any notification !lO 
issued thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anvthin~ inconsistent 
therewith contained in any enactment other than this· Act or in any ins-
trument having ,ffect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act. 
20. (1) No suit. prosecution or other legal proceedinlt shall lie against 
the Cp.ntral Gnvl'T'nment. the metro railwav adminhltration or any officet"!:IS 
Or other emp11')vee nf that Oovemment nr the metro railwav administra-
tion for anything which is in ,~ood faith done or intended to be done .under 
this Act. ' -,. ,- ---, ,. 
(2) NI') sui.t. pro",ElCution Or other le~al proceedinf! sh"ll lie a~ainst the 
("~ntrRl GnVC,1"nml'n1 nr the m~ro railwav administration or ::Iny officer or 30 
other etimlovee of that G<w'j':>1"nment nr the metro railwav administration 
for any dama~p. cau~ed cir likf'lv to be caused by anything whi<!h Is in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
21.' If any oifficultv arisp~ in l!ivin~ effect to the provisions of this Adt. 
the Central Government may. bv oraer.,'do anvthinR' not lncl')nsis~nt with 35 
such provisions which appears to it to be necessary or expedIent for tbe 
purpose of removinlt the nifficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall h~ made after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
22. (1) The Central Government may. by notiftcation in tlie OfHclal 40 
.Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to tbe t:tenerality of the fore-
goL"lg power, such rules may provide fOl' the following matters, namely:-
fa)· the tenns and conditions of ·service of the officel'8 and: other 
employees of the metro railway a'dministration under wb-aection (2) 45 
.of section 3; , . ., " ., ";~ ~: '·'..-nrrw"·, 
, ' .. , :.; 
9 of 1890. 

., 
(b) the cases in which and the extent to which the procedure 
specified in section 4 for the opening of the metro railway for public 
carriage of passengers may be dispensed with; 
(e)' the volume and weight of the baggage containing personal 
5 belongings that may be carried by a·person while travelling in the· 
-. metro railway; 
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. ..j 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
10 be after it 1s made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days whi<:h may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session 1mmediately foliowing the sessiC)n or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
15 Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; 'So, hOwever, that any such modification or annulment shall b~ with-
out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
D. (1) The Calcutta Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance) 
13 of 19M. gO Temporary Provisions Ordinance, 1984, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken 
under tHe corresponding provisions of this Act. 
. 
Repeal 
aDd 
saving. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND "REASONS 
To meet the inadequacies .of the existing surface transport system 8I!1d 
the ever increasing demand of urban commuter traffic in Calcutta, the 
construction of rapid transit system from Dum Dum to Tollygunj (metro 
railway) is in progresS in accordance with the provisions of the :Metro 
Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978 (33 of 1978). Two small 
single line stretches of the metro railway under construction from 
Esplanade to Bhowanipore and Dum Dum to Belgachia were ready for 
opening to public carriage of passengers with ~ limited number of train 
services in October, 1984. 
2. As it was decided to provide interim tellef to the com-
muters by commissioning the above two stretches for public carriage of 
passengers,it was considered. necessary to make temporary provisions 
for the operation and maintenance at the metro railway at Calcutta pend-
ing the'1'!laking of regular -arrangements for such operation and main-
tenance. Accordingly, the President promulgated the Calcutta Metro 
Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Temporary Provisions Ordinanee, 
1~84 (13' of 1984) on the 22nd October, 1984, to achieve the above object. 
3. The Ordinance, inter aUa, provided -for . the following matters, 
!laIn:ely:-
. (i) the metro railway admini3tration constituted under the 
Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978, was entrusted 
with the responsibility for the operation and maint.enance of the 
metro railway and the authority has to satisfy certain conditions 
before the opening of the metro railway for the public carriage of 
I passengers, 
(il) special provisions for the running of the metro railway; 
(iii) specified certain offences and provided for appropriate 
penalties therefor. Although these offences are also covered 
under the existing Indian Railways Act 1890, higher penalties 
had been provided in view of the special nature of the metro railway; 
(iv) the provisions of the Indian Railways Act, 1'890, were made 
applicable to the metro railway in respect of other matters not 
specifically provided for in the Ordinance. 
4. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
NEW DEtm; BANSlLAL. 
The 15th Januarv, 1985. 
8 . 

~~f~~~~P~~ 
Clause 3 of the Bm invests the Calcutta metro railway a.dmIni4Itratioo 
wi~\~ ~.POzJ.i~Ii\~ :jqr,.~~~~' ~~wo~,..,. tM.,u.. 
r~qy! ~ .~~ ~.p,,,,~ o'lthe ~'~".Y.,,~ *" 
v~v ... ex~t\1" ~,.~ ,'+~ ...... ~j..,D.l~t,PI.~,~ .~~ 
salaries and allowances of th~.~~,,~~, fie.,eos~.: ~.~~~ 
consUl1led, cost of ~tenanc.e ~ upkeep of ~e asse~, etc . 
. '~ ~'l ., ., .... ~!\r ;~ .. ·~1 ~~:~·1!.f . .' x).~:~ ':~I#:U~~' :.t", .. ';.j~ ~) :u 
2. It is not poSsible af this stage to indicate precisely the expenditure 
that i* likel'ito.,,~ itf tjIiijOO .. ...w.-..lR'o.t into· ..... 
tlon. :~il£iw ... , ~t.1 .' ..... .,tk •• cDncd_,Ib'Uletfae .. ~ 
~t;'i_~'Wll6dditua:e';wdlIld be ~ .... _~bM; 
ttie .. ~ .. __ dl ...... ed1d .. .,.IlBil 2'C1'Ote1f.mIII.Uy fdi. 
Jltl1ll_~i""",Oc!l~"lltrodU"i.1Iir wD_ .... ~ ..... 
WlzerhimOM seat1a;urof;.,the·'._u,.,.:v..eampletecl ~ttamt •. 4liai.lJill 
taken up for pubUc carriage,aDIl.mcesi'. ~ _;~ the ..... h. 
~~ ~r:;~, r~~~~ ~ ~ m.~~. . ... -
3.' 'nle Bill does not involw any other expenditure whether of' a re-
curring or' non-recurring nature. .~i~ {. ;;:itii I:)di J: ;:~~l~.t: i .r; i", 
, '.' ~ r . . t ::~ , .• \" .... 
.. 
, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the central. Government to zemove by 
order any diftlc:ulty which may arise in giving effect to the provisiO!ia of 
the proposed legislation. The said clause provides that the Central Gov-
erDIDeJit shall· not issue such order after the expiration of a period of two 
years ·from the commencement of the Act. 
2. Clause 22 of the Bill empowel'l the Central Government to make 
rules to carrY out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of 
which sUch rules may be m8'de, inter alia, relate to the tertna land condi-
tions of service of the· oftlcers and other employees of the metro railway 
administration, the cases in which and the extent.to which the procedure 
specifled in clause 4 for the opening of the metro railway !or public 
carriage of pusengers may be dispended' with, and the volume and weight 
of the baggage containing personal belongings that may be carried by a 
person while travelling in the metro railway. 
3. The matters in reapect of which rules DiBy be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail It is, theretore, not practicable to 
prOvide for them in the Bill itself. 
4. The delegation of legislative power il1cluded in the above provisions 
is therefore normal in character. 
\ 
10 

MemBrandtflm e:zPaitai"9 the modi~ion.s contained in the Bin 
to 7'eP~ the CtJ1cuttG Metlro .R4il1DtJlI (Operation ond 
MaifttentJf&Ce) TempoMry Protnsiom Orcimance, 1984 
Apart from changes of a formal, drafting or consequential· nature, the 
BUl contains the following modiftcation:-
Clause 21 of,the Bill empowers the Central Govemment to 
remove by order any difficulty which may arise in givUlg e1!ect to 
i;:,'" the provisions of the proposed legislation. A proviBo is being 'a'dded 
to the said clause to the effect that the Central Government shall not 
iSIJUe any such order after the expiration of a period of two ye&1'l from. 
the commencement of the legislation. . 
,r;' . i ~ .. 
11 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BnL 
to make temporary provisions for the operation and maintenance of 
the Calcutta metro railway and fDr matters connected therewith.. 
pending the making of regular arrangements for such operation aDd 
maintenance. . , .~~ 
(Shrt BIIM ~ 
MinUter of RcIikcIav.) 
A 
'. 