8lU No. 8 of 1'5' 
THE DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSA-
TION AND REHABILITATION) 
AM.ENDMENT BILL, 19'9 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON I4TH APlUL, 1959) 

Btl. No.8 'dr 1959 
THE DiSPLACE!) PERSON'S (COMPENSA 1TON ANt) 
RmtAb~LrTATION) ~NDMENTBILL, 1959 
(As tN't'itODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
furtner to amend the Displaced Persons (Compensation and 
YtehabiHtation) Act, 19M. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of 
India as fo!lows:-
1. This Act may be called the Displaced Persons (Compensation Short title. 
and Rehabilitation.) Amendment Act, 1959. 
S Z. Section 30 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Reha- Amen~ment 
bilitation) Act, 1954, shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, ~~.8eCtiOn 
and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-sec-
tion shall be inserted, namely:-
.. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
10 (1) if the Chief Settlement Commissioner is of opinion that a 
person is refusing or neglecting, or has refused or neglected, to 
pay any sum due under this Act, he may, after giving such 
person an opportunity of being heard, by order in writing stating 
the grounds therefor, direct that the provisions of sub-section (1) 
15 shall not apply to him, and thereupon such person shall cease 
to be entitled to the exemption conferred by that sub-section." 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under sub-section (1) of section 21 of the Displaced Persons 
(Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954 (44 of 1954), any sum 
payable to the Government or to the Custodian in respect 
of any evacuee property or to the Government in respect of any 
property in the compensation pool may be recovered in the same 
manner as an arrear of land revenue; but section 30 of the Act pro-
hibits the arrest or imprisonment of a defaulter for the purpose. 
Many defaulters who are otherwise capable of meeting the demands 
against them, particulary in respect of arrears of rent, have taken 
advantage of the protection given by section 30 with the result that 
huge arrears of rent have accumulated. Such defaulters are able to 
evade successfully all other methods of enforcing recovery. Even 
concessions for payment by instalments and facilities for adjusting 
arrears against the compensation due to them or to other displaced 
persons have evoked very little response. It has, therefore, become 
necessary to amend section 30 so as to permit the arrest of defaulters 
in cases where they refuse or neglect to pay the sums due from 
them. It is, however, proposed that exemption from arrest will be 
withdrawn only in cases where the Chief Settlement Commissioner, 
after giving an opportunity to the defaulter to be heard, is satisfied, 
for reasons to be recorded, that he should no longer enjoy such 
exemption. 
NEW DELm; MEHR CHAND KHANNA. 
The 10th February, 1959. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND RmIABILI-
TATION) ACT, 1954. 
(No. 44 OF 1954) 
• • • • • • 
30. No person shall be liable to arrest or imprisonment in pursu- Exemption 
ance of any process issued for the recovery of any sum due under trom arrellt. 
this Act which is recoverable as an arrear of land revenue . 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to atnend the Displaced Persons (Compensation and 
Rehabilitation) Act, 1954. 
(Shri Mehr Chand Khanna, 
Mtnister uf Rehabilitation 
and Minority Affairs.) 