THE WOMEN'S (RESERV ATION IN WORKPLACE) BILL, 2021
By
SHRIMATI RAMA DEVI,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of posts for women in establishments and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Women's (Reservation in Workplace)
Act, 2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
(4) It applies to establishments owned, established, controlled, managed or
financed by the Central or State Governments and includes—
(i) a Ministry or Department or subordinate office or attached office of
the Government;
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent,
commencement
and application.5
   Bill No.  8 of  2021
10

2
(ii) a public sector undertaking or statutory authority constituted under
any Central act;
(iii) a corporation in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up
share capital is held by the Government;
(iv) a university established by a Central Act and its affiliated colleges,
including medical and engineering colleges and institutions;
(v) a primary or secondary school or any other educational institutions;
(vi) an industry, trade or business;
(vii) a Government company as defined under sub-section (45) of
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013;
(viii) an autonomous body, organisation or institution receiving grant or
aid from the Consolidated Fund of India; and
(5) It may also apply to the private establishments to such extend and in such
manner as they may voluntarily decide to apply to their establishments.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appointing authority" in relation to a service or post in an
establishment, means the authority empowered to make appointment to such
service or post;
(b) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Council or Women's
Welfare at Workplace, appointed under sub-clause (a) of clause (2) of
section 14;
(c) "Council" means the Council for Women's Welfare at Workplace,
constituted under section 14 of the Act;
(d) "Government" means the Central Government;
(e) "Group 'A' post" means a post which is classified as such by the
President in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to article 309 of the
Constitution or by or under any Act of Parliament and includes an equivalent
post in any establishment;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "promotion by non-selection" means promotion made on the basis of
seniority-cum-fitness;
(h) "promotion by selection" means promotion made on the basis of
merit-cum-seniority;
(i) "recruitment year" means the calendar year for which the recruitment
is made; and
(j) "scientific or technical post" means posts for which qualifications in
natural sciences or exact sciences or applied sciences or technology are essential
and the incumbent of such post shall have to use his or her knowledge in such
sciences for discharge of duties.
3. (1) The Government shall reserve not less than thirty per cent. of posts for
women for appointments in establishments by direct recruitment and promotion, in
such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The vacancy reserved for women under sub-section ( 1) shall be filled in
such manner, as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
Reservation for
women in
appointments by
direct,
recruitment and
promotion.
30
35
40

3
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, there shall be no
reservation where appointments are made—
(i) for a period of less than forty-five days;
(ii) where work is required for any emergency relief work;
(iii) to posts higher than the lowest grade of Group 'A' posts and to those
classified as scientific or technical post; and
(iv) to posts in which employment of women is prohibited or restricted by
or under any law for the time being in force.
(2) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt any
institution of national importance and Indian Institutes of Management from the
application of this Act.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 2) shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.
5. In the case of promotion by selection from the one Group 'A' post to another
Group 'A' post which carries the scale of pay, the maximum of which is equal to or less
than the maximum of the scale of pay of a Director in the Central Secretariat Service or
equivalent posts in other establishments, women officers, who are fit to hold the post
and are relatively senior so as to be within the number of vacancies for which the
select list is to be drawn, shall be included in such select list and considered for
appointment.
6. (1), The appointment to the unreserved vacancy shall be open to all eligible
persons, including women.
(2) Where such unreserved vacancy is filled by direct recruitment or promotion
by a women and the basis of merit, then, such person shall be appointed against the
unreserved vacancy.
7. The examination fee or application fee, determined for recruitment to a service
or post through competitive examination or otherwise, shall be exempted or be reduced
to scuh extent for women as may be prescribed.
8. ( I) Any standard of suitability, excluding the essential and desirable
qualifications, required for appointment by direct recruitment to a post may be relaxed
for women, if sufficient number of such candidates possessing requisite standards
are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them:
Provided that no such appointment shall be made where the candidate is found
unfit to hold the post.
(2) The experience required for appointment by direct recruitment to a post may
be relaxed for women, if at any stage of selection, sufficient number of such candidates
possessing the requisite experience are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for
them.
9. (1) Where a qualifying examination is held to determine fitness of eligible
persons for promotion by non-selection and sufficient number of women fulfilling the
qualifying standards are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them, such
qualifying standards may be relaxed, consistent with the minimum standards of fitness
required for appointment to the post, in the case of women.
(2) Where qualifying examination is held to determine merit of eligible persons
for promotion by selection and sufficient number of women fulfilling the qualifying
standards are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them, such qualifying
standards may be relaxed, consistent with the minimum standards of merit required
for appointment to the posts, in the case of women.
No reservation
in certain cases.
Inclusion of
women officers
in select list in
case of
promotion
within Group 'A'.
Unreserved
vacancies to be
open to women.
Fee concession
Relaxation in
qualifications
and experience.
Reservation in
case of
promotion.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
10. The vacancies reserved for women shall be filled by women only.
11. Where posts in an establishment are to be abolished and as a result thereof,
the services of certain persons are required to be either surrendered or terminated, no
such surrender or termination shall be made in respect of women, if it results in
lowering their representation in relation to the percentage of reservation fixed for
them.
12. (1) Every establishment shall designate an officer of such rank, as may be
prescribed, to function as a liaison officer for the purpose of ensuring that the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any direction or instruction
issued by the Government regarding reservation are not contravened.
(2) The liaison officer shall, from time to time, inspect and verify the documents,
records and reports with respect to appointments of women made by the appointing
authority by direct recruitment or promotion.
(3) Where the liaison officer is satisfied that any establishment has contravened
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any direction or instruction
issued, he shall submit a report of such contravention to the head of the establishment.
(4) On receipt of the report of contravention under sub-section (3), the head of
establishment shall initiate an enquiry into the matter and take suitable disciplinary
action against the person responsible for such contravention.
13. (1) Every appointing authority, or an officer authorised by him in this behalf,
shall maintain such documents and records, and furnish every year a report on the
appointments of women made by direct recruitment and promotion, in such manner
and at such time, as may be prescribed.
(2) The appointing authority or any other officer authorised by him shall make
available such documents and records for inspection, furnish such information, and
render such assistance, to the liaison officer, as may be necessary, to enable him to
carry out his functions under this Act.
14. (1) The Government shall, by notification in the official gazette, constitute
a Council to be called the Council for Women's Welfare at Workplace for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Council shall consist of the following members, namely—
(a) the Union Minister for Women and Child Development Chairperson,
ex-officio;
(b) Secretary, Ministry of W omen and Child Development-member,
ex-officio;
(c) The Chairperson of the National Commission for Women-member,
ex-officio;
(d) two prominent lawyers in the field of Women's Rights-member to be
nominated by the Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) two social workers working in the field of Women's Rights- member
to be nominated by the Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The members of the Council, referred to in sub-clauses (c), (d) and (e) of
clause (2) shall, as soon as may be, choose one member amongst themselves to be
Vice-Chairperson of the Council for such period as may be prescribed.
Reserved
Vacancies to
filled by
Women.
Abolition of
posts not to
affect the
representation
of women
Appointment
and duties of
Liaison officer.
Maintenance of
documents and
records and
furnishing of
reports by
appointing
authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Council on
Women's
Welfare at
Workplace.

5
(4) The Council shall make recommendations to the Government on—
(a) developing and organizing training programmes to advance the
competence of women for appointment to services and posts;
(b) providing necessary social services to enable parents to combine
family obligations with work responsibilities, in particular through the promotion
of establishments and development of a network of child-care facilities;
(c) formulating policies regarding flexible work schedules and other such
welfare policies that may attract and retain women in workplaces; and
(d) any other matter relating to women's welfare at workplace, as the
Council may decide.
(5) More than one half of the total number of members of the Council shall
constitute the quorum at its meetings.
(6) The Council shall determine its own procedure in the performance of its
functions.
(7) Every decision of the Council shall be taken at a meeting, by a majority of the
members present and voting.
(8) No act or proceedings of the Council shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Council; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a member of the Council;
or
(c) any procedural irregularity of the Council not affecting the merits of
the case.
(9) The Council may decide about the modalities to resolve disputes arising out
of its recommendations.
(10) The term of office of the Members of the Council shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(11) The Council shall, subject to such regulations as made in this behalf,
appoint officers and other employees, as it may deem necessary.
(12) The Salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of members, officers and staff appointed of the Council, shall be such as may
be prescribed.
15. The Government shall take steps to incentivise private establishments to
provide equal employment oppurtunities to women.
16. Where any person responsible for implementing the provisions of this Act
or the rules made thereunder, intentionally contravenes any of the provisions thereof,
he shall be liable for disciplinary action under the service rules applicable to such
person.
17. The Government may, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act or the
rules thereunder, issue such directions to establishments, as it deems fit.
18.  (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely—
(a) the manner of reservation under sub-section (1) of section 3;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Central
Government to
incentive the
private
establishment
Disciplinary
action for
contravention of
provisions of
Act.
Power to issue
directions.
Power to make
rules.

6
(b) the manner of filling vacancies under sub-section (2) of section 3;
(c) the exemption, or the extent of reduction in examination fee and
application fee under section 7;
(d) the rank of the officer to be designated as the liaison officer under
sub-section (1) of section 12;
(e) the document of records to be maintained and the time and manner  of
furnishing report under sub-section (1) of section 13.
(3) Every rule made by the Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be, after it is made, before each House of the Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
15

7
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The promise of equal opportunity for women has remained as a mere promise in
our country since independence. Though our Constitution has guaranteed these
promises in terms of the fundamental right of equality, women are deprived of
employment opportunities however they are qualified and deserving. It is high time
that the women community is unshackled from their discriminatory status in the
society.
Article 15 of the Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex and
empowers the State to make special provisions for women. This is in line with the
provisions on international conventions like the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (1948), the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women (1979) [CEDAW]. Article 4(2) of CEDAW allows for
special measures to be taken in the case of accelerating equality of men and women.
This principle has been reiterated in article 5 of Discrimination (Employment and
Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111).
India has been a signatory to the United Nations and the International Labour
Organisation Conventions recognising the gender equality. Further it has adopted
legislations that uphold Remuneration, Maternity Benefits, etc. However, women in
many parts of the country are kept away from active participation in the workplace.
This Bill aims to ensure that women find a respectful position in the society by
bringing an end to the discrimination meted out to them. The State shall endeavour to
take a progressive step towards providing women thirty per cent. reservation in all
workplaces across the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMA DEVI
October 31, 2019.

8
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 14 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Council for Women's Welfare
at Workplace. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of
rupees one hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.

9
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of posts for women in establishments and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Rama Devi, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1124LS—12.01.2021.