As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 8 of 2025
THE MISSING INDIVIDUALS BUREAU BILL, 2025 
By
Shri Putta Mahesh Kumar,  M.P.
A
BILL
       to provide for the establishment of a Missing Individuals Bureau to track  
down missing individuals and carry out investigations  
into persons deemed missing.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
1.(1) This Act may be called the Missing Individuals Bureau Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, –
(a) “bureau” means the Missing Persons Bureau established under section 3; 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5
Definitions.

(b) “identity Proof” means any of the following documents issued by a valid 
Government authority, namely:
(i) Aadhaar number as defined under Clause (a) of Section 2 of the 
Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and 
Services) Act, 2016; 
(ii) Birth Certificate;
(iii) Ration Card as defined under Clause (16) of Section 2 of the 
National Food Security Act, 2013; and
(iv) Valid Passport as defined under Clause (b) of Section 2 of the 
Passport Act, 1967. 
(c) “missing Individual” means any individual who:
(i) has been missing from their place of occupation/study/residence 
(permanent or otherwise)/tourism; and 
(ii) has been mentioned in a First Information Report filed under 173 
of BNSS 2023;
(d) “missing persons database” means and refer to a National Database as 
defined under Section 11 of the Act; and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything in the Police Act, 1861, the Central 
Government shall, by notification may constitute a Bureau to be called 
the Missing Individuals Bureau for investigation into matters of missing 
individuals. 
(2) Subject to any orders made by the Central Government may make in this 
behalf, officers of the Bureau shall have throughout India and, subject to any 
international treaty or domestic law of the concerned country, outside India, in 
relation to the investigation of missing individuals, all the powers, duties, privileges 
and liabilities which police officers have in connection with the investigation of 
offences committed therein.
(3) Any officer of the Bureau above, the rank of Senior Inspector, may, subject 
to any order made by the Central Government in this behalf, exercise throughout 
India, any of the powers of the officer-in-charge of a police station in the area in 
which he is present for the time being and when so exercising such powers shall, 
subject to any such orders as aforesaid, be deemed to be an officer-in charge of a 
police station discharging the functions of such an officer within the limits of his 
station.
4.  The superintendence of the Bureau shall, in so far as it relates to the 
investigation of missing persons, vest in the Central Government.
5. (1) The administration of the Bureau shall vest in an officer appointed in this 
behalf by the Central Government, hereinafter referred to as the Director, who shall 
exercise in respect of the Bureau such of the powers exercisable by an Inspector-
General of Police in respect of the police force in a State as the Central Government 
may specify in this behalf. 
(2) The Central Government shall appoint the Director on the recommendation 
of the Committee consisting of: 
(i) The Union Minister for Home Affairs-Chairperson;
(ii) The Union Minister of State for Women and Child Development-Member;
2
10
5
Constitution 
of the Missing 
Individuals 
Bureau.
Superintendence 
of Bureau.
Appointment 
of Director.
15
25
30
35
40
45
20

(iii) The Union Minister of State for External Affairs-Member;
(iv) The Leader of Opposition recognised as such in the House of the People, 
or, where there is no such Leader of Opposition, then the leader of the single 
largest Opposition Party in the House of the People-Member; and
(v) The Chief Justice of India or a sitting judge of the Supreme Court 
appointed by him-Member.
(3) No appointment of the Director shall be invalid merely by reason of vacancy 
or absence of a member of the Committee. 
(4)  The Committee shall recommend an individual for the position of a Director 
from a panel of officers chosen from amongst officers belonging to the Indian 
Police Services or Indian Administrative Services as under the All India Services 
Act, 1951.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the conditions of service for the Director 
shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. ( 1) On receipt of information and recording thereof under section 173 of 
the Bharatiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 relating to any instance of missing 
individual, the officer-in-charge of the concerned police station shall forward the 
report to the State Government within thirty days of the filing of the same.  
(2) On receipt of the report under sub-section (1), the State Government shall 
forward the report to the Bureau as expeditiously as possible, taking no longer than 
fifteen days after taking cognizance of such document. 
(3) On receipt of report from the State Government, the Bureau shall determine, 
on the basis of information made available by the State Government(s), within 
Thirty days from the date of receipt of the report, having regard to the gravity of the 
issue and other relevant factors, it is a fit matter to be investigated by the Bureau. 
(4) Where the Bureau is of the opinion that the particular matter is a fit case to 
be investigated and is of such nature that it may span across multiple states, it shall 
accordingly inform the Central Government and the respective State Government(s) 
of its intention to investigate the said matter. 
(5) While selecting matter to be investigated, the Bureau must give priority to 
matters in the following order when the missing individual; 
(i) is a child is under eighteen years of age; 
(ii) is a female above the age of eighteen years of age; 
(iii) is a transgender above the age of eighteen years of age;
(iv) is a male above the age of eighteen years of age;   
(v) is an aged individual above the age of sixty five Years  of age; and
(vi) any other individual’s matter deemed necessary and important by the 
Bureau. 
(6) Where the Central Government and respective State Government(s) grant 
the Bureau requisite permission to carry out investigations as specified under sub-
section (3), then the officer-in-charge of the police station under sub-section (1) 
shall not proceed with their investigation and transmit all relevant documents in an 
expeditious manner to the Bureau:      
Provided that till the Bureau takes up the investigation of the said matter, the 
officer in charge of the police station as under sub-section (1) shall be duty bound 
to continue with the investigation.
10
5
Missing 
report of the 
individual 
to the State 
Government.
3
15
25
30
35
40
45
20

7. While investigating under this Act, the Bureau may, on a case-to-case basis 
taking into consideration the gravity of the matter,–
(a) with prior authorisation of the respective State Government(s) and/or 
relevant investigative authorities as determined by the State Government(s), to 
associate with the investigation; and
(b) with the previous approval of the Central Government, transfer the matter 
to the State Government and/or relevant investigative authorities as determined by 
the State Government, for investigation and trial of the offence.
8. Under the provisions of the Act, the Bureau, if in the course of its investigation,–
(a) determines that the matter in one state is connected to that in another state 
or across various States, notify each involved State Government of the same before 
carrying out investigations across multiple States; 
(b) apprise the Central Government of developments in matters on a regular 
basis and work with other Central agencies if deemed necessary and appropriate; 
and 
(c) other offences emerge as well, notify the respective State and Central 
agencies and undertake joint investigations regarding the same.
9. Nothing contained in this Act shall affect the powers of the State Government 
to investigate and prosecute any matters as specified under this Act or any other 
connected matter or offence under any other law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Bureau shall maintain a Missing Persons Database which shall 
include details as prescribed under this Act;
(2) The Bureau shall be responsible for co-ordinating with respective State 
Governments to maintain an up-to-date Database; and
(3) The Database and all its entrants shall be considered as a Public 
Document as defined under Section 74 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 
2023.
11. The Bureau shall release an extensive report regarding the various works it 
has undertaken in a year on its subject matters on an annual basis. 
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule.
    
Authority 
of State 
Government 
to investigate 
matters 
of  Missing 
individuals.
Missing 
Persons 
Database.
Annual 
Report.
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
make rules.
4
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Transfer of 
Investigation 
to State 
Government.
Power to 
investigate 
connected 
offences.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The number of missing persons in India is increasing and represents a serious 
challenge in ensuring safety and security of individuals. As per NCRB data, the 
total number of missing persons including missing children increased by 12.34 per 
cent. from 8,12,620 in 2019 to 9,12,926 in 2022. Out of the total missing persons 
and children in 2022, 4,97,393 were missing women and 94,079 were missing girls. 
Around 2,31,143 missing women and 33,798 missing girls are yet to be recovered 
and traced. If not traced timely, there is the threat that such women and girls will fall 
prey to organised crime such as human trafficking and sexual exploitation. Hence, 
it is crucial to strengthen the existing institutional and legal framework to ensure 
timely recovery of missing persons. 
In this context, the Bill  proposes to establish a specialised Bureau which aims 
to support State Governments by providing resources and aiding coordination in 
the investigation of missing persons cases, especially those spanning multiple 
jurisdictions between states and Union Territories of India. By facilitating cross-
state investigations and coordinating efforts between State Governments, central 
agencies, and local authorities, the bureau will expedite search operations and 
ensure a unified approach to locating missing individuals. 
Additionally, a centralised database of missing persons will be maintained by 
the Bureau to facilitate information sharing and analysis. This database will serve 
as a valuable tool for law enforcement agencies, researchers, and policymakers to 
better understand the patterns and trends of missing persons cases. By leveraging 
data analytics and advanced technology, the Bureau can identify potential risk 
factors and develop targeted interventions to prevent future disappearances.
The establishment of a dedicated Missing Persons Bureau is a crucial step 
towards addressing the complex issue of missing persons in India. By providing 
a centralised and coordinated response, the Bureau will enhance the prospects of 
locating missing individuals, provide timely relief to their families, and strengthen 
the overall response to this pressing social issue.
Hence this Bill.
       New Delhi;                   PUTTA MAHESH KUMAR  
November 13,  2024
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a special body called the 
Missing Individuals Bureau  for the investigation of missing individuals. The Bill, 
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
It is estimated that a sum of above rupees three hundred crores will be involved as 
recurring expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.  
 
  
                               
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Missing Individuals Bureau to track  
down missing individuals and carry out investigations  
into persons deemed missing.
————
(Shri Putta Mahesh Kumar, M.P.)