AS INTRODUCED IN Lok 5५888

29 Jul 2008

Bill No. 8_of 2004
—an

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
Stirs Basupes AcHaria, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of Initia.

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1, This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004.
2. After article 214 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely; —

"218, (1) All citizens shall have the right to social security,

(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the provision of this article
shall not be suspended,

(3) Parliament may by law prescribe within a period of one year from enactment
of this Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004 the manner in which social security shall
be secured to the citizens,

Explanation:— In this article, in clause (1), "social security" means—

(i) provision of employment or unemployment allowance to an unemployed
person from the age of thirty years till he gets gainful employment or attains the age
ofsixty years, whichever is earlier;

Short title

Insertion |
new article
2B.

Right 10
social
security


2

(ii) old age pension and necessary assistance for a decent livelihood to
such persons who have attained the age of sixty years and have no other source
ofincome;

(iii) disablement allowance and other assistance to all disabled persons
who haye no other source of income; and Ss

(iv) compulsory health insurance for all old aged and disabled persons.
of _3. Article 41 of the Constitution shall be omitted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTSAND REASONS

Even more than fifty years after independence, the State has not secured to its citizens
the rights envisaged under article 41 of the Constitution. There have been cases of death
due to starvation, malnutrition, inadequate health care facilities, et. in many parts of country.
A large section of population is lacking basic facilities and lives below subsistence level.
Social insecurities such as loss of employment, disability, old age and ill-health, etc. are to be
addressed properly. Social security needs to be viewed as a basic/fundamental right rather
than as a charity oriented intervention.

‘The term social security should consist of all types of measures, preventive, promotional
and protective as the case may be. The term encompasses social insurance, social assistance,
social protection, social safety net, etc.

It should be the duty of the State to provide: social security to all citizens of the
country. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

Hence this Bill.

New Det; BASUDEB ACHARIA
June 7,204.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 2 of the Bill.seeks to inserta new.article21B inthe ‘Constitution, which
makes the State responsible for providing social security to all'the citizens, Thus, it
‘would become the duty of the State to provide social security according to the needs
of diverse sections.of population,

The total overall financial burden.due to implementation of ‘obligations under
the proposed provision would be shared between Central and State Governments in
the ratio of seventy’five and twenty five per cent, respectively,

Atthis stage, itis not possible to estimate the total financial implication in case
this Bill is enacted:and implemented. However, if the.Bill 15 ‘enactedand implemented

approximate recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore from the Consolidated
Fund of India per-annum is likely to’be involved.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five'thousand crore is also
liklely:to be involved. from the Consolidated Fund of India.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT PROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA,

214, The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age
of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State, by law, determine.

41, The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make
effective provision for securing the right to work, to education and to public assistance in
cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved
want.

Right to
education.

Right to
work, 10
educating and
७ public
assistance पा.
certain cases.


LOK SABHA

A
BLL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P.)

MGIPMRNG—868LS—18 06 2005,