Ss

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

25 FER om:

है Bill No. 8 of 2000

THE CABLE TELEVISION NETWORKS (REGULATION
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

By
‘Suri Kirt Somatya, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:-—

1. This Act may be called the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment
Act, 2000.

2. In section 5 of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), the proviso shall be omitted.

3. In section 6 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted.

Short title,
Amendment
of section 5.

Amendment
of section 6.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Cable Televison Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 is not applicable to certain
foreign satellite channels like Star TV, AXN, etc. which are beamed directly or through
cable operators. As such these channels do not follow any programme or advertisement
code as provided in the Act. These channels telecast obscene films, pictures, etc. and also
show advertisements with a view to advocating tobacco and alcoholic products which corrupt
the minds of youngsters. Hence it has become necessary to bring all channels ineluding free
to air foreign channels within the purview of the Act with a view to enforcing programme
and advertisement code strictly.

The Bill seeks to accordingly amend sections 5 and 6 of the Act.

New Deut; KIRIT SOMAIYA
December 21, 1999


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CABLE TELEVISION NETWORKS (REGULATION) ACT, 1995
(Act No. 7 of 1995)

. * . . *

5. No person shall transmit or re-transmit through a cable service any programme

Programme
unless such programme is in conformity with the prescribed programme code; code.

Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the programmes of foreign satellite
channels which can be received the use of any specialised gadgets or decoder.

6. No person shall transmit or re-transmit through a cable service any advertisement Advertisement
unless such advertisement is in conformity with the prescribed advertisement code: code

Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the programmes of foreign satellite
channels which can be received without the use of any specialised gadgets or decoder.

* . * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to amend the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995.

(Shri Kirit Somaiya, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3261LS—21-1-2000.