1
THE PREVENTION OF FEMALE INFANTICIDE BILL, 2013
By
SHRI RAKESH SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to prevent female infanticide.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Female Infanticide Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "girls child" means a girl upto the age of ten years; and
(ii)  "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Whoever causes, or does any act with the intention of causing death of a girl child
or allows a sick girl child to die by deliberately not giving timely and proper medical assistance
or does any act of negligence towards the care of the girl child which may result in her death,
commits the offence of female infanticide.
Bill No. 8 of  2013
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title
and
commencement.
Definitions.
Female
infanticide.
5
10

2
4. (1) Whenever a female child is born or a girl child dies, it shall  be the duty of the
parents or the guardian of the child to inform the nearest health centre, run by the Government or
to such authority, as may be prescribed for this purpose, about the birth or death of the girl child.
(2) In case of death of a girl child, the child shall not be cremated or buried unless the
health centre or the authority, as the case may be, has permitted the cremation or burial upon
being informed about the cause of death of the girl child.
(3) Where an officer-in-charge of health centre or the authority, as the case may be, has
any reasonable suspicion about the violation of the provisions of this Act, such officer or
the authority, as the case may be, shall hold an investigation into the cause of death of the
girl child and make a report thereon within twenty-four hours.
5. If the findings of the report made under sub-section (3) of section 4 suggest
commission of an offence of female infanticide, any person who appears to be prima facie
involved  in the commission of the offence, shall be taken into custody at once.
6. Any inquiry or investigation into the offence of female infanticide and filing of a
chargesheet in a court of law shall be completed within a period of three months from the date
of the death of the girl child.
7.  An offence under this Act shall be non-bailable.
8. (1) Any person who commits or abets the commission of the offence of female
infanticide or withholds information about the death of a girl child, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a period which shall not be less than ten years and also with fine of rupees
one lakh.
(2) Any person who withholds information about the birth of a female child shall be
punished with imprisonment for a period of six months.
9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860
or any other law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Information
about birth or
death of a girl
child to be
given to
authorities.
Arrest of
person
committing
female
infanticide.
Investigation
and filing of
chargesheet.
Offence to be
non-bailable.
Punishment.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
With the menace of dowry system continuing in the country, birth of a girl child in an
ordinary family is considered to be very inauspicious and a curse. Birth of a girl child is
considered as a burden in poor families. As a result, female infanticide is widely prevalent in
the country. Thousands of innocent girls are dying prematurely as a result of inadequate
care and indifference on the part of their families. It is high time that this dastardly act is
brought to an end. However, in the absence of a stringent legislation it is quite difficult to put
an end to this evil practice.
It is, therefore, proposed to bring forward a legislation providing for severe punishment
to those who commit female infanticide in order to eradicate this evil practice from the
country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAKESH  SINGH
December 12, 2012.
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is of a  normal character.
4

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to prevent female infanticide.
—————
(Shri Rakesh Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4643LS(S3)—08.02.2013.