     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 8 of 2022
THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI SHYAM SINGH YADA V, MP
A
BILL
to further amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 11 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), for the words
“he shall be punishable, in the case of a first offence; with fine which shall
not be less than ten rupees but which may extend to fifty rupees, and in the
case of a second or subsequent offence committed within three years of the
previous offence, with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees
Short title,
and
commencement.
5
10
Amendment of
section 11.
59 of 1960.

2
but which may extend to one hundred rupees or with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three months, or with both’’., the words “he shall be
punishable, in the case of a first offence, with fine which shall not be less
than one thousand rupees but which may extend to five thousand rupees and
in the case of a second or subsequent offence committed within three years of
the previous offence, with fine which shall not be less than three thousand
rupees but which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three months, or with both”.
3. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words “two hundred rupees’’,
the words “five thousand rupees’’ shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 20.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 51A (g) of the Constitution imposes a fundamental duty on
every citizen to safeguard the wildlife and have compassion for all living
creatures. The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act was enacted in 1960
and thus needs to be contemporised with the advances in the collective
psyche of the society of the 21st Century. The monetary fines mentioned
in the parent Act have become too insignificant to act as a deterrent to
aberrant behaviour and thus futile. The Animal Protection Index 2020 has
not ranked India in the top tier for animal protection and this shows there
is much scope for improvement. The same index has also sought amendments
to the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to enhance penalties under the parent Act to
create a deterrence to prevent cruelty against animals.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;          SHYAM SINGH YADA V
November 23, 2021.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960
(59 OF 1960)
* * * * *
11(1).  If any person —
* * * * *
(o) promotes or takes part in any shooting match or competition wherein
animals are released from captivity for the purpose of such shooting;
he shall be punishable, in the case of a first offence, with fine which shall
not be less than ten rupees but which may extend to fifty rupees and in the
case of a second or subsequent offence committed within three years of the
previous offence, with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees
but which may extend to one hundred rupees or with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three months, or with both.
* * * * *
20.  If any person—
(a) contravenes any order made by the Committee under section 19; or
(b) commits a breach of any condition imposed by the Committee under that
section;
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees,
and, when the contravention or breach of condition has taken place in any
institution, the person in charge of the institution shall be deemed to be guilty
of the offence and shall be punishable accordingly.
* * * * *
4
Treating animals
cruelly.
Penalties.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
————
(Shri Shyam Singh Yadav, M.P .)