1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI PRALHAD VENKATESH JOSHI, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of People Act, 1951.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of People (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  23 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After section 70 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"70A. (1) If a person, who is already a member of either House of Parliament or a State
Legislature, is elected or nominated as a member of a Municipal Corporation, then at the
expiration of such period, as may be prescribed, his seat in Municipal Corporation shall
become vacant unless he has previsouly resigned within the prescribed time period his seat
in that House of Parliament or a State legislature, as the case may be.
(2) If a person, who is already a member of a Municipal Corporation and is subseqeuntly
elected or nominated as a member of either House of Parliament or a State Legislature, as the
case may be, then at the expiration of such period, as may be prescribed, his seat in that
House shall become vacant unless he has previously resigned within the prescribed time
period his seat in the Municipal Corporation.
(3) If a person, who is already a member of either House of Parliament or a State
Legislature, is elected or nominated as a member of a Panchayati Raj Institution, then at the
expiration of such period, as may be prescribed, his seat in Panchayati Raj Institution shall
become vacant unless he has previously resigned within the prescribed time period his seat
in that House of Parliament or a State legislature, as the case may be.
(4) If a person, who is already a member of a Panchayati Raj Institution and is
subsequently elected or nominated as a member of either House of Parliament or a State
Legislature, as the case may be, then at the expiration of such period, as may be prescribed,
his seat in that House shall become vacant unless he has previously resigned within the
prescribed time period his seat in the Panchayati Raj Institution.".
Insertion of
new section
70A.
V acation of
seats in case
of multiple
memberships. 5
10
15
20
43 of 1951

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 101 of the Constitution prohibits a person from simultaneously being a member
of both Houses of Parliament. It further prohibits a person from simultaneously being both
a member of Parliament and of a House of Legislature of State.
Section 70 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 also prohibits a person from
holding of multiple seats in either Houses of Parliament or State Legislature.
However, there is no central law prohibiting a person from holding positions in Parliament
or State Legislature, and a position in the local body simultaneously. Whilst some States
have foreseen such a situation and have appropriately dealt with it in their State laws, other
States do not have such provisions. For example section 52A of the Chennai City Municipal
Corporation Act, 1919 states that, "no person shall be qualified for being elected as, and for
being, a Mayor, Deputy Mayor or Councill or if he is a member of the Legislative Aseembly
or a member of either House of Parliament."
No such provision, however, exists in the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act,
1976. It shows that a person can hold the position of both Member of Legislative Assmebly
and Councillor legally, and may even draw a salary from both positions.
It is important to maintain a separation of roles amongst the three tiers of Government—
the Centre, State and Local bodies.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; PRALHAD VENKATESH JOSHI
February 11, 2016.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951
————
(Shri Pralhad Venkatesh Joshi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4324LS(S3)—26-02-2016.