1
THE NATIONAL BOARD FOR CREATION OF SMALL STATES
BILL, 2019
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to constitute the National Board to explore possibilities and prepare blueprints for
creation of small States; make recommendations thereto to the Central
Government and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Board for Creation of Small States Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 8 of 2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘Board” means the National Board for Creation of Small States constituted
under section 3; and
(b) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a National Board for Creation of Small States.
(2) The headquarter of the Board shall be at Mahoba in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
(3) The Board shall consists of—
(i) seven members to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner
as may be prescribed;
(ii) two members  each from the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha, representing
the States of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh to be nominated by the Presiding
Officers of the respective Houses; and
(iii) two persons, who have been associated with the movement or demand of
small States for the last fifteen years, to be nominated by the Central Government in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The members of the Board shall elect one of the members from amongst themselves
to act as the Chairperson of the Board.
(5)  The term of the Board shall be three years:
Provided that the Central Government may, on the expiry of term of three years,
extend the term of the Board till such time as it may deem necessary from time to time;
(6) The Board shall meet at least once in every two months.
(7) The Allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of the
Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(8) The Chairperson and members of the Board shall not be deemed to be holding the
office of profit under any law for the time being in force.
4. The Board shall—
(a) explore the possibilities of creation of small States in the country;
(b) prepare the blueprint of demands for small States and examine such demands in
details and forward reports thereon to the Central Government;
(c) recommend the creation of small States to the Central Government; and
(d) recommend to the Central Government for inclusion of language, being spoken in
small States to be created in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the Board for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Functions of
the Board.
Central
Government to
provide
requisite funds.
Power to make
rules.
Constitution
of the
National
Board.
40
45
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At the time of Independence there were big States which British Government had
formed with the purpose of continuing the colonial rule. But several smaller States were
formed after independence which have made economic progress and also strengthened their
cultural identity. The State of Gujarat is one such example which has not only progressed
economically but also established its cultural identity not only in India but also abroad after
it came into existence on bifurcation of erstwhile Bombay Province. Likewise the States of
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Goa, Uttarakhand, Jharkhand, Andhra
Pradesh and Telangana were also formed after independence and statistics show that they
have made reasonable economic progress. But the demand for new States is still on and
related movements also take place. The demand for a separate State of Bundelkhand is a pre-
independence one. A conference was held in February, 1943 in Tikamgarh for Bundelkhand
and such demands are still being raised. Overall development of region is the basis of
demand for the Bundelkhand State. Bundelkhand region lagged behind in development
during British rule and it has been divided between two States after independence.
Bundelkhand region is possibly the only region was divided between two States and still
undeveloped. Therefore, it has not progressed like other States. But other States have not
made economic progress but also preserved their cultural identity after attaining Statehood
on different basis. Bundeli language has not even been included in the Eighth schedule to
the Constitution and there has been a constant demand for its inclusion.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to constitute a Board to explore the possibilities,
prepare blueprints and recommend to the Central Government for creation of smaller States
including creation of Bundelkhand State to fulfill the long standing demand of people of this
region and considering the public sentiments for overall development backward region in
the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
January 18, 2019.
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of National Board for Creation of Small
States. Clause 5 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure  of ruppes
one hundred crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative  power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to constitute the National Board to explore possibilities and prepare blueprints for
creation of small States; make recommendations thereto to the Central
Government and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3302LS(S3)—28-01-2019.