1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
MAHARASHTRA BILL, 2016
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Maharashtra for the purposes
of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other
 Backward Sections of the people and agricultural labourers, development
 of  infrastructure and backward districts, exploitation and proper
utilisation  of its resources and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Maharashtra
Act, 2016.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  8  of  2016
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) It shall come into force on such date as  the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  There shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India, every
year, as Parliament may by due appropriation by law provide, as special financial assistance
to the  State of Maharashtra to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of Union Government for the purposes of—
(i) promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward Sections of the people;
(ii) implementing welfare measures with a view to improve the conditions of
agricultural labourers;
(iii) allocating adequate funds for special development projects;
(iv) developing necessary infrastructure; and
(v) development, exploitation and proper utilisation of resources in the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Maharashtra.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The State of Maharashtra is socially and economically backward. Problems of poverty,
unemployment and illiteracy are required to be addressed urgently. Besides, the measures
for proper utilisation of resources in order to address the issue of backwardness in the State,
measures for the welfare of weaker sections in the region and new development schemes in
a time-bound manner are required to be initiated.
It is, therefore, necessary that Central Government should provide special financial
assistance to the State of Maharashtra for its all round development including the welfare of
weaker sections and for the development and exploitation of its vast natural resources. Such
a step of providing financial assistance to the State of Maharashtra would go a long way in
building a more powerful nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
December 22, 2015.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Maharashtra to meet the cost of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Maharashtra. As the
sums of moneys which will be given to the State of  Maharashtra as special financial assistance
by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to
be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are
identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Maharashtra for the purposes of
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other
Backward Sections of the people and agricultural labourers, development
of  infrastructure and backward districts, exploitation and proper
 utilisation  of  its resources and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4102L(S3)—12.02.2016.