THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
By
SHRI K.S. RAO, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2007.
2. (1) After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"21B. (1) Every citizen shall  have right  to adequate health care free of cost in
the hospitals/dispensaries run by the State.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the State from making any provision for charging
of fees or cost of treatment from persons, on the basis of criteria to be prescribed by law,
having  means to bear such fee or cost.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this article, 'health care' shall  include  consultation,
diagnostic tests, medicines, indoor treatment and surgery but shall not include tests or
surgery for cosmetic purposes.
(3) Parliament may, by law,  provide for a health insurance  scheme for citizens to give
effect to the provisions of this  article.".
Short title.
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Bill No. 8 of 2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Right to
adequate
health care.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Majority of our countrymen are either living below the poverty line or are too poor to
afford adequate health care which has become very expensive. Thus most of the citizens do
not have access to adequate health care. The condition of Government hospitals is pathetic
on account of absence of proper infrastructure and also manpower. The cost of treatment in
private hospitals is beyond the capacity of common man. Therefore, the common man in the
country suffers from lack of adequate health care. India being a welfare country, it is the duty
of the Government to take  initiative for providing health care to all the citizens. It may charge
fee for providing health care from persons who are in a position to pay it.
Given the large size of our population,  it may be difficult for the State to meet the
expenditure on this account. Therefore, Government may go for health insurance scheme for
the citizens and determine the amount to be paid, as premia, by them. Health is a state subject
and that is the reason formulating a health insurance scheme has been proposed.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; K.S. RAO
November 8, 2006.
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that every citizen shall have right to adequate health care
free of cost in the hospitals/dispensaries run by the State. The Central Government has to
provide manpower, infrastructure, etc. in the hospitals/dispensaries. The Bill, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of rupees twenty thousand crore will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
21. No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to
procedure established by law.
21A. The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age
of six  to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.
* * * * * * *
Protection of
life and
personal
liberty.
Right to
education.
4

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri K.S. Rao, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—62LS(S-5)—06.02.2007.