As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

ee

Bill No. 8 of 2006

THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
By
‘Suri C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Short title,
Act, 2006. and
commence-
=) (2) It shall come into force at once. ment.
2. In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, in paragraph 3, the following Amendment
proviso shall be added at the end, namely:— oF Paragraph

"Provided that the for the purposes of this order, a member of the Scheduled

Caste who has converted from the Hindu, Sikh or Buddhist religion to any other

10 religion shall also be deemed to be belonging to the Scheduled Caste to which he
belonged before such conversion.""



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Paragraph 3 of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 stipulates that no
person who professes a religion different from the Hindu, the Sikh or the Buddhist religion
shall be deemed to be a member of a Scheduled Caste. At the time the Scheduled Castes
(Order), 1950 was brought into operation, it was presumed that caste discrimination is prevalent
in the Hindu religion only. Later on, the Sikh and the Buddhist religion were also added in
paragraph 3 of the aforesaid Order.

The persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes were afforded with the benefits of the
reservation in the legislatures and in jobs under the State with a specific purpose to put an
end to caste discrimination and to bring these oppressed persons into the mainstream of the
society. However, their lot did not improve much even after they were provided with certain
facilities by the State. In their attempt to escape from the scourge of caste system and social
oppression, the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes started converting to other faiths in
the hope that they will not have to face caste discrimination anymore once they embraced
other religion. However, the situation did not improve much even after their conversion to
other faiths as these people were not accepted well and continued to be treated as dalits by
the people in their new fold. After conversion to new faith these people lost the status of
Scheduled Caste in the eyes of law and were deprived of the benefits of reservation provided
in jobs under the State. These persons are still victims of the caste discrimination and social
oppression even when they have converted to new faith.

Therefore, it is unfair and unjust to ignore the reality and to plead that caste
discrimination prevails in Hindu religion only. Realizing and accepting the reality, it is high
time to take realistic step by way of amending the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order,
1950 in order to extend the benefits of reservations to the persons who originally belong to
the Scheduled Caste and have converted to a faith other than the Hindu, the Sikh or the
Buddhist religion. It is also equally important to uphold the spirit of secularism and equality
engrained in our Constitution.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New Deut; C.K. CHANDRAPPAN
November 24, 2005.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for extending the benefits, which at present are being

ed by the Scheduled Castes of Hindu, Sikh and Buddhist religions to Scheduled Castes
have converted to other religions. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
n the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of
Tupees one hundred crore is likely to be involved.

_ Anon-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CasTEs) ORDER, 1950
(C0. 19)

* * * * *

2. Subject to the provisions of this Order, the castes, races or tribes or specified in Parts
Ito XXIV of the Schedule to this Order shall, in relation to the States to which those Parts
respectively relate, be deemed to be Scheduled Castes so far as regards member thereof
resident in the localities specified in relation to them in those Parts of that Schedule.

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph 2, no person who professes a
religion different from the Hindu, the Sikh or the Buddhist religion shall be deemed to be a
member of a Scheduled Caste.

* * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.

(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—5149LS(S-5)—08-02-2006.