1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  8  of  2017
Definitions.
THE REGULATION OF INTERNATIONAL TREATIES,  AGREEMENTS,
CONVENTIONS AND COVENANTS BILL, 2017
By
ADVOCATE JOICE GEORGE, M.P.
A
BILL
to regulate the manner in which the Central Government shall enter into and implement
any international treaty, agreement, convention or covenants with countries and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Regulation of International Treaties, Agreements,
Conventions and Covenants Act 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(b) "stakeholder" means persons or community affected by or intended to be
affected by the international treaty, convention or agreement and includes a
State Governments; and
5
10
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Committee to be known as the Expert Committee to examine the pros and cons of
International Treaties, Agreements, Conventions and Covenants to be signed by the
Government of India.
(2) The Expert Committee shall consist of such number of experts including
representatives of the State Governments having expertise in the field of International Law
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall,  by notification in the Official Gazette, publicize
the details of any International Treaty, Agreement, Convention and Covenant to be signed by
the Government of India.
5. The Expert Committee shall—
(a) initiate wide consultation on the contents of the instrument of International
Treaty, Agreement, Covention or Convenant to be signed by the Government of India
with stakeholders and others and publish its comments with explanations as regards
the objectives, commitment and the national interests to be protected by signing such
International Treaty, Agreement, Convention and Covenant;
(b) create awareness amongst the citizens as regards effects of the International
Treaty, Agreement, Convention or Covenant to be signed by the Government of India
with proper examples for public deliberations;
(c) make available the outcome of the consultation with the stakeholders and
others to the Members of the Parliament, who shall take into consideration the outcome
of consultations while deliberating and voting on ratification of any and the
International Treaty, Agreement, Convention or Covenant.
6. The Central Government shall not enter into and implement any International Treaty,
Agreement, Convention or Covenant unless it has been ratified by resolutions by each
House of Parliament.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of an Expert
Committee to
examine
international
treaty, etc.
Publicity of
the details of
any
International
Treaty,
Agreement,
Convention
and Covenant.
Functions of
the Expert
Committee.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Articles 73 and 253 of the Constitution deal with the power of the executive to enter
into International Treaties, Agreement, Convention and Covenants and the power of the
Parliament to enact laws for giving effect to such instruments, respectively. Unfortunately
our Parliament has not passed any law for regulating the procedure for entering into
International Treaties, Agreement, Convention and Covenants. There is no Constitutional
obligation on the executive to get International Treaties, Agreement, Convention and
Covenants ratified by Parliament. There can be no dispute with the proposition that the
International Treaties, Agreement, Convention and covenants may contain clauses having
deleterious impact on the lives of the people living throughout India or in a particular region
or a State. The stake holders who are affected by the clauses of the International instruments
do not have any say in such exercise. From the experiences on hand, it is advisable for
having wide consultations among the stakeholders before giving legal effect to an international
commitment which affects the right of the people especially vulnerable and weaker sections
of the society. Therefore, it is highly necessary to have a comprehensive enactment regulating
the powers to the executive in entering International Treaties, Agreement, Convention and
Covenants.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; JOICE  GEORGE
December 14, 2016.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall constitute an Expert
Committee to examine pros and cons and to regulate the International Treaty, Agreement,
Convention and Covenants to be signed by the Government of India. It also provides for
appointment of experts in the Expert Committee. Clause 4 provides for publicity of the details
of any International Treaty, Agreement, Convention and Covenant. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve the expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees  Ten Lakhs per annum would involve from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees  Fifteen Lakhs is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the manner in which the Central Government shall enter into and implement
any international treaty, agreement, convention or covenants with countries and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Adv. Joice George, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4007LS(S3)—24-01-2017.