As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

27 su 200t

Bill No. 8 of 2001

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
By
‘Suri ANANT GANGARAM GEETE, M.P.
nas
BILL
(further to amend the Constitution of India
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001.
2. In article 80 of the Constitution, for clause (4), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
(4) The representatives of each State in the Council of States shall be elected
in the following manner, namely:—

(a) each party shall nominate its representatives according to its nu-
merical strength in the Legislative Assembly concerned in proportion to total
number of seats allocated to that State in the Council of States;

(0) if, after nomination is made in accordance with the clause (a) in
respect of that State, any seat remains unfilled, the representative to fill the
unfilled seat shall be elected by the elected members of the Legislative As-
sembly of the State in accordance with the system of proportional representa-
tion by means of single transferable vote.”.

Short title.

article 80.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In recent times we have witnessed a growing and alarming trend of ‘Money Power’,
playing a decisive role in the elections to Rajya Sabha. Although we term it as an ‘Elec-
tion’, in fact each party, “Selects”, its representatives in the Rajya Sabha, based on its
numerical strength in their respective Legislative Assemblies.

Due to money power, often the official candidate of the party is either defeated or
not elected in the first or second round. Thus a person who has no allegiance to a party's
political philosophy gets elected to Rajya Sabha. This is detrimental to the interests of a
political party and its strength and its political ideology in the Rajya Sabha.

With a view to curb this trend, it is proposed that—

(a) based on its numerical strength in the Legislative Assembly, a party should
be entitled to ‘nominate’ its representatives in Rajya Sabha;

(b) if, after each party has nominated its representatives, any seat remains
unfilled, election may be held to elect the representatives to fill the seats based on

party's direction on voting. This will prevent cross voting and ensure election of the
desired candidate.

This amendments are required urgently in view of forthcoming election to the Council
of States.

Hence this Bill.

New Deuu; ANANT GANGARAM 65815
February 8, 2001.



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *

80. (1) * * ad * * — Composition
of the Council
of States.

(4) The representatives of each State in the Council of States shall be elected by the
elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State in accordance with the system
proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.

* * * * * * *



LOK SABHA

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Anant Gangaram Geete, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND-€368LS ~16.02.2001.