28 of 19M. 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
8111 No. 90 of J970 . 
THE HIGH COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1970 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act. 
1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the High Court Judges (Conditions 
of Service) Amendment Act, 1970. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 2 of the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section 
(1), in sub-clause (ii) of clause (h), for the words "one month", the 
10 words "forty-five days" shall be substituted. 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for dause (a), 
the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(a) leave on full allowances (including commuted leave on 
half allowances into leave on full allowances on medical 
IS certificate); or". 
4. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words 
"The maximum period of leave which may be granted", the words, 
brackets, figures and letter "Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) 
of section SA, . the maximum period of leave which may be granted" 
20 shall be substituted. 
Short 
title and 
com· 
mence-
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 3, 
Amend-
mentof 
section 5. 

Insertion 
of new 
ce.ction 
5A. 
Commuta. 
tion of 
leave on 
half 
allowances 
into leave 
on full 
allow-
an::es. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 9. 
2 
5. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following &ection shaH be 
inserted, namely:-
"'SA. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) 
of section 5, a Judge may be permitted to commute leave on half 
allowances into leave on full allowances on medical certificate up to 5 
a maximum of three months during the whole period of his service 
as a Judge. 
(2) In computing the maximum period of leave on full 
allowances which may be granted at one time to a Judge under 
sub-section (3) of section 5, the amount of commuted leave pennitted 10 
to him under this section shall not be taken into a~ount.". 
6. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words 
"for the first month of such leave", the words "for the first forty-five days 
of such leave" shall be substituted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954, when 
a High Court Judge avails of leave on full allowances, he can draw 
full salary (ckual to monthly rate of pay) for the first month and leave 
allowance at the rate of ru. 2,220 per month for the rest of such leave. 
It has Ibeen represented that this provision is too restrictive and causes 
hardship. It is accordingly proposed that as in the cas~.! of Supreme 
Court Judges, the High Court Judges may also be allowed full salary 
(equal to monthly rate of pay) for the first 45 days of leave on full 
allowances. 
At present there is n.o provision for the glj8llt of "commuted leave" 
to a High Court Judge with the result that if a Judge is forced to take 
long leave on grounds of ill-health, he has to avail of leave on halt 
allowances during which period be is entitled to an allowance at the 
rate of Rs. 1,110 per month only. To give some relief in such cases, 
it is proposed to extend to the Judges of the High Courts the facility 
of commuting leave on half allowances into leave on full allowances 
on medical certificate up to a maximum period of three months during 
the entire service as Judge, on the analogy of ~he provision for 
"commuted leave" obtaining in the case of Central Government 
employees. 
The Bill seeks to amend the High Court Judges (Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1954 to achieve the above objectives. 
NEW DELHI; RAM NIW AS MIR'DHA. 
The 12th August, 1970. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 1913169-Judl~ In (iv). dated the 13th Au~st, 1970' 
from Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha. Minister of State in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] . 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the High 
~ourt Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1970, recom-
mends the introduction and consideration of the Bill in the Lok Sabha 
\Ulder article 117 (1) and 117 (3) of the Constitution of India. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Bill makes provision enabling a High Court Judge to 
commute leave on half allowances into leave on full allowances on 
medical certificate up to a maximum period of three months during the 
entire period of his service as a Judge. The monthly rate of allowance 
payable to a Judge during leave on half allowances is Rs. 1,110; during 
leave on full allowances according to section 9 of the Act as proposed 
to be amended by clause 6 of the Bill, a Judge will be entitled to draw 
full salary (equal to monthly rate of pay) for the first 45 days instead of 
one month as at present and leave allowance at the rate of Rs. 2,220 
per month for the rest of such leave. 1£ commuted leave is taken in 
spells of less than 45 days, the monthly allowance will be Rs. 4,000 for a 
Chief Justice and Rs. 3,500 for any other Judge. Since only six months of 
leave on half allowances can be converted into leave on full allowances, 
the additional expenditure per Judge, other than the Chief Justice, would 
be Rs. 3,500 minus Rs. 2,220, i.e. Rs. 1,280 for each month of commuted 
leave or Rs. 3,840 for the entire period of three months commuted leave. 
2. Under clause 6 of the Bill which seeks to amend section 9 of the 
Act, a High Court Judge will be entitled to leave allowanl;e at monthly 
rate of his pay for the first 45 days instead of one month as at present. 
The additional expenditure involved is Rs. 640 on each occasion when 
leave on full allowances for more than 45 days is taken. 
3. The additional expenditure in respect of Judges of High Courts 
except the Delhi High Court will be a charge on the Consolidated Fund 
of the States. So far as the Delhi High Court is concerned, assuming that 
all the 13 permanent Judges of that High Court will avail of commuted 
leave, the total expenditure will be of the order of Rs. 49,920; the average 
period of service of a Judge of the Delhi High Court being 10 years, the 
annual recurring expenditure for that High Court will be about Rs. 5,000. 
4. There will be no non-recurring expenditure . 
.. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE HIGH COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, ]954 
(28 OF 1954) 
• • • • 
Z. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • 
(h) 'Iservice for pension" include.-
(i) actual service; 
• 
• 
• 
(ii) one month or the amount actually taken, whichever is 
less, of each period of leave on full allowances; 
• • • • • 
3. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, leave granted to a Judge 
may ·be at his option either-
(4) leave on full allowances; or 
• • • • • 
I. (1) • • • • • 
{3) The Il12I!Idmum period'of' leave which may be granted at one 
time shall be, in the case of leave on full allowances, five months and 
in the case of leave with allowances of any kind, sixteen months. 
• • • • • 
9. (1) The monthly rate of leave allowances payable to a Judge while 
on leave on full allowances shall be for the 1lrst month of such leave 
a rate equal to the monthly rate of his salary, and thereafter two thousand 
two hundred. and twenty rupees. 
• • • • • 
.. ) s 
; , ., 
L:.inda of 
leave ad-
miuible 
to a 
Jud,e. 
~,re­
JIIte 
amount of 
leaVe 
which 
may be 
,ranted. 
Leave al-
lowances. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954. 
(Shri Ram NiflJas Mirdha, Minister oj State in the Ministry of Home Affairs) 