BUI No. 90 ..,f 1959 
THE SUGAR (SPECIAL EXCISE DUTY) 
BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 3RD DECEMBER, 1959) 

DiU No. ,., of 1959 
THE SUGAR (SPECIAL EXCISE DUTY) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the imposition of a special duty of excise on certai11l 
rugar. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: ~ , 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sugar (Special Excis(; Duty) 
Act, 1959. 
S (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on f1e 25th ~~3~(~~~c 
day of October, 1959. mencement. 
10 
IS 
~o 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Central Excises Act" means the Central Excises and 
Salt Act, 1944; Definition •. 
(b) "factory" means any premises, including the precincts 
thereof, wherein or in any part of which sugar is being manufac-
tured, or, wherein or in any part of which, any manufacturing 
process connected with the production of sugar is being carried 
on or is ordinerily carried on, and includes any premises wherein 
sugar in respect of which the duty of excise payable under the 
Central Excises Act or the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods 
of Special Importance) Act, 1957, has not been paid, is stored; 
(c) "sugar" means any form of sugar, whether wholly or 
partially manufactured, but does not include-
(i) khendsari sugar, that is to say sugar in the manu-
facture of which neither a vacuum pan nor a vacuum eva-
porator is employed; or 

Imposition 
of special 
additional 
excise duty 
on certain 
aUiBI. 
(ii) palmyra sugar, that is to say sugar manufactured 
from jaggery obtliined by boiling the juice of the palmyra 
palm. 
3. (1) There shall be levied and collected in respect of that 
quantity of sugar removed from any factory on or after the com- 5 
mencement of this Act as is equivalent to the quantity of sugar lying 
in stock on such commencement within the precincts of the factory, 
a special duty of excise at the rate of rupees two and fifty-two nalla 
paue per cwt. I 
(2) The duty of excise referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in 10 
addition to the duties of excise chargeable on sugar under the Cen-
tral Excises Act or any other law for the time being in force. 
(3) The provisions of the Central Excises Act and the rules 
thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemptions from 
duty shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and coHee- 15 
tion of the special duty of excise referred to in sub-section (1) as 
they apply in relation to the levy and collection of the duties of 
excise on sugar under the Central Excises Act. 
Effect of 4. Where, in compliance with an order made with reference to 
levy of ~uty clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Essential Commodi- ~o 
=~i~s. ties Act, 1955, a person is required to sell any sugar, the price of the 10 of 19~'. 
su~r so required to be sold shall, if he has paid the special duty 
of excise leviable under section 3 on such sugar, include an amount 
equivalent to the duty so paid, and he shall be entitled to be paid 
such amount by the buyer. 25 
Repeal. 5. The Sugar (Special Excise Duty) Ordinance, 1959, is hereby 3 of 19.59. 
repealed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
This Bill seeks to replace the provisions of the Sugar (Special 
Excise Duty) Ordinance, 1959 (No.3 of 1959), promulgated by the 
President on the 25th October, 1959. 
In order to stimulate production of sugar during the current 
season Government decided to increase the price of sugar-cane. 
Simultaneously the ex-factory price of sugar was also increased in 
proportion to the increase in cane price, by Rs. 2.52 per cwt. As the 
sugar produced out of cane purchased at the old cane price would 
have got an unintended benefit of the enhanced price, it was decided 
to mop up these profits for the public exchequer, by promulgation of 
an Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 26th November, 1959. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the impositioo of a special duty of excise on (:eltain 
sugar. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 117 and 
clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, reCom-
mended to Lok Sabha the introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Finana.) 