BiD No. 80 of l8U. 
THE FORWARD CONTRACTS (REGULATION) BILL, 1952 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HoeSE OF TUE PEOPLE) 
A 
BILl ... 
• to providil for the regulation of certain matters relating to forward 
contracts, the prohibition 0/ option. In good. and lor matters 
cOImetlted therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament a8 follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRBLIHINARY 
1. Short title, ezt8llt aDd commencemeut.-(l) This Act may be 
called the }<'orward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952. 
(.9) It extends to the whole of India except the State of .Tammu Rnd 
Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on sllch date or dates as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, for 
different States or areas, and for different- goods or classes of goods. 
2. »e1lnlttou.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "M80ciation" menns any body of individuals, whether in-
corporated or not, constituted for the purpose of regulating and 
controlling the business of the sale or purchase of any goods; 
(b) "Commission" means the Forward Markets Commission 
established under section 8; 
(c) "forward contract" mean.s a contract for the delivery of • 
goods at a future date and which is not 8 ready delivery contract ; 
(d) "goods" means Avery kind of movable property other thaD 
actionable claims, money aDd securities; 
(6) "Government se<'urity" means n Government security as 
defined in the Public Debt Act, 1944 (XVIII of 1944); 
5 
JO 
51 
20 
(ft) "non-transferable specific delivery contract" means a specific 25 
delivery contrRCt. the rights or liabilities under which or under any 
delivery order, railway reoeipt, bills of lading, warehouse receipt or 
any other document of title relating thereto are not transferable . • (g) "option in goods" means an agreement, by wh8t('lv~r name 
called, for the purchase or. sale of a right to buy or sell, or a right 30 
to buy and sell, goods in future, and includes a teii, a mandi, a teji-
mandi, a galli, a put, a <'all or n put and call in goods; 
(h) "presoribed" means presoribed by rules made under this Act; 
(i) "ready deli:very contract" means l\ contrAct which provides 
for the deliv~ry of g~ds Bnd the pa;\'ment of 'l'i~t' th,,··,.r T. eifJ!"1' 
immediately or within such period not exceeding elevell dny" .. i~·: :-5 
,the date of the oontract and subject to sllch conditions a8 tbe Cenual 

10 
16 
10 
30· 
35 
2 
Government may, by notification in the OffICial Guzette, specify in' 
respect of any goods, the period under such contract not being oapable 
of extension by the mutual consent of the parties thereto or otherwise; 
(i) "recognised association" means an association which is for 
the time being recognised by the Central Government under sec~on 6; 
(k) "rules" with reference to rules relating in general to the 
constitution and management of an association, includes in the case 
of an incorporated association its memorandum and articles of 
assooiation; 
(1) "securities" includes shares, scrips, stocks, bonds, debenture!!, 
debenture-stocks, or other marketable securities of 0. like nature in" 
or of any incorporated compa.ny or other body oorporate and also 
Government securities; 
(m) "specific delivery contract" means 0. forward contract 
which provides ,for the aotual delivery of specific qualities or types of 
goods during a specified future period at 0. price fixed thereby or to 
be fixed in the manner thereby agreed and in which the n&mes of both 
thE' buyer and the seller are mentioned ; 
(n) "transferable speoific delivery oontract" 
delivery contract which is not 0. non-transferable 
oontraot. 
Ol:lAPTER n 
THE FOIlWAllD MARKETS COMMISSION 
means a specific 
speoific delivery 
3. Bst&bUahment aDd COllItltuti011 of the I'orward Markets OomDd.l-
1toD..-(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish a Oommission to be cu.lled the Forward Markets Com-
mission for the purpose of exercising such functions and disoharging suoh 
duties as may be assigned to the Commission by or under this Act. 
(2) The CommisRion shall eonsist of liot less than two but not exceeding 
three members appointed by the Central Government of whom the Chair-
man and the Secretary (also to be appointed by the Central Government) 
shall be full-time members and the third member, if any, full-time or part-
time as the Central Government may direct : 
Provided that one of the members of the Commissioo shall he a.n offioer 
of the Central Government Bnd another a person having knOWledge of for-
ward markets in India. 
(3) No person shall be qualified for appointment. as, or for eont4tuing 
to be, a member of the Commission if he has, directly or indirectly, any 
Buch financial or other interest a.s is likely to affect prejudioially hiB 
functions as 'h member of the Commission, and every member shall, 
whenever required by the Central Government so to do, furnish to it such 
information as it may require for the purpose of securing compliance with 
toe provisions of this sub-section. 
(4) No member of the Commission shall bold office for a. period of more 
than three years from the date of his appointment, and a member relin-
quishing his office on the expiry of his term shall be eligible for reappoint-
mentl. . 
(5) The other terms and oonditliona of servioe of members of th.s Com-
mission shall be such a8 may be prescribed. 

3 
t. l'uncttODl of the OommiasloD.-The functions or the Commission 
'Shall be-
(a) to advise the Otlntrul povernment in respect of the recogni-
tion of, or .the withdrawal of recognition from, any association or in 
respect of any other matter arising out of the administration o£ this I) 
Act; 
(b) to keep forward markets under observation and to draw the 
lIttention of the Centrol Government or of any other prescribed au-
thority to any development taking place in, or in relation to, such 
murkets which, in the opinion of the 'Commission, is of sufficient 10 
importance to deserve the attention of the Central Government and 
to mll.ke recommendations thert'on ; 
(c) to collect and whenever the Oommission thinks it necessary 
publish information regarding the trading conditions in respect of 
goods to which any of the provisions of this Act is made applicable, HS 
including information regarding supply, demand and prices, and to 
submit to the Contml Government periodical reports on the operation 
of this Act ond on the working of forward markets relating to such 
goods; 
(d) to make recommendations generally with a view to improving 20 
the organisation and working of forwarp. markots ;. . 
(e) to undertake ·the inspection . of the accounts and other 
documents of any recognised association when directed by the Central 
.Government; and 
(f) to perfo.rm such other duties and exercise such other powers 25 
as may be assigned to the Commission by or under this Act, or as 
may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER lIt 
RECOGNISED ASSOCIATION 
6. AppUcat10n for recopttloD of assoc1atlona.-(l) Any association 30 
.concerned with the regulation and control of forward contracts which is 
desirous of being recognised for the purposes of this Act may make an 
.application in the pr~scribed mnnn'er to the Central Government. 
(2) Every application ~ade under sub-section (1) sha:! be accompanied 
by a copy of the bye-laws for the regulation and control of forward con- 35 
tracts and also a copy of the rules relating in, general to the constitution 
of the association, and, in particular, to-,-
(a} the govering body of such assooiation, its constitution and 
powers of management and the manner in which its business is to 
he transacted; 4D 
(b) the powers and duties of the office bearers of the association; 
(0) the admission into the. association of various classes of mem-
bers, the qualifications of members, and the exclu8ion~ suspension, 
.expulsion and readmission of members therefrom or theremto ; 
.(d) the procedure for registration of partnerships 88 members of 
the association and the nomination and appointment of authorised 45 
representatives and clerks. 
I. CJ1'&Ilt of recopitiOD to aIIoClatioD.-(l) If the. Central Govemment 
is satisfied, after making such inquiry as may be necessary in this behalf 
and after obtaining such further information, if any, as may be required, •. 
that t.he rules and bye-laws of the association are suitable in the interest 

10 
15 
4 
of the trade and are in th.e public interest, it may gran. recognition to the 
association in such form as may btl presoribed. 
(2) Before granting recognition under sub-section (1), the Central 
Government muy, by order, direct,-
(a) that there shall be no limitation on the number of members 
of the association· or that there shall be such limitation on the number 
of members as may be specified; 
(b) that the 8SBociBtion shall provide for the appoint.ment by the 
Central Government of a person, whether a membp.r or the association 
or not, as its representative on, and of not more than three persollS 
representing interests not directly represented through membership 
of the asllociation as member or members of, the governing body of 
such association, and may require the association to incorporate in its 
rules any such direction and the conditions, if any, accompanying it. 
(3) No rules of a recognisoo association shall be amAnded except with 
the approval of the Central Govenlment. 
(4) Every grant of recognition under this section shall be published in 
the Official Gazette. 
'1. W1Ul4rawal 01 recop1\IaD.-If the Central Government is of opinion 
IOtha. any recognition granted to an association under the provisions of this. 
Act should, in the interest 01. the trade or in the public interest, be with-
drawn, the Central Government may, alter giving. a reasonable opportunit,. 
to the association to be heard in the matter, withdraw, by notificatioD 
in the Official Gazette, the· recognition granted to the said association : 
25 Provided that no such withdrawal shaU affect the validity of any con-
tract entered into or made before the date of the notification, and the 
Central Government may make such provision as it deems fit in the noti-
6cation of withdra.wal or in a.ny subsequent noti6cation similarly published 
for the due performance of any contracts outsta.pding on that date. 
SO 8. Po!"l' of OeDtnl GoY.mm.nt to call tor periodical retarDI or dlrIct. 
1Ilq1drl .. to be mad •. -(l) Every recognised association .shall furnish to the 
Central Government such periodical returns relating to its affairs or the 
affairs of its members 88 may be prescribed. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in Bub-seotion (1), 
35 where the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, it may, by 
order in wrlting,-
(a) call upon a recognised BRsociation to furnish in writing such 
information or explanation relating to its affairs or the affairs of an,. 
of its members as the Central Government may require, or 
40 (h) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to 
the affairs of such association or the affairs of an:! of its members Bnd 
submit 8 report: of the resull; of such inquiry to the Central Govern-
ment withirl such time as may be specified in the order or, in the al-
ternative, direct the inquiry to 'be made, and the report to be submitted, 
4S by the governing bodS of sllch 88soeiation acting jointly with one or 
more representatives of the Central Government; and 
(c) direct the Commission to inspect the accounts a.nd othel' docu-
ments of any recognised association and submit its report thereon to 
the Central Government. 

Ii 
(3) Where an iDquJry in relation to 'he alairs of a recogniled alsocia. 
iion or the aftairs of an)' of its membel'lJ has been undertaken under sub-
.ection (S)-
(4) every director, manager, secretary or other oilicer of sucb as. 
sociation, 5 
(b) eTery member of such Association, and 
(0) it the member of .he 3ssociation is a firm, every panner, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the firm, 
shall be bound to produce before ~he authority making the inquiry, all 
luch books, aooountli, correspondence and other documents in his custody 10 
CIJ" power relaWig to, or having .. bearing on the subjeot-matter ot, such 
inqHiry and also to furnish the authority with any lucb statement or in-
formation relating thereto "88 may be required of him, within luch time 
&I may b. Ipacified. 
9. hrDIIIdIIc of ua1l&1 npon. to 11M OeaVal Go ...... \ "NCO,- 11 
JdII4 .... UoDI.-{l) Every recognised 888OCiation shall furnilh to the 
Central Government a copy of its annual repori. 
(B) Such annual repori shall contain sueh particulars .. Inay be 
Ptlscrlbed. 
10. Pow. of OeIltral GonrIuDtD\ to 4IrIo\ nleI to be IUd. or to.an !O 
nlM.-(1) Whenever the Central Goyernment considers it expedient so 
-to do, it may, by order in writing, direct any recognised associati?n to 
makP any rules or to amend any rules made by the recognised 88eociation 
in respect of all or any of the matters specified in sub-Ieotion (.e) of section 
~, other than the matter specified in clause (b) of sub·section (2) of 25 
sectioll 6, within a period not exceeding aix months from the date of tbe 
order. 
(2) If any recognised UBociation, against whom an order is issued b, 
"\be Central GOT8rnment under sub·section (1), fails or neglects to com,)I~ 
wit.h Buch order within the period specified in the said sub-"ection, th,' 30 
Centr"l Government may make the rules or amend the rules Made by thf' 
Tecognised association, as the case may be, either in the form "pacified in 
tbe order or with such modifioation thereof 811 may be agreed lipan r, .. tweoll 
'l1e association and the Central Government. 
(8) Where, in pUl'lluanoe of sub-section (9), any rules have been made 35 
or amended, Ule rules 80 made or amended shall be publishlld in thl' 
Official Gazette and on such publication shall, notwithstanding anything 
-to the contrary contained in the Indian Companies Act, 191a (VII of 
19UI), or any othor law for the time being in force, have effp.ct 8S if tbey 
bad heen made or amended by the recognised association concerned. 40 
11. Pow .. 01 recoplMd .-,ctatloll to make bye-JaW8.-(1) Any recog-
Dised nSS.:>ciation mav, subject to the previous approval of the Central 
Government, make bye-laws for the regulation and oontrol of forward ('on-
tra!!". 
(.e) Tn particular. and without prejudicE" t.o the generality of the fore- 45 
going power, such hye-Iaws may provide for-
(4) the opening and closing of markets and the regulation of the 
hourI! of trade; 

I 
10 
11 
o 
(b) a clearing houae for the periodk-al settlement of contracts 
aud diJI~ences thereu~er, the delivery of, and payment for, I.:t>Ods.-
the passmg on of dehvery orders and for the regulation 8nd Dlllin-
tenance of such clearing house; 
(0) the number and classes of contI' acts in respect of whioh settle-
ments shall be made or differences pa~d ~rough .the c~eRring house r 
(d) fixing, altering or pos~ponillg days for, settleD;lent; 
le) determining and declaring market ratesJ. including c..pcnins .. 
olosing, highest and lowest rates fOl; goods; 
(j) the terms, conditions and incidents of contracts including ·the-
prescription of margin requirements, if any, and oonditions relating 
thereto, and the· forms of contracts in writing; 
(g) regulating the entering into, making, performance. rescission. 
and termination of contracts, including contracts betw6t'l1l members 
or between·... oommissidn agent and his conSifitut!Dt, or hctwt!en a. 
broker and his constituent, or between a member of the' Tecagnil'ed 
assooiation and a person who is not a member, and the ~onsequenl!e9" 
of default or insolvency on the part of a seller or buyer or inter-
mediary, the consequenoes of a breach or omission by 6 sl!l1er or 
buyer and the responsibility ot commission agents and brokers who 
. are not partie. to such contrao.; . ' . 
(h) the admission and prohibition of specified classes or typea of 
goods or of dealings in 'goods by a member of the recognised Bssoda-
.tion; . 
(I) the method. and prOL'edure for the settlement of claims or di.-· 
putes inoluding the set.tlement thereof by arbitration; 
(j) the levy and recovery of fees, fines and penalties; 
(k) the regulation of the course of business between parties to> 
contracts in any capacity ; ~ 
(l) the fixing of a Icale of brokerage and other charges; 
(m) the making, comparing, settling and closing of bargains; 
(ft/) the regulation of :fluctuations in rates and prices; 
(0) the emergencies in trade which may arise and the ~xerciae ot 
powers in such emergencies including the power to fix maXllllum ,and 
3IS mtnimum prices; 
(p)the regUlation of dealings by members for their own ac(:cunt; 
(q) the limitations on the volume of .trade done by any individual 
member; 
(1) the obligation of members to supply such infoMnation or-
explanation and to produce such books relating to their business as 
the governing body may require. 
(8) The bye-laws made under this section mBy-
(a) specify the bye-laws the contravention of any of which RhaU 
make a contract entered into otherwise than in accordnnce with th& 
bye-laws void under sub-section (.9) of section 15; 

7 
(b) provide that the contravention of any of .the bye-laws shall-
(~ render the member conoerned liable to fine; or 
(ii) render the member concerned liable to expullJion or sus-
pension from the recognised association or to any other pt'nalt,. 
of a ·like nature not involving the payment of money. 5 
(4) Any bye-laws made under this section shall be subjeot to such 
conditions in regard to previolls publication as may be prescribed, and 
when approved by the Gentral Government, shall be published in the 
GAZette of India and also in the Official Gazette of the State in whioh the 
principal office of the recognised association is situate : 1~ 
Pl'ovided that the Central Government may, in the interest of the 
trade or in the publie interest, by order in writing, dispense witb the 
eonr.lition of previous publication, in any case, 
12. Powlr of O8ID~ Governmlnt to make or amend . "'1-laWl of 
re~ AIIOCl&UoDa.-(l) The Central Government may, either on a 15 
request in writing received by it .in this behalf from the governing bc,dy of 
a recognised association, or if in its opinion it is expedient so to do, 
make bye-laws for all or any of the matters specified in. section 11 or 
amend any bye-laws made by such association under that secaon. 
(S) Where, in pursuance of this section, any bye-laws have been madeaQ 
or amended,the bye-laws so made or amended shall be published in the 
Otlicial . Gazette and also in the Official Gazette of the State in which the 
principal office of the recognised association is situate, and on such publi-
cation the bye-laws so made or amended shall have effec~ a6 if they had 
been made or amended by the recognised association.: 25 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained, in this section, where the 
governing body of a recognised association obje~ts to any bye-laws JDade 
or amended under this .section by the Central . Government on its own 
motion, it may, within six months of the publicatioD thereof under sub-
sedion (2), apply to the Central Government for a revision thereof, and 30 
the Central Government may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to 
the governing body of the association to be heard in the matter, revise 
the bye-laws so made or amended. rind where any bye·jaws so made or 
amended are revised as a result of Bny action taken under this sub-section, 
the bye-laws so revised shall be published in the Official Gazette. 35 
(4) The making or the amendment or reviaion. of any by.3-laws under 
this section shall in all cases be subject to the conditi'Jn of previous 
publication: 
Provided that the Central Government may, in the interest of tpe 
hade or in the public interest .. by oroer in writing, dispense with the 40 
condition of previous pUblication. 
18. Power of Oentral Government to IUper.de goV6l'IllI1g body of 
recogn1aed .-ocl&tlon.-(l) Without prejudice to any other powers vested 
in the Central Government under this Act, where the Central Govern-
ment is of opinion that the governing body of any recognised IlRRoeiation if) 
should be superseded, then notwithstanding anything contained. ill this 
Ach or in any other law for the time being in force, the Central Govern-
ment may, and after giving a reasonahle opportunity to the go"erllin~ 
body of the recognised association concerned to show cause why it 'should 
Dot be superseded, by notification in the Official Gazette, dE:('lare the 50 

J' 
8 
govemi.ng b~y of such association to be 8'uperseded for such period not 
eltce~\hng SIX months as may be specified in the notificatioll alld may 
appCllJlt any person or persons to exercise and perform all tha Powers Bud 
duti~s of the gove;"ling body, and where more persons than (l1e artl 
appomted may appomt one of such peNons to be thl:' chairman and 
another of such pel'8Ons to be the vice-chairman. 
(:?) On .the publication of a notification in the Oftkia1 Gazette under 
6ub-section (1), the following consequences shan ensue, naDlely:-
(G) the members of the governing body which has becl) super-
lIeded shall. as from the date of .the notification of 8upe:."Se!lsio!l, ceaSe 
to hold oftice as such members; 
, (b) the penton or persons appointed under suh-section (1) may 
~xel'6tile and perlorm all the powers and duties of the governing body 
"'hich has heen superseded; 
(c) all such property of the recognised aslKX'iation as the P('l"SOD 
or persons appointed under sub-section (1) may, hy order in writing, 
specify in this behalf as being necessary for the purpose of ellabJing 
him or them to carry out the purposes of this Act, shall vest in suchl 
penon or persons. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in rol'Y la", or 
th·) rules or bye-Ia", of ~e association whose governing body is super-
laded under sub-aection (1), the person or persons appointed under t.hat 
lub-lIection shaJl hold oftiee for such period as may be "pecified in the 
nottflcation published under that sub-section, and the Central Go,·ern-
ment may, from time to time, by like notifica'ion Vllry suah period. 
(4) On tbe determination of the period of office of any person or persona 
appointed under this section the recognised assooiation shan lOItbwith 
rec~oDBtitute a governing body in aocordance with its rules: 
Provided that until a goveming body is so reconstituted, the pel1lOn or 
persons appointed under sub-section (1) shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub-section (1), continue to exercise and perform their powers 
and duties. 
(5) On the reconstitution of a governing body under suh-se('tion (..I), all 
Mie property of the recognised association which had vested in, or wall 
in the JlO8se.s~on of, the person or persolls appointed under sub-section 
(1) shall yes. or revest. 88 the CI1&e may be, in the governing ·body ISO 
reconstituted. 
1'. Power to ~DCl bllltDea of recoplJed. IIIOOlattoU.-If in the 
interest of t·he tmde or in the public interest the Central Government 
C'.onsiders it expedient so toO do, it may. by notificlltion in the Officisl 
Gazette. direct a recognised RSRocilltion to suspend Ruch of its bUliness 
for such period not exceeding seYen days Rnd subject to such conditions 
811 may be specified in the notification. and may if, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, the interest of the trade or the public interest so 
requires by like notification extend the Mid period from time to time. 
CHAPTER IV 
FORW ARD CONTRACTA AND OPTION IN GOOD8 
11. lWward cOntract. in notUle4 ,oodI U1e,&1 or void In certaID 
c11'cum8t&n"e •. -(J) The Cpntral Government may. by notification in the 
Official Gl\zette~ declare this sedion t" apply to B_uch goods or c1888 of 
goods and in such areas 8& moy h(' Rp('citied in the nQtification, and there-
upon, Imbject to the T,rovisions contained in scction lA, ev('ry forwRrd 
oontract for the sRle or purchase of Bny goods o;;pecified in the notificstion 

U 
which is entered into in the Ill'ea specified therein otherwise than b.etweeD 
IDemb<'rl of a recognised association or through or with any such member 
shall be illegal. . 
(2) Any forward contract in goods entered into in pursuance of IIUI»-
section (1) which is in contravention of any of the bye-laws spec:fied in IS 
this behalf under clause (a) of Bub-section (3) of section 11 .hall be "oid-
(i) as respectll the right. of any member of the recognised 
association who has entered into such contract in l'olltranmtion of 
any such bye-law, and .• lao 
(il) as respects the rights of any other person who has knowingly 10 
p;lrticipated in the tran.action entai:ing such contravention. 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall affect the right of any person other 
than 8 member of the reeognised as"80l~iatiolJ to enfor(le ony such Mntrac' 
or to recover any sum under or in respect of such contract : 
Provided that Imch person had no knowledge that such tranuction was 15 
in contravention of any of the bye-laws specified under clause (0) of lub-
section (3) of section 11. 
(4) No member of a recognised association shall, in respect of any 
goods specified in the notification under sub-section (1), enter into any 
(!onU"act on his own account with any person other thlUl a mamber of the 20 
recognised association, unle.s he has secured the consent or authority 
of such person and discloses in the note, memorandum or agreemenfl of 
l1ale or purchase that he has bought or sold the goods, as the ease may b., 
on his own account: 
Prov:ded that where the member has secured the eon!ent or authority 2lJ 
o()f such person otherwise than in Writing he, shall secure a written con-
firmation by such person of such consent or authority within three days 
:from the date of such contract: 
Pro\'ided further that in respect of IIny outstanding contract entered 
!into by 8 member with a penon other th8n a member of the recognised 30 
.8f1sociation, no consent or authority of such penon shall be necesllary 
:for closing out in ACCordance with the bye-laws the outstanding contract, 
if the member discloses in the note, me,norandum or agreement of sale 
or purchase in respect of such closing out that he has bought or sold the 
goods, as the case may be, 00 his owo account. 35 
'11. Oouequeao. of DOUllcatioa 'DIId.er .. c&lon 15.-Where a noti-
"Iieation has been issued under section 15, then notwithstanding anything 
containeq in any other law for the time being in force or in any custom, 
usage or prlldice of the trade or the terms of on.y contract or the bye-laws 
.of any association concerned relating to any contract,- 40 
(a) every forward contract for the Rale or pUrI'hase of any goods 
Rpecified in the notification, entered into before the date of the 
notification and remaining to be performed after the said date Rnd 
which iR not in conformity \\'ith the provisions of scction 15, shall be 
deemed to he closed out at such rate as the Cent,ral Government 45 
may fix in this behalf, and different rates may be fixed for different 
claslles of such contracts; 

10 
C. b) all differences Ql'ifling out of any contract so deemed to be 
closed out shall be payable on the basis of the rate fixed upder clause-
(a) add the seller shall not he hound to give and the buyer shall not-
be bound to take delivery ()f _the goods. 
6 17. Power to probiblt fonr&l.cl contracta In certain c ..... -(1) The 
Celltral Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare· 
that 110 -person shall, save with the permission of the Central Government 
enter into any forward contract for the sale or purchase of any good; 
(!r class of goods specified in the notification and to which the provil'ions. 
10 of seet;ion 15 have not been ;nade applicable, except to the extent and 
in the manner, if~ny, ~ may he specified ~ j;he notifica.tion. 
(2) All forward contracts in contravention of the provisions Clf sub--
. lection (1) entered into aft~r jhe. da,te of publication of the nCJtificatioJ» 
thereunder shall b.e illegal. .-
US (.9) Where a. notification has been issued under sub-section (1), the-
provisions of section 16 shall, in the a~seQce of anything t{) the c'>ritrary 
in the notification, apply to all forward contracts for the sale or !Jl1rchase-
of any goods specified in the notification entered into before the date of the 
notifi:cation and remaining to be performed after the said date us thtoy 
JO apply to all forward conttacts -for the sale or purchase of any good" . 
• pecified in the notification- under section 15. 
18; Cllaptem m &Dd IV to apply to DOn-t1'&DIIferable apecUlc deKveq-
COIltr&cta oDlIy In certabl c ..... -(1) Where a notification under section 15 
has been issued in respect of any goods or class of goods, the Central 
!ts Government shall, by a like notification, define the area in which iii 
recognised association may regulate and control non-transferable specifio 
delivery Cbntracts in respect of such :goods or class of goods and the 
proVisions of this Chapter and ,of Chapter III shall apply to non-trans-
ferable specific delivery contracts only in such areas and only in respect. 
30 of such goods or class of goods. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in' sub-section (1), if the-
Central Government is of opinion that· in the interest of the trade or in 
the public interest it is expedient to regulate and 'control non-transferable 
lIpecific delivery contracts in any area to which the provisions of this 
M Chapter and of Chapter III do -not apply, it may, by notification in th4' 
Official Gazette, declare that all or any of the provisions of the said 
CbBpters shall apply to non-transferable specific deli'very oontra.c~ in 
such area and in respect of such' goods or class of goods as may be specified 
in the notification, and may also specify the manner in whioh and the-
40 extent to which all or any of the said provisions sliaH S6 apply. 
19. Prohlbltion of optlona In goodl.-(l) Notwithstanding anyt.hing 
contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, aU 
options in ~ods entered into after the date on which this section comes 
into forc€. shall be illegal. 
41 (9) Any option in goqds which has been entered into before the date 
on which this section comes into force and which remains to be performed, 
whether wholly or in part, after the said date shall to that extent become-
'Yoid. 

11 
OHAPTER Y 
PENAlA'lB8 AND PaoCEDt1B.II 
10. Pell&lty for contravention of certain pIOViIioDi of OhipHl :tV.-
(1) Any person who enters into any forward contract or allY option in goods 
in contravention of any of the provisions contained in IilIb-section (1) of t). 
.action 15, section 17 or section 19 shall, on conviotion, be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or 
with both. 
(2) Any p~r80n who enters into any £orw~rd contract in contravention 
of the provisions contained in sub-section (3) of seetion 15 shall, on' lOo 
conviction, be punishable with fine. 
21. PID.&lty for OWDing or keepID.J place qed for enteriDI in~ 
Jorward contr&CU in ,oodI.-~ny person who-
(4) owns or keeps a place other than that of a recognised 
association, which is used for the purpose of entering intO or making 15-
or performing, whether wholly' or in part,any forward contracts in 
oontravention of any of the pro,visions of, this Act and knowingly 
permits such place to be used for such purposes, or . 
(b) without the permission of jihe OentrAI Government, 
organises, or assists in organising, or becomes a member of, any 2()0 
aSlklciation. other than a reoognised association, for the purpose of . 
assist,ing in, entering into or making or performing, whether wholly 
or in part, any forward contracts in oontrauntion of any of the pro-
"jsions of this Act, or 
(e) manages, controls or assists in keeping any place other than !5-
that of a rellognised association, which is used for the purpose of 
entering into or making' or performing, whether 'NhoJly or in part, 
any fo!ward contracts in contravention of any of t·ha pro"isions of this 
Al't or at which such forward oontracts are recorded or adjusted, or 
rights or lia.bilities arising out of such forward contil"8ets are adjusted, 30-
regulated or enforced in any manner ~hatsoever, or . 
(d) not being a member of a recognised associution, wilfUlly re-
presents to, or induces, any person to believe that he is a member of 
a recognised association or that forward contracts clln be entered into 
or made 01' performed, whether wholly or in part, under this ,Act 36-
through him, or 
(e) Dot being a member of a recognised association or his agent 
authorised as such under the rules or bye-laws of such association, 
canvasses, advertises or ~uts in any manner, either for" himself or 
on behalf of any other person, for any business connected with iO' 
forward contracts in contravention of any of the provisions of this 
Aot, or 
(j) joins, gathers, or assists in gathering at any place. other than 
the place of business specified in the bye-laws of a recognised asso-
ciation, any person or persons for making bid!'! or offers or for entering 4:5-
mio (.r 1llaking or performing any forward contracts in contravention 
of any 01 the provisions of this Act, 
aball , 011 conviction, be punishable with imprisonment whioh may extelld 
to two yea.rs, or with fine, or with both. 

10 
Ii 
22. OfleAo .. bJ oompual ... -(l) Whertl an oRence has been uommitted 
by 8 company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 
of the business of the company, 8S well as the. company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the oRence and shall be liable to be procEleded against and 
punished accordingly: 
I'rovidcd that nothing contained in this sub-sectioll &hall render ally 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Aot, if he proves 
thol thl"! often",! was committed without his knowledge (11' that he' t'xerciaed 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such ofteooe. 
(i) Nonrithstanding . anything ('ontained in sub-sectio;'l (1), whel'e AD 
offene'e under this Act has been committed by a company and it iB proved 
that tlJf) offence has been committed with the conBent or connivancoPl, 
or iu attributable to any gross negligence OD the part 01, any direotor, 
13 manager, secretary or other officer of the company, Buch director, manager, 
lecretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 01 that oRence 
and Ihall t.e liable to be proceeded agaiult; and punished aooorclingly. 
1!zp'''7&atiofl.-For the purpo.ea of thie section,-
(II) "oompany" means any body oorpora~ and includes 11 firm or 
other 8IIIOOiation of individuals; and 
(b) "direotor", in relation to a firm, meanB a panner in the firm. 
28. 0erUI&D oJleDCli to be COpl'ulie.-Notwithstanding anything con-
tained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), any olence 
punishable under sub-section (1~ of section 20 or Bection 21 shall be 
23 de-emed to be a cognizable offence within the meaDing of that Code. 
U. 11lllldlcUon to tIJ olllllCM 1III4er tbiI ~-No court inferior ~ 
tbat of " preAidency magi.trate or a magistrate of the first 01 ... shan t.kt-
oognizance of or tr7 any oHence punishable under thil Act. 
CHAPTER VI 
lII80BLLAWBOI18 
D . .&dYIIaIJ Oomml"".--For the purpose of advising flhe Central Go-
-.t!!rnment in relation to .. ny maUer concerning the operation of this Aci, 
the Central Government lOlly estAblish an advilory committee conaiatini of 
luch number of persons al may be prelCribed. 
3G St. Power to 4elepw.-The Central Government may. by notificaiion 
'n tbe Offic'ial Gazette, direct that any power eJ:ert'iuble by it under this 
Act may, in such circumstances and Bubject to such conditions, if any, as 
may be Kpecified, be exercised by Buch officer or authority, inClluding any 
1!tate Oonl"nment or officers or authoritie. thereof aa may be specified h 
the tlirectiun. 
2'1. Power to uempt.-'l'he Centra) Government may, by notific8-
. tion in the Official Gazette, exempt, subject to 8U1·h conditiollR nnd in 
luch circumstances and in such areas as may be specifIed in the notifica-
tion, any contract or'clas8 of contrncts from the operRtion of all t)r [.r.y of 
40 the provipions of this Act. 

13 
•. Power to make rul ••. -(I) l'he Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of ccrrying 
into effect 1 he objects of this Act. 
(9.) In pllrticular, and without prejudice to the generality of tbe 
foregoing po-er, such rules may prm'ide for- 5 
(a) the terms and conditiolls of service of members of the 
Commission; 
(b) the manner in which applications for recognition may be 
made under section 5 and the levy of 0. fee in respect thereof; 
(c) the manner in which any inquiry for the purpose of 1'8COg- 10 
nising allY association may be made and the form in whil,h recogni-
tion shall be granted; 
(d) the partieuiars to be contained in ihe annual reports 1)( recog-
nised associations ; 
(6) the manIler ill which the bye-laws to be nlllc1~ ftDlpnded ror 16 
reviAl'd under this Act shall, before being so mali~. I\:r,cnded Or 
revised, be published for criticism; . 
(n the constitution of the advisory committee established under 
section 25, the terms of ofl\ce of and the manner of filling vacancies 
among membel"S of the committee; the interval within which meetings 20 
·of the advisory committee may be held and the procedure to be followed 
at such meetings; and the matters which may be referred by the Cen_ 
tral Government to the advisory committee for advice; . 
(g) any other matter which iii to be or may bs prescribed. 

14: 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Forward trading, whioh normally plays a useful part in tf>mpering prioe 
Silotua.tions, tends in oertain flituo.tions to exaggerate suoh fluotuations to the 
detriment of the int.Jrests of producers 8.8 W':IU as consumers. During the 
W&r and immedit\toly thereafter, the Contral Govornmnnt issued orders under 
Rule 81 of the D }fen()3 of India Rulos, prohibiting forwar(, trading in comm')· 
dities, such as foodgrains, oil.sootis, oil·oakes, vegetable oils, raw cotto; 
:spices, suga.r a.nd bullion. After the Defmo~ of India. Act lapsed, orders it. 
respect offoodgrains, edible oil·seeds and oils, raw ootton n.nel spiN~s were kopt 
in foroo und3rthe E8~()ntjal Supplies (Temporn.ry Powers) Aet, 1946, ;\nd similar 
orders about cotton· seed and sugar w.)re also issuod later und~r this Act. It 
wa,s only in the oase of raw ootton that 0. ganoral exemption was grantod with 
respect to forward trading oonducted undar the auspices of the El\st India 
-COtton Association, Bombay, 
Alllong the Stat~s, Bombay is the only one whioh has adopted a. com· 
prehensive scheme for the regulation of forward trading under the Bombay 
Forward Contracts Control Act. That Aot has been brought into foreo mainly 
to control forward trading in ootton, bullion and oil·seeds. 
Undar the C.)Q9titution, the subject of "stock excho.ng-s and futur, I 
markets" is included in the Union list. Cons·~qllently, tho State Legislature~ 
&re no longar compet'lnt to enaot any fresh legislation with reg&rq tof,) rward 
ma.rkets, and unless Contrall.}gislation on this subjoct is enaet()d, the resulting 
laouna. may prevont de~irable action being taken, when neaded. Whfln tho 
Oentral Ad oomo,'i into force, th'.} existing State Acts will cOll.se to 0p'-,rate to 
the oxtr.mt to which they are inoonsist:lnt wit.h tho Ctlntral Act. 
In February, 1950, a draft Bill on this subject was circulated to the State 
Governments, the Reserve Bank ofIndia, Chambers ofCommorc(l and various 
:>ther interosts conO'3rnoo. In .July, 1950, the draft Bill was referr(ld to an 
Expart Committ~ under the Chairmanship of Shri A. D. Shroff. and wal 
revised in th~ light of th", Committee's reoommendations. Tho Government of 
India also Il.cc')ptod in principle the Committee'~ recommendationl:1 in reg' rd 
to the pra.ctical op3ration of this mea.sure, though thoir applio!l.tion to individual 
-Gases would have to be decided in the light of experionce and the ciroumstances 
~f eaoh case. 
A Bill wa.s introduced in the Provisional Pa.rliament on 19th n.~comher, 
1950, and W,\S referred by it to & Seler.t Committee on 24th April, 19ti!. The 
Select Committ<Jo's R"port, which was submittod on 20th Augul!t, 1951. 
could not be considered by the Provisional Parliament before it WIUI prorogu<.od 
and tho Bill lapsed. This Bill 80S now introduced is largoly in tho form 
·reoomm·mded b, the Select Committee, but oortain alterations have boon made 
therein as a result of further consideration. 
Thl} Bill prOVides for the regulation of forward trading and the prohibi-
tion of option!l in goods. Transa.ctions on Stook Exchanges have been ex· 
-eluded, since the problem of regulating Stook Exchanges have somo sp6cilll 
fa ,tures of its own and oan bORt be treated Repar&tely. It is proposed to pro-
hibit options altogether, since they &re considered to be an undasirable form of 
-speoulation. . 
The regulatory provisions of this Aot will be xtended by notification to 
4ift'eront 01&8868 of goods and to difler'nt areas as and when necessary. Th. 
main principle underlying these provisions ise that forward IlOntracts should be 

15 
allowed to be enwred into oaly in a.coord6noe with the rules and byo-
laws of a. recognised &8sociation. The rules and by. laws will be subjeot to 
the approva.l of th6 Central Government who will also have the power to make 
auah rules and by(~-la.ws. ,Provision has been mado for the appointment by 
th'3 Oentral Government of onl' parson 80S its own representative and not more 
than throe persons to ropros:mt intllrests not directly represented through the 
.memb~rship of the Il.8sooiation, 8.S members of the governing body of a recog~ 
nised assooiation. Tho Contral Government will also have the powers to 
.ord.,r an inquiry into the affa.irs of Ii. l'I.1oogni!!od association or those of any 
.of its m ):D b )rs, and to rlireot the Forward Markets CommiRsion to insJY'ct the 
:aocounts and oth~r do~umonts of tho .AR~ocia.tion. In emergenciclI, the C.mtraJ 
G;)vornm~nt MrJ.Y have to·susp·:md the business of a recognised aSl!ooiation, 
a.nd in corhin oxtrome CI\.S~s, to sup~r"'(ldc the governing body of a recognised 
..assooiation for a period p.ot oxcecdin." lIix months, or even to withdraw recog· 
nition. It has b J()n provichd that the provisions of this Aot will apply to non-
tuu'If.m"blo 8p )oi6.o d)liv.~ry contra.ots only in certain areaRto be notified by the 
Contral Government. 
In ordJr to a9.~ist th() CJntra.l Gov-3rnm:mt in the administration of the 
Ao!;, it is oon3id )rod (le~ira.ble that a oommiRSion, to be called " The Forward 
M:Iorkl'ts CommiSlJion" should be establi!!hed. Provision has also hElen made 
for th'3 ostablishm mt of ... "1 Advisory Committee to a.dvise the Central Govo-m-
m'mt on a.ny matter oOllc3rning the op3ration of the Act. 
NEW DBLHI; 
!l'4e 25th July. 1962. 
T .T. KRISltNAMACHARI. 

16 
Nolt8 on ClaiuM 
Clause 2.-Forwa.rd contraot!! are of three kinds : futures contraot., 
transferabltl 8p~oi6(} doli very oontraots and non-transferable spe~ifio delivery 
oontraou. It will be seen from clause 2 (c) rea.d with clause 18 that the soheme 
of ragulation embodiod in this Bill applie£l to all the three types of oontraotp. 
T~nsferable speci6c delivery contraots are included within th(l purview of this 
Bill, because in many trades Buoh types of oontracts can also be used as futures 
contracts for all praotical purposes. Government will have th(l pow£\r, hcw£;ver, 
under olause 27 to exempt transferable Bpecific delivery contracts, wh£'n their 
inolusion is likely to cause unneooBEary hardBhip or inconveni(,nce to t,he trade 
ooncerned. In regard to non-transferable specific deliTery contracttl, t.he 
regulatory provisions of the Bill will be made applicable only in such areas 
and only in rel!pect of such goods or class of goodB as are notified by the Cen-
tral Government. Sub-clause (2) of clause 18, however, empowers the Central 
Government to extend the application of the regulatory provisions to non-
transfera.ble specific delivery oontracts in any area to which they do not apply. 
ClatuU 3 and 4.-In order to llo88iat the Central Government in the admi-
nistration 01 the Act and to provide for a study of the problems relating to for-
ward markets, it is oontlidered desirable that a Commisl!ion 1.11 be called the 
"Forward MarketB CommiR8ion", should be establishf'd. The Commission 
will also llo88ist the Central Governmt'nt in co-ordinating thf' action tabn and 
policies pursued by the various authorities to whom the Central Government 
may havs to delegate some of the powon conferred upon it by this Act. 
ClatUU 5, 6 and 7 provide for the grant of recognition to and with-
drawal of recognition from &8sooiaHons concerned with the rrgulation and con-
trol of forward contracts. Recognition will be grant(d only to a limited 
number of asociations. Before granting recognition, !)are will be tak( n to S(,6 
that the rulell of admission do not exclud" an,. soction of the trade whose partie 
oipation is necessary or desirable in the interests of the trade. Provision 
is also made for securing Government repretl6Jltation on the governing bodios 
of reoognised U8OCliations. 
Glawe 8 empowen the Central Government--
(/I) to 08.11 upon a recognised &88Ociation to furnish information or 
explanation regarding ita aft'airs or the affairs of ita members ; 
(6) to order an inquiry into such aft'airs ; and 
(c) to direct the Commission to inspeot the documents of a recognised 
A.B80ciation. 
OIa1UJe 10 gives power to the Central Government to direct any recog-
nieed association to make or amend any rulell in rt'lation to any matter speci-
fied in clause 5 (2) other than the matter specifit'd in claust 6 (2) (b). 
ClaU8e8 11 and 12.---Ol&use 11 sper-ifies matters on which a recognised 
&Moftiation may make bye-laws for rogulating the activities of its memberB. 
Any contrant entered into in oontravention of oertain specified bye-Ia W8 will be 
void. [See also clause 15 (2)]. Power is given to the Central Government 
under c1autle 12 to amend the bye-laws of a recognisod association, wherever 
necc8Bary. 
ClafUU 13 and 14 c~ntain nece8Bary powers for the sUpt'rlleMion of the 
governing body of a recognised 8Mociation, or t.o suPpCnd the bUBinE'8l! of" .. 
recognised association in omergenties. 

~7 
Ola-rue lS.-Whe,O" &ssot'is.tions, )unv been reeognised und.:.r clause 6 
in respeot of a commodity in any a.r:l& and clause 15 is, brought into foroe 
.. W'ithra8peq~ tie that oommodity in thlJ,t &l'f.la, no forward oontraot will be 
;,alloweA:.to. be enterdd into in rJspect' of that coriiin6iijty in, that area except 
'by ol"'through a member of a recognised al!lIOGiation. Th;!" clause all!o provi. 
des that any forward contract en~1'ed intO in' oont1:aventiOll of the bye-laws 
of the reoognised association shall be void. It has also beeR'provided that 
',the r1ghts of innocent third pii.rtie8 will not be affected by forward eontracts 
.~htered in~ iil'contraventiori of the' bye-laWs. A member of a rec6gniBed 
&8llociation, while executing a sale or purchase order from a' non~memhfr, 
will 'be required not to buy or, 8011 on his oWll.account, exc3pt'with t}te ~on-
·.sent 6£ the non-momber, Suoh oonsent, however, will riot bercquired when 
~h6 member has ~ close out an outstanding contract.,' , 
,:. C!11Ji£8e n e~pB~ers' Qpvcrnr:deni ~op~obibit foi-wa.rd contr~cts in any 
-commodity to which clause 15 h~ not been' made applicable. Similar powers 
are contained in the E8.8ential Supplies (Temporary Powerl!) Act, 1946, hut 
they are limited to the ossential commodities specified in that Act. The 
powdr to prohibit forward contracts may have to be exercised in the caStl 
of commodities in which eXfJcE.sive speculation is found to be taking place, 
but to which the rflgulatory provisions of tbis Act have not yet been appli-
ed. Suoh prohibition will be withdrawn as and when tho necessary arrange-
ments are made to raglliate forward oontracts in tbe commodity concerned. 
Where forward trading has to b3 prohibited even in respect of a commodity 
to whioh 0laus8 15 has bo"n made applicablo, thE" necessary action can be 
taken under cla11so 14 or clause 7. 
mfJ,II,11e l!l provides for application of Chaptors III and IV to non-
tran~forable specific delivery contraots. l;;ee the note on dause 2. 
Ola1UJe 19 prohibits option in goods. It is oonsidered that options 
unduly increase tho volume of speCUlation and hay" a dt"moralising effect 
on the market. 
Ol!l,rne 23 lQ\kes cortain offenoes under thE" Act cognizablt". 
OlaU8e 2.'; provides for the establishment of an Advisory Committee 
which will advise the Central OovE"rnment on any matt':>f concerning the op<'r-
ation of this Act, 
Olau.ge 27.-This power is nE'oessary. It waEl provid('d in thE' Forwa.rd 
Contraot, (Prohibition) Orders issued Ilnd<lr the Dd(~nce of India Rui('s and 
waH utilised to deal with special caSeEi. ' 

·HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
BILL 
to provide for the regula.tion of certain matters relating to 
forward contracts, the prohibition of options in goods 
and for matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauso (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the Honse 
of the People the consideration of tho Bill. 
(SAri T. T. KrillAnamacll4ri, 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
Minister for Oommerce and IndU8try) 
GIPD-LAD-:122 1\1 of LlIw-aO.i· 52 -I,7110. 