WK SABRA 
OORRIG§lDA 
to 
THE EXPENDITURE-TAX BILL, 1987 
(To be/As in troduced in 10k Sabha) 
1. page 3, in the rrarginal heading to clause 5,-
after "Mean in g" in ser t "0 fIt 
2. Page 3, line 14,-
.!o.I. "per son " ~ "p er son s " 
3. Page 6, line 38,-
a.t:ter "section 9" insert "or section 10" 
4. Page 6, line 4L,-,-
!o.l: "section 9" ~ "section 11" 
5 . pa ge 7, lin e 7,-
!o.l: "period expires" ~ "is" 
6 • Pa ge 8, lin e 14,-
i.lu:. "con cea cn en t" ~ "concea.lmen t" 
7. Page 8, line 15,-
!a..t. ;hargeable" ~ "d1 a rgeable" 
8. Page 9, line 6,_ . 
.1b..x: "revised" ~ "reviewed" 
9. pagr. 9, line 1'.6-
.!a.l: "satisfied after" ~ "satisfied that" 
10. ' Page 10, in the marginal heading to clause 24,-
..t:Q.t "Appliuion" ~ "Applioe. tion" 
11. page 11~ in the marginal heading to clause 26,-
!Q.r. "presecribed" ~ "prescribed" 
NEW DEUII; 
August e6, 1987 

As INTROtlUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
M\G\9S1 1. iill'lJo. 90 of 1987 
nIE EXPENDITURE-TAX BILL, 1987 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Application of the Act. 
4. Charge of expenditure-tax. 
5. Meaning of chargeablE7 expenditure. I 
8. Tax authorities. 
7. Collection and rec-overy of expenditure-tax. 
8. Person responsible for collecting tax to furnish prescribed 
return. 
9. Assessment. 
10. Best judgment assessment. 
11. Chargeable expenditure escaping assessment. 
12. Rectification of mistake. 
13. Time limit for c-ompletion of assessment and reassessment. 
14. Interest on delayed payment of expenditure-tax. 
15. Penalty for failure to collect or pay expenditure-tax. 
16. Penalty for failure to furnish prescribed return. 
17. Penalty for concealment of chargeable expenditure. 
18. Penalty for failure to comply with notice. 
19. Penalty not to be imposed in certain cases. 
20. Notice of payment. 
21. Revision of orders by the Commissioner. 
22. Appeals to the Commissioner (Appeals) .. 
23. Appeals to Appellate Tribunals. 
24. Application of provisions of Inoome-tax Act. 
25. Wilful attempt to evade tax, etc. 
26. Failure to furnish prescribed returns. 
27. False statement in verification. etc. 
28. Ahetment of false return, etc. 
29. Certain offences to be non-cognizable. 
30. Institution of proceedings and composition of offences. 
31. Power to make rules. 
:32. Power to remove difficulties. 
33. Consequential amendments. 

'4 of 1963 
Bill No. 90 of 1987 
THE EXPENDITURE·TAX BILL, 1987 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy ota tax on expenditure incurred in certain hotel~. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Expenditure-tax Act, 19&7. Short 
title, 
(2) It extends to the whole ot India eJtcept the State of Jammu and extent 
S Kashmir, and 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Offlcial Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this I\ct, ·unless the context Qtherwiee requires,-
(1) lIa~sessfte" means a rersun responsible for collecting the 
10 expenditure-tax payable under the provisions of this Act; 
15 
(2) "assessment year" means the period of twelve rr.onths com-
I mencing on the 1st day of April every year; 
(3) "Board" means the Central Board of Direct Taxes consti-
tuted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act 1963: 
(4) "chargeable expenditure" means the expenditure referred 
to in section 5: 
(5) "expenditure-tax" or "tax" means the tl;\x char~eabll> und"'l 
the .. urovisions of this Act: 
commence-
ment. 
Defini. 
tions. 

2 
(I) Uhotel" includes a building or part of a building where 
nsidential accommodation is, by way of business, provided for a 
monetary consideration; 
(7) "Income-tax Act" means the Income-tax Act, 1961; 43 of 1961 
(8) "person responsible for collecting" means a person who is S 
required to collect tax under this Act or is required to pay any 
other sum of money under this Act and includes-
(a) every person in respect of whom any proceedings under 
this Act have been taken, and I 
(b) every person who is deemed to bean assessee-in-default 10 
under any provision of this Act; 
. (9) uprescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
I (10) "room charges" means the charges for a unit of residential 
accommodation in a hotel and includes the charges for-
(a) furniture. air-donditioner, refrigerator, radio. ,-nuslc, 15 
telephone, television, and 
(b) such other services as are normally included by a hotel 
in room rent, 
but does not incluCle charges for food, drinks and any services other 
than those referred to· in sub-:clauses· (a) and (b); 20 
(11) all other words and expressions used herein but not defined 
and defined in the Income-tax Act shall have the meanings respec-
tively assigned to them In that Act. 
". ·(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and SUb-section (3), 
this Act shall apply in relation to any chargeable expenditure incurred 2S 
In a hotel wherein, the room charges for any unit of residential accom-
modation at the time of the incurring of such expenditure are fourhuridred 
rupees or more per day per individual. , 
(2) Where a composite charge is payable in respect of residential 
.accommodation and food, the room charges included therein shall be 30 
detennined in the prescribed manner. 
(3) Where-
(i) a composite charge is payable in respect of resid~ntial 
accommodation, food" drinks and other services. or nny of them, and 
the C8$e is not covered by the provisIons of sub-section (2r. or 35 
(ii) it appears to the Income-t.ax Officer that the charges for 
residential accommodation. food. drInks Or other sc!'Vices are so 
arranged that the rOOm charge~ are u",dprstnt~d and the other 
charges are overstatep. 
the Income-tax Officer shall. for thE' pUTpOl'les of sub-section (1). deter- 40 
mine the room chl'lrges on sll':!h rea.'lo~'3hl~ ba!'<s as h~ may deem fit. 
4. Subject to the provisions of this A~t. tht.:'r(' !'lhnll be charged on ~"d 
lrom the commencement of thi!! Act. a tnx ~t the THte of ten per cent. 
(If thQ chargeable cxpenditurl? 
".-- ....... ~. ·:,::,,···:..;.·....;;,;;;. ..... '""9.·· : .. *Iiri···iiiii··IIiiii·i-iiIiIi'kiiiili· • .., .. ··· .. ' IIIiIIPiI' ._ 

3 
5. For the purposes of this Act, chargeable expenditure means any 
expenditure incurred in, Or payments made to, a hotel to which this Act 
applies, in conn~tion with the provision of,-
(a) any accommodation, residential or otherwise; or 
5 (b) food or drink by the hotel, whether at the hotel or outside, 
or by any other person at the hotel; or 
(C) any accommodation in such hotel on hire or lease; or 
(d) any other services at the hotel, either by the hotel or by 
any other person, by way of beauty parlour, health club, swimming 
] 0 pool or other similar services, 
but does not include-
(a) any expenditure which is incurred. or the payment for 
which is made, in foreign exchange; 
(b) any expenditure incurred by person. within the purview of 
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, 1961. or the Vienna 
J5 Convention on Consular Relations, 1963; 
20 
25 
46 of 1973 30 
(c) any expenditure incurred in any shop or in any office which 
is not owned or managed by the person who carries on the business 
of a hotel; 
(d) any expenditure by way of any tax, including tax under 
this Act. 
Ex/llanation.-For the purposes of this section.-
(a) expenditure incurred or any payment made in Indian cur~ 
rency obtained by conversion of foreign exchange into Indian cur~ 
rency shall in such cases and in such circumstances as may be pres-
cribed be deemed to have been incurred or, as the case may be, made 
in foreign exchange; and 
(b) "foreign exchange" and "Indian currency" shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses (h) and (k) of 
section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973. 
6. (1) Every Director of Inspection, Commissioner of Income-tax, 
Commissioner of Income~tax (Appeals), Inspecting Assistant Commis-
sioner of Income-tax, Income-tax Officer and Inspector of Income-tax 
shall have the like powers and perform the like functions under this 
35 Act as he has and performs under the Income~tax Act, and for the 
. exercise of his powers and the performance of his functions, his jurisdic-
tion under this Act shall be the same as he has under the Income-tax 
Act. 
(2) All officers and persons employed in the execution of this Act 
o "hall observe and follow the orders jnstructions and directions of the 
4 Board: ' 
Provided that no such 'Orders, inst.ructions or directions shall be 
issueo-
(.~) so as to require any blX fluthority to make a particular 
4~ assessment or to di!lpos~ of a particular case in a pnrticul!\r mann~r: 
Dr 
Meaning 
charae-
able j 
expendi-
ture. 
Tax 
authorl-
ties. 

Collec-
tion and 
recovery 
of expen-
diture-tax. 
Person 
l'eIIp<lnsi-
ble for 
collee-
tins taX 
to furnish 
"res-
cribed 
return. 
(b) SO as to interfere with the discretion of the Commissioner 
(Appeals) in the exercise of his appellate functions. 
(3) Every Income-tax Officer employed in the execution of this Act 
shall observe and follow the orders, instructions and directions issued 
for his guidanc~ by the Director of. Inspection or by the Commissioner S 
or by the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner within whose jurisdiction 
he performs his functions. 
7. (1) Where any chargeable expenditure is incurred in a hotel to 
which this Act applies,-
(i) if such expenditure relates to any of the services. ~pecjfied 10 
in clauses (a) to (d) of section 5, provided by the hotel. the person 
who carries on the business of such hotel; and 
(ii) if such expenditure relates to any of the services, specified 
in clause (b) or clause (d) of section 5, provided by the other person 
referred to therein, such other person, 1 ~ 
shall conect the expenditure-tax at the rate specified in section 4. 
(2) The tax collected during any calend~r month in accordance with 
the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be paid to the credit of the Central 
Government by the 10th day of the month immediately follOWing the 
said calendar month. I 20 
(3) Any person responsible for collecting the tax who fails to coned 
the tax in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) shaU, not-
withstanding such failure, be liable to pay the tax to the credit of the 
Central Government in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2). 
8. (1) Every person responsible for collecting t.he tax shall before 25 
the expiry of four months from the 31st day of March in f"ach year, fur-
nish or cause to be furnished to the Income-tax Offtcer in the prescribed 
form and verified in the prescribed manner, a return in respect of the 
immediately preceding financial year showing-
. (a) the aglV'egate of t.he payments received in respect of charge- 30 
able expenditure; I 
(b) the amount of the tax coliected; 
(c) the amount of the tax paid to the credit of the Central Gov-
ernment; and 
(dJ such other particular~ as may be prescribed. 
(2) In the case of any person who. in the opinion of the Income-taxi 
Officer, is .responsibl e for collecting tax under this Act and who has not 
furnished a return under SUb-section (1), the Income-tax Officer may, 
before the expirv of the finapcilll year in which the return is to be fur-
nished. issue a notice tl"l him and serve ~he ~nme upon him. requi.ring him 'i0 
to furnish within thirtv days from the (hltf~ of service of the notice the 
return in the prescribed form and verified in the nrescribed manne.r 
setting forth such other particulars as mny be prescribed. 
(3) Any person responsible for coJlecting the tax who has not 
furnished the return within the time allowed under sub-section (1) or 4 S 

sub-section (2), or having furnished a ire turn under sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2) discovers any omission Or wrong statement the.rein, may 
furnish a return or a revised return, as ,the case may be, at any time 
before the assessment is made. 
5 9. (1) For the purpose of making an assessment under this Act, the Assess.. 
Income-tax Officer may serve on any person who has furnished a return men!. 
under section 8 or upon whom a notice has been served under sub-section 
(2) of section 8 (whether a return has been furnjshed or not) a notice 
requiring him on a date therein to be specified, to produce or cause to be 
10 produced such accounts or documents or other evidence as the Income-
tax Officer may require for the purposes of this Ac~ and may, from time 
to time, serve further notices requiring the production of such further. 
accounts or documents or other evidence as he may require. 
(2, The Income-tax Officer, after considering such accounts, docu-
15 ments or other evidence, if any, as he has obtained under sub-section (1) 
and after taking into account any relevant material which he has gather~ 
ed, shall, by an order in writing, assess the chargeable expenditure and 
the amount of tax payable on the basis of such assessment. 
10. 1£- Best juda-
20 (a) any pe.rson fails to make the return required by any notice 
given under sub-section (2) of section 8 and has not made a return 
or a revised return under SUb-section (3) of that section, or ! 
(b) any person having made a ,return fails to comply with all 
the terms of a notice issued unde~ sub-section (1) of section 9, or 
25 (c) the Income-tax Officer is not satisfied with the correctness or 
the completeness of the accounts of the assessee, 
the Income-tax Officer, after taking into account all the relevant material 
which he has gathered, shall, by an order in writing, make the assessment 
of the chargeable expenditure to the best of his judgment and determine 
30 the sum payable by the assessee or refundable to the assessee on the 
basis of such assessment. 
35 
11. If-
(a) the iIncome-tax Officer has reason to believe that by reason 
of omission or failure on the part of the assessee to make a return 
under section 8 for any assessment year or to disclose wholly and 
truly all material facts necessary for his assessment for any assess-
ment year, chargeable expenditure for that year has escaped assess-
ment or has been under-assessed, or 
(b) notwithstanding that there has been no omission or failure 
as mentioned in clause (a) on the part of the assessee, the Income-
tax Officer has, in consequence of information in his possession, 
reason to believe that chargeable' expenditure assessable in any 
assessment year has escaped assessment or has been under-assessed, 
he may, in cases falling under clause (a), at any time, and in cases falling 
4S under clause (b), at any time within four years from the end of that 
assessment year, serve on the assessee a jIlotice containing all or any of 
the requirements which may be included in a notice under section 8 and 
may proceed to assess or reassess the chargeable expenditure, and the 
ment assess-
ment. 
Charge-
able 
expendi-
ture es-
caping 
assess-
ment. 

Rectifica-
tion of 
mistake. 
Time 
limit for 
comple-
tion of 
assess-
ment and 
reassess-
ment. 
6 
provisions of this Act shall. so far as may be. apply" as if the notice was 
a notice issued under that section. 
12. (1) With a vieW' to rectifying any mistake apparent from the 
record, the tax authority referred to in section 6 which passed any order 
unde.r the provisions of this Act may. wtithin four years of the date on 5 
. which such order was passed, amend the ord~r. 
(2) Where any matter has been considered and decided in any pro-
ceeding by way of appeal or revision relating to an order refe.rred to in 
sub-section (1), the authority passing such order may, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any law for the time being in force, amend 'the 10 
order under that sub-section in .relation to any matter other than the 
• matter which has been so considered and decided. 
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this section. the authority 
concerned-
(a) may make an amendmen~ under sub-section (1) of its own 15 
motion, and 
(b) shall make such amendment if any mistake is brought to its 
notice,- ' 
(i) by the assessee; or 
(ii) where the authority concerned is the Commissioner 20 
(Appeals), by the Income-tax Officer. 
(4) An amendment, which ,has the effect of enhancing an assessment 
or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the liability of the assessee, 
shall not be made under this section unless the authority concerned has 
given notice to the assessee of its intention so to do and has allowed the 25 
assessee a .reasonable opportunity of being neard. 
(5) Where an amendment is made under this section, an order shall 
be passed in writing by the tax authority concerned. 
(6) Subject to the other provisions of this Act where any such amend-
ment. has the effect of reducing the assessment, the Income-tax Officer 30 
shall make any refund which may be due to such assessee. 
(7) Where any such amendment has the effect 'Of enhancing the 
assessment o,r reducing the refund already made, the Income-tax Officer 
shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand in the prescribed fonn 
specifying the sum payable and such notice of demand shall be deemed 3S 
to be issued under section 20 and the provisions of this Act shall apply 
accordingly. i 
13. (1) No order of assessment shall be made under section 9 at any 
time after the expiration of a periOd of four years from the end of the 
assessment year in which the chargeable expenditure was first assessable, 40 
or one year from the date of the filing of the return or revised return 
under section 8, whichever is later. 
(2) No order of assessment or reassessment shall be made under 
section 9,-
(a) where the assessment or reassessment is to be made in a 4S 
case falling within clause (a) of section 11 for which a notice has 
been served upon the assessee, at any time after the expiration ofa 
period of four years from the end of the assessment year in which 
the said notice was served; 

7 
(b) where the assessment or reassessment is to be made in a 
case falling within clause (b) of section 1'1, for which a notice has 
been served, after the expiration of a period of-
(i) fOUr years from the end of the assessment year in which 
S the chargeable expenditure was first assessable, or 
(ii) one year from the date of service of such notice, I 
whichever period expires later. 
(3) Notwi.f;hstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (Z). 
an order of fresh assessment in pursuance of an order passed under 
10 section 21, section 22 or section 23, setting aside or cancelling an assess-
ment, may be made at any time before the expiry of four years from 
the eru:l of the financial year in which the order under section 21 is 
passed by the Commissioner, or, as the case may be, the order under 
section 22 or section 23 is received by the Commissioner. 
15 (4) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2} shall not apply to the 
assessment or reassessment made in consequence of, or to give effect 
to, any finding or direction contained in an order under section 21, sec-
tion 22, section 23 or any order of a High Court or Supreme Court in 
a prOCeeding by way of reference or appeal under this Act or any order 
20 of any court in a proceeding otherwise than by way of an appeal or 
reference under this Act and such assessment or reassessment may, 
subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), be completed at any time. 
Explanation_In computing the period of limitation for the purposes 
of this section, the period during which the assessment proceeding is 
2S stayed by an order or injunction of any court shall be excluded. 
14. Every person responsible for collecting expenditure-tax and pay-
ing it to the credit of the Central Government in accordance with the 
proviSions of section 7, who fails to credit the tax to the account of 
the Central Government within the period specified in that section, shall 
30 pay simple interest at the rate of one and one half per cent. for 
every month or part of a month by which suc.h crediting of tax is 
delayed. 
15. Any person responsible for collecting expenditure-tax in accord-
ance with the provisions of sub~tion (1) of section 7, who-
3S (a) fails to collect such tax; or 
40 
(b) having collected the tax, fails to pay such tax to the credit 
of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section (2) of that section, 
shall pay,-
(i) in the case referred to in clause (4), in addition to paying 
tax in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) of that 
section, by way of penalty, a sum equal to the amount of tax that 
he failed to collect; and . 
(ii) in the case referred to in clause (b), in Ilddition to payin!f 
interest in accordance with the provisions of section 14, by way ot 
penalty. a sum which shall not be less than one hundred rupees, but 
which may extend to two hundred rupees for every day during which 
the failure continUft. 
Interest 
on 
delayed 
pa)'1lleDt 
of 
Oltpeudi-
ture-tax. 
Penalty 
for 
failuro 
&0 coUeCl 
arpay 
upcDdi· 
klre-tax. 

PCDally 
for 
failure 
to furnish 
prcscribal 
return. 
Penalty 
for 
conceal-
mentof 
charge-
able ex.. 
penditu ... :. 
Penalty 
for 
failure 
to 
comply 
with 
notice. 
Penally 
no()t t() he 
imposed 
in 
certain 
case!. 
Notice 
of 
payment. 
Revision 
of 
orders 
by 
the 
C-Ommis-
sioner. 
. 16. If a person fails to furnish in due time the return which he is 
'requiredto furnish under sub-section (1) of sectionS or by notice given 
under sub-section (2) of that section, he shall pay, by way of penalty. 
a S11m which shall not be less than one hundred rupees. but which may 
extend to two hundred rupees for every day during which the failure 5 
cominues. 
17. H the Income-tax Officer or the Commissioner (Appeals) in the 
course of any proceedings under this Act is satisfied that any person has 
concealed particulars of chargeable expenditure or has 'furnished in-
ac~urate. particulars of such chargeable expenditure, he may direct that 10 
such person shall pay by way of penalty, in addition to any expenditl;1re-
tax pay"ble by him, a sum which shall not be less than, but which sha~l 
n,:>t exc~ed twice, the amount of tax sought to be evaded by reason of 
conceacnent of particular3 of chargeable expenditure or the furnishing 
of inaccurate particulars of such hargeable expenditure: 15 
Provided that if the amount of chargeable expenditure (as determin-
ed by the Income-tax Officer on assessment)· in respect of which parti-
culars have been concealed or inaccurate particulars have been furnish-
ed exceeds a sum of twenty-five thousand rupees, the Income-tax Officer 
shall not issue any direction for payment by way of penalty without 20 
the previous approval of the Inspecting Assistant Commis5ioner. 
18. If the Income-tax Officer in the course of any proceedings under 
this Act is satisfied that any person has failed to comply with a notice 
under sub--section (1) of section 9, he may direct that such person ~ha1l 
pay, by way of penalty, in addition, to any tax payable by him, a sum 25 
which shall not be less than ten per cent. but which shall not exceed 
fifty per cent. of the amount of the tax if any, which would have been , . 
avoided if the chargeable expenditure returned by such person had 
been accepted as the correct chargeable expenditure. 
19. Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of section }O 
15, sectior., 16,3ect!on 17 or section 18, no penalty shall be imposable 
on the assessee for any failure referred to in the said provisions if he 
p:oves that there was reasonable cause for the said failure .. 
20. When any tax, interest, penalty 'or any other sum is payable 
under this Act, the Income-tax Officer shall .. serve upon the assessee a 15 
notice of demand in the prescribed form, specifying the sum so payable -
and the amount of chargeable expenditure in relation to which such 
sum is F.iyable. 
21. (1) The Commissioner may, either of his own motion or' on appli- . 
cation by the assessee for revision. call fot the record of a proceeding 
under this Act which has been taken by the Income--tax Officer subordi- 4'} 
nate to him and may make such enquiry or cause such enquiry to be 
made and. subject to the provisions of this Act. may pass s,Uch order 
thereon as he thinks fit. 
( 2) No order which is prejudicial to the assessee shall be passed 
under this section unless the assessee has been gIven an opportunity 45 
of being heard. ...' . 

9 
(3) No order under this section shall be passed by the Commissioner, 
if an appeal against the notice of demand issued by the Income-tax 
Officer under section 20 is pending before the Commissioner (Appeals). 
(4) No order under this section shall be passed after the expiry of 
5 two years from the end ·of the financial year in which the 'Order sought 
to . be revised has been passed. 
22, (1) Any person objecting to the amount of expenditure-tax for 
which he is assessed by the Income-tax Officer, or denying his liability 
to be assessed under this Act, or objecting to an order levying penalty 
10 under this Act. may appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals). 
(2) Every appeal shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified 
in the prescribed" manner. 
(3) An appeal shall be presented within thirty days of the receipt 
of the notice of demand relating to tax, interest or penalty under this 
15 Act: 
Provided· that the Commissioner (Appeals) may admit an appeal 
afcer the expiration of the said period if he is satisfied after the appel-
lant had sufficient cause for not presenting it within that period. 
(4) The Commissioner (Appeals) shall hear and determine the appeal 
20 and. subject to the provisions of this Act, pass such orders as he thinks 
fit and such orders may include an order enhancing the assessment or 
penalty: 
Provided that an order enhancing the assessment or penalty shall 
not be made unless the person affected thereby has been given a reason-
25 ablt;! opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement. 
(5) The procedure to be adopted in the hearing and determination 
of. the appeals shall, with:any necessary modification, be in accordance 
with the procedure applicable in relation to income-tax. 
2.3. (1) Any assC'ssee aggrieved by an order passed by a Commissioner 
30 under section 21, or an order passed by a Commissioner (Appeals) under 
any provision of this Act, may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against 
such order. 
(2) The Commissioner may, if he objects to any order passed by the 
Commissioner (Appeals) under any provision of this Ad, direct the In-
('orne-tax Officer to appell to the Appellate Tribunal against the order. 35 
P) Every appeal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be 
filed within sixty days of the date on which the order sought to be appeal-
ed against is communicatE'd to the assessee or to the Commissioner. as the 
case may be. 
40 (4) The Income-tax Officer or th~ assessee. as the case may. b~. on 
receipt of a noti':e that an appeal agamst the order of the CommiSSIOner 
(Appeals) has been preferred under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) by 
the other party may, notWithstanding that he may not have appealed 
against such order or any part thereof, within thirty days of the receipt 
45 of the notice, file a memorandum of cross-objections, verified in the pres-
criber! manner, against any part of the order of the Commissioner 
Appeals 
to 
the 
Commis-
5ioner 
(Appeals). 
Appeals 
10 
Appellate 
Tribun,,1& 

"pplica-
jon of 
Irovi-
lions of 
Income-
tax Act. 
Wilful 
attempt 
to 
ovade 
tax, etc . 
10 
(Appeals). and such memorandum shall be disposed of by the Appellate 
Tribunal as if it were an appeal presented within the time specified in 
sub· flection (3). 
(5) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal or pennit the filing 
of a memorandum of cross-objections after the expiry of the relevant S 
period referred to in sub-section (3) or sub-section (4), if it is satisfied 
that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it within that period. 
(6) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the prescribed 
form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner and shall, except in 
the case of an appeal referred to in sub-section (2) or a memorandum of 10 
cross-objections refe~ed to in sub-section (4), be accompanied by a fee of 
two hundred rupees. 
. 
(7.1 Subject to the provisions of this Act, in hearing and making an 
order on aJily appeal under this section, the Ap.pellate Tribunal shall exer-
cise the same powers and follow the same procedure as it exercises and 1 S 
follows in hearing and making an order on any appeal under the Income-
tax Act. 
24. The provisions of the following sections and Schedules of the In-
come-tax Act and the Income-tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 1962, 
as in force from time to time, shall app1,y with necessary modifications as 20 
if the said provisions and the rules referred to expenditure-tax instead of 
to Income-tax:-
2. (43B) and (44),118. 125, 125A, 128 to 136 (both inclusive), 138, 140, 
144A. 159 to 163 (both inclusive), 166, 167, 170, 171, 173 to 179 (both inclu-
sive), 187, 188, 189, 220 to 227 (both inclusive), 229, 231, 232, 237 to 245 2S 
(both inclusive), 254 to 262 (both inclusive), 265, 266, 268, 269, 278B, 278C, 
278D, 278E, 281. 281B, 282, 283, 284, 287, 288, 288A, 2'88B, 289 to 293 (both 
inclusive), the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule: 
Provided that references in the said provisions and rules to the 
"assesc;ee" shall be construed as references to an assessee as defined in 30 
this Act. 
Zer;. If a person wilfully attempts in any manner whatsoever to evade 
collection or payment of any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or impo.':.-
able under this Act, or to understate the aggregate of the chargeable ax-
penditure. he shall, without prejudice to any penalty that may be impos- 35 
able on him under any otter provision of this Act, be punishable with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months 
but which may extend to seven years and with fine. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, a wilful attempt to 
evade collection or payment of any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or 40 
imposablt. under this Act sr...all include a case where any person-
(i) has in his possession or control any books of account or other 
documents (being books of account or other documents relevant to 
any proceeding under this Act) containing a false entry or state-
ment; or 45 
(it) makes or causes to be made any false entry or statement in 
such books of account or other documents; or 
(iii) wilfully omits or causes to be omitted any relevant entry or 
statement in such books of account or other documents; or 

2 of 1974. 
45 of 
)860. 
11 
(iv) caUtJeS any other circumstances to exist which will have 
tl':e effect of enabling such person to evade collection or payment of 
any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act. 
26. If a person fails to furnish in due time the return which he is 
S required to furnish under sub-section (1) of section 8 or by a notice given 
under sub-section (2) of that section, he shall, without prejudice to any 
penalty that may be imposable on him under any other provision of this 
Act, be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than. three months but which may extend to seven years 
10 and with fine. 
27. If a person makes a statement in any verification under this Act 
or any rule made thereunder, or delivers an account or statement which 
is falRe, and which he either knows Or believes to be false, or does not 
believe to be true, he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a 
1 S term which shall" not be less than three months but which may extend to 
seven years and with fine. ' 
28. If a person abets or induces in any manner another person to 
make and deliver an account or a statement or declaration relating to any 
chargeable expenditure which is false and which he either knows to be 
20 false or does not believe to be true or to commit an offence under section 
25, he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than three months but which may extend to seven years 
and with fine. 
29. Notwithstanfling anything contained in the Code 'pf Criminal 
2S Procedure, 1973, an offence punishable under section 25 or section 26 or 
section 27 or section 28 shall be deemed to be non-cognizable within the 
meaning of that Code. 
30. (1) A person shall not be proceeded against for any offence under 
section 25 or section 26 or section 27 or section 28, except with the 
30 previous sanction of the Commissioner: 
Provided that no such sanction shall be required where the complai-
nant before the court is a Commissioner (Appeals). 
(2) The Commissioner may, either before or after the institution of 
proceedings, compound any offence punishable under section 25 Or section 
35 26 or section 27 or section 28. 
31. (1) The Board may, subject to the control of the Central Govern-
ment, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out 
the proviSions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
40 going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters. namely:-
04S 
(0) the manner in which the room charges may be determined. 
under sub-section (2) of section 3 in cases where composite charges are 
payable in respect of residential accommodation and food; 
(b) the cases and the circumstances in which payments made in 
Indian currency by conversion of foreign exchange into Indian cur-
rency shall be deemed to have been made in foreign exchange for the 
purposes of clause (a) of the ExplanatiOn to section 5; 
Failuro 
to furnisb 
prese-
cribed 
returns. 
False 
statement 
in veri-
fication, 
etc. 
Abetment 
of 
false 
return, 
etc. 
Certain 
offences 
to be 
non·cogni_ 
zable. 
Institu-
tion of 
procee-
dings 
and 
composi-
tion of 
offences. 
Power ~o 
make 
rulce. 

'ower to 
remove 
difficul-
ties. 
Consc. 
luential 
amend-
ments. 
12 
(c) the form in which return'S under section 8 may be furnished. 
the manner in which they may be verified and the other particulars 
which a form may contain; 
(d) the form in which a notice of demand may be served on the 
assessee under sub-section (7) of section 12; 5 
(e) the form in which appeals under section 22 or under sub-
section (6) of section 23 may be filed and the manner in which they 
may be verified; 
(f) the manner in which a memorandum of cross-objections under 
sub-section (4) of section 23 may be verified; 10 
(g) any other matter which by this Act is to be or may be pres-
cribed. 
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall on the 
first occasion of the exercise thereof include the power to give retrospec-
tiVf ~ffect to the rules or any of them from a date not earlier than the IS 
date of commencement of this Act. 
(4) The Central Government shall cause every rule made under this 
section to be laid. as '30nn as may be after it is made. before each House 
of Parliamen.t. while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session Or in two or more successive sessions. and 20 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or 
the sliccessive sessions aforesaid. both Houses agree in making any modi-
fication in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the ruie shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 25 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
viously done under that rule. 
32. If any difficulty arises in glvmg effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order. not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 30 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
:13. (1) In section 2 of the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1S63, in 
sub-clause (1) of clause (c).-
(a) in item (viii). the word "and" occurring at the end shall be Vi 
omitted; . . . 
(b) after item (viii) as so amended. the following item shall be 
im:;erted namely:-
"(ix) the Expenditure-tax Act, 1987; and". 
(2) In the Economic Offences (Inapplicability of Limitation) Act. 4() 
1974, ill the Schedule, after entry 2B' relating to the Hotel .. Receipts Tax 
Act, 193(), the following entry ,shall be inserted, namely:-
"2C. The Expenditure-tax Act, 1987.". 
~4 of 
1963. 
120r 1974-
54 of 1980 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill seeks to impose a tax on expenditure incurred in hotels 
wht!re the room charges for any unit of residential accommodation are 
fo~r hundred rupees or more per day per individual. This tax will be 
levied at the rate of ten per cent. of the expenditure incurred in con-
miction with provision of any accommodation, food, drinks, and cert.ain 
othel categories of services. This tax will not apply to expenditure 
incurred in foreign exchange or in the case of a person enjoying diplo-
matic privileges. 
NEW DELHI; 
rhe 21st August, 1987. NARAYAN DATI TIWARI. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 22IFBI87-TPL dated 21-8-1987 from Shri Narayan 
Datt Tiwari, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill which seeks to provide for levy of a tax on expenditure 
incurred in certain hotels.. has recommended under article 117 (1) of the 
Constitution of India. introduction of the Bill in Lok Sai)ha. 
1'3 

~ORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Cla\.u:ie 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Board of Direct Taxes 
to mw rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legisla-
tion. Sub-clause (2) of that clause enumerates the matters in relation 
to which rules may be made. Such rules may be made inter atia for 
laying d.own the manner in which the room charges may be determined 
under clause '3 (2) in cases where composite dharges ~ payable ib 
resp,ect of residential accommodation and food; for specifying the cases 
and the circumstances in which payments made in Indian currency by 
conversion of foreign exchange into Indian currency shall be deemed to 
have been made in foreign exchange for the purposes of clause 5; speci-
fying the form in which returns under clause 8 may be furnished and 
the manner in which such returns may be verified and the particulars 
which such form may contain; specifying the form in which a noti~ 
of demand may be served on the assessee under clause 12 (7); specifying 
the form in which appeals may be filed under clause 22 or clause 23 
and the manner in which they may be verified.; specifying the manner 
in which a memorandum of cross-objections under clause 23 (4) may be 
verified. The Central Board of Direct Taxes is also being empowered 
to mllke rules, on the first occasion, with retrospective effect from a 
date not earlier than the date of commencement of the proposed 
legislation. I , 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters 
of administrative detail which cannot be incorporated in the proposed 
legislation. The delegation of legislative power is. therefore, of a 
normal character. 

Defini-
tions, 
ExTRAcr FROM THE CDmlAL BOAlUlS 01' RIwI:Nuz Act, 1_ 
(54 OF 1963) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,'-
• • • • 
(e) "direct tax" means-
(1) any duty leviable or tax chargeable under-
• • • • • 
(viii) the Hotel-Receipts Tax Act" 1980; and 
• • • • • 
IS 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy of a tax on expenditure incurred in certain hotels. 
(Shri Narayan Datt Tiwari, 
Minister of ~nance.) 