ft.s INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA ON 
Bill No. 90 of 1976 
THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF MEMBERS OF 
PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parlia-
ment Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of Members 
of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1976. 
30 of 1954. S 2. In the Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliament Act, 
1954 (hereinafter referred to a'S the principal Act), in the long title, for 
the words "salaries and allowances", the words "salary, allowances and 
pension" shall be substituted. 
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words 
10 "Salaries and Allowanes" the words "Salary, Allowances and Pension" 
shall be substituted. 
4. In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-clause (b) of dause (e), 
for the words "the period beginning with the date when such member 
takes his s.eat in the House of the People or the Council of States, as 
IS the case may be", the words and figuJ'es "the period beginning with 
the date on which such member makes and subscribes the oath or 
affirmation a8 required by artic;ll' " ~f the Constitupon" shall be subs-
tituted. 
Short 
title. 
Amend. 
ment of 
lon, 
title. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 1. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 2. 

Amend_ 
ment of 
section 5. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
6C. 
Air 
travel 
facilities 
in certain 
circums-
tances. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
SA. 
Pension. 
2 
5. Section 5 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section 
(1) thereof and after that sub-section as so re-numbered, the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Where in any year a member does not perform during any 
session any such journey as is referred to in the second proviso to S 
sub-section (1), or the number of such journeys performed by him 
during any session is less than the maximum specified in that pro-
viso with respect to such session, then, such member shall be 
entitled to perform all or, as the case may be, the remaining num-
ber, of such journeys during any other session or sessions in that 10 
year, in addition to the mlInber of journeys which he is otherwise 
entitled to perform under that proviso during such other session 
or sessions.". 
6. After section 68 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:- IS 
"OC. Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Act, where 
during any part of a year the usual place of residence of a member 
in his constituency is inaccessible to or from any place outside his 
constituency by road, rail or steamer due to climatic conditions 
but there is air service between any place in his constituency, 20 
and the nearest place, having rail service, outside his constituency, 
such member shall be entitled to travel to and fro by air from 'the 
nearest place in his constituency where there is air service to such 
pike having rail service: 
Provided that where tbe nearest place having air service is out· 25 
side his constituency, such member shall be entitled to travel to and 
fro by air only from such place to the nearest place having ran 
service.". 
7. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 30 
"8A. (1) With effect from the commencement of the Salaries 
and Allowances of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1971, 
there shall be paid a pension of three hundred rupees per mensem 
to every person who. has served for a period of five years as-
(il) a member of thf! Council of States; or 
'(ii) a member of the Hou.'te of the People; or 
(iii) partly as a member of the CouncU of StatefJ aDd partly 
as a member of the House of the People; or 
3S 
(iv) partly as a member of the Provisional 
that is to say. the body which functioned as the 
Assembly of the Dominion of India immediately 
commencement of the Constitution, and-
Parliament, 
Constituent 40 
before the 
(a) partly as a me'llber of the Council of states and 
partly as a member of the Hous-eo of th~ People, or 
(b) partly as a member of the Council of States or part- 45 
Iy as a member of the House of the People: 
Provided that where any person h~ served as aforesaid for a 
period exceeding five years, there sball be paid to bhn an 8Ihtl-
tional pension of fifty rupees per mensem for every year !in 'excelS 
of five, so, however, that in no case the pension payable to 'Iuch So 
person shall exceed five hundred rupees per me~m, 

S 
19 of 1966. 10 
IS 
3S 
so 
3 
(2) Where any person entitled to pension under sub-section 
(1),-
(i) is elected to the office of the President or ViFe-Presi-
dent or is appointed to the office of the Governor of any state or 
the Administrator of any Union territory; Or 
(ii) becomes a member o.f the Council of States or the 
House of the People or any Legislative Assembly of a State 
or Union territory or any Legislative Council of a State or the 
Metropolitan Council of Delhi constituted under section 3 of the 
Delhi Administration Act, 1966; or 
(iii) is employed on a salary under the Central Govern-
. ment or any State Government, or any corporation owned or COIl-
trolled by the Central Government Or any State Guvernment, or 
any local authority or becomes o·therwiseentitled to any re-
muneration from such Government, corporation or local autho-
rity, 
such person shall not be entitled to any pension under sub-fleetion 
(1) for the period during which he continues to hold sueh oftlce 
or as such member, or is so employed, or continues to be entitled 
to such remuneration: 
Provided that where the salary payable to such person for hold-
ing such office or being such member or so employed, or where the 
remuneration referred to in clause (iii) payable to such person, is, in 
either case, less than the pension payable to him under sub-section 
(1), such person shall be entitled only to receive the balance as 
pension under that sub-section. 
(3) Where any person entitled to pension under sub-section (1) 
is also entitled to any pension from the Central Government or any 
State Government, or any corporation owned or controlled by the 
Central Government or any State Government, or any local 
authority, under any law or otherwise, then,-
(a) where the aDlOWlt of pension to which he is entitled 
under such law or C1therwise, is equal to or in excess of that 
to which he is entitled under sub-section (1), such person shall 
not be entitled to any pension under that sub-section; and 
(b) where the amount of pension to which he is entitled 
under such law or otherwise, is less than that to which he is 
entitled under sub-section (1), sucb person shall be entmed to 
pensfloo under that sub-section only of an amount which lalla 
short of the amount of pension to which he is otherwise entit-
led under that sub-section.". 
8. In sub-section (3) of section 9 of the principal Act,- Amend_ 
mentol (a) after clause (e), the follOWing clause shall be inserted, section 9. 
namely:-
II (ee) the form in which certificates, if any, shall be furnished 
by any person for the purpose of claiming any pension under this 
Act;"; .( 
(b) in clause (g), for the words IIdaily and travelling. al~.owan­
ees", the words IIdaily and travelling allowances and penSIon shall 
be substituted. ' 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASON'S 
The object of the Bill is to amend the Salaries and Allowances of 
Members of Parliament Act, )954 With a view t() entitling members of 
Parliam.$!nt to-
(a) free, air travel facility when the w;,ual place of residence of a 
member is inacces~ible by rdad or rail or steamer due to cli,;, 
matic conditions; 
(b) salaries and allowances, etc., from the date of taking oath; and 
tc) undertake unutilised intermediate air journeys in subsequent 
sessions. 
Prbvision is also being made entitling ex-members of Parliament to 
pension. 
2. The above amendments are being made in the light of the re-
commendations made by the Joint Committee on Salaries and Allowances 
of Members of Parliament. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 27th August, 1976 K. RAGHURAMAIAH. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 4 (12) 176-R&C, dated the 28th August, 1976 from 
Shri K. Raghu Ramaiah, Minister of Works and Housing apd Parlia-
mentary Affairs to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the pro-
posed Salaries and Allo~ances of Members of Parliament (Amendment) 
Bill, 1976, recommends, under artide 117 (1) and (3) of the Constitution, 
the introduction and consideration of the said Bill in Lok Sabha . 
• 

rINA~dAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 2 of the principal Act. 
Under the proposed amendment, a member of Parliament will be en .. 
titled to salaries and allowances and other benefits under the Act from 
the date on which he makes and subscribes the oath or affirmation as 
required by article 99 of the Constitution. The expenditure involved in 
advancing the date from which a member will be entitled to salaries, 
ek., under the Act will be negligible. 
2. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 6C in the principal 
Act. Under the proposed section, members of Parliament will be 
entitled to additional air travel facilities in certain circumstances. ~e 
amount of expenditure that will have to be incurred on this account is 
not likely to exceed ten thousand rupees per annum. 
3. Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section SA in the prin-
cipal Act. Under the proposed section, a pension ranging from three 
hundred rupees to five hundred rupees per mensem is proposed to be 
paid to ex-members of Parliament. It is estimated that an amount of 
one crore rupees will have to be incurred every year on this account. 
4. There will be no non-recurring expenditure. 

Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend st1b-'Section (3) of section 9 of 
\he Salaries and Allowancell of Members of Parliament Act, 1954. Under 
the proposed amendment, the Joint Committee is being empowered to 
make r~s relating to the form in which certificates, if any, shall be fur-
nished by a person for the purpose of claiming any pension and gene-
rally for regulating the payment of pension. The matters with respect 
to which the Joint Committee is being empowered to make rules are 
matters of procedure and detail. The delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 
8 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SALARIES AND Au.oWANCES OF MEMBERS 
OF PAllLIA:M:ENT ACT, 1954 
(30 OF 1954) 
An Act to provide for the salaries and allowances of Members of 
Parliament. 
• • • • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of Mem- Short 
bers of Parliament Act, 1954. title and 
• 
* 
• • * • • 
2. In this Act,-
* • * • • 
(e) "term of office" means,-
• • • • 
(b) in relation to a new member, the period beginning with 
the date when such member takes his seat in the House of the 
People or the Council of States, as the case may be, and ending 
with the date on which his seat becomes vacant .. 
• • • • • 
9. (1) • • • • • 
(3) The Joint Committee constituted under sub-section (1) may 
after consultation with the Central Government make rules to provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(g) generally for regulating the payment of daily and travelling 
allowances under this Act. 
• • • • • 
T 
commen-
cement 
Power to 
make 
rule .. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Salariet:-and Allowances of Members of Parliament 
Act, 1954. 
(Shri K. Raghu Ramaiah, 
Minister of Works and Housing 
and Parliamentary Affairs.) 