LOK SABRA 
cnpJ?IGENDA 
to 
THE DELHI HIGH COUT~T BILL, 19~5 
(T0 bp.(As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
v.. Page 3, 11n~ 19,-
for tt t~rr 1 tory" re'ld "terri tories" 
2. Pnge r:) 1-- n.... r: -,..'" '. , .I. \'.' • -' , 
for "d~-l.YR" re~-id "day" , 
3. P~ge 6, line 
for II of" r(~ ~1.r1 "or." 
4. Page 6, line 11,-
after ltr:om~titllt1ori", insert 
5. p~~c 6, line 37,-
3.fter "d'1t~~t, in3ert 
n. Page 8, line 37,-
It " , 
after "s ubr. tit uted" for 
7. P~gG 14, line 14,-
for "ronne'!. rO'3.d "£\lay" 
'r " • 
" " , 
read " .rr· , 
8. Correct J.ine numb~rs on pages 2, :'1nd 7. 
rEW DELHI; 
December 4, 1965 
Agrahayan9. 13, 1:;:>'~7(Sflk'::') 

- 6 DEC 1965 
!W No. to.t It's 
THE DELHI HIGH COURT BILL, 1965 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the conatitution of a High Court for the Union tenitorv 
. of Delhi, for the ezteMon of the 1uriBdictton of toot High COUf't 
to the Union ter7itoru of Himachal Pra.desh ane! for matten 
connected therewith. 
lk it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the RepubUe 
:of India u follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi High Court Act, 1965. Short 
title and 
(2) Section 17 shall come Into force on such date as the Central comma-
S Government may. by DoWlcation in the OfBcial Gazette, appoint; and cement. 
the remaining provialoDS of this Act shall come into force at once. 
. 'I. In thIa Act; UDleu the context otherwise require&,- Deftnl- ,. 
,. . UoDII. 
'. ~ - '. (4) "appoiDted day". means the date appointed under lee-
,.. tloa 8. 

Slab 
Court. 
(b) "notifted order" meana order noti1led in the 0Ilcia1 
Gazette. • 
------------~~-----------------------
I. (1) As from .ueh date as the Central Government ma7, b7 
DotUleatioD In the 081eial. Gazette, appoint, there shall be a Rich $ 
Court for the UDiOD territo17 of Delhi (hereiaafter referred to .. 
the m,h Couri of Delhi). 
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Delhi shall be at Delhi 
or at such other place as the President may, by notifted order, appoint. 
- . (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in 8Ub-section (2), the 10 
Judges and Division Courts of the High Court of Delhi may lit at 
such other place or places other than its principal seat as the Chief 
Justice may, with the approval of the President, appoint. 
ExeepUons 4. (1) The provisions of Chapter V of Part VI of the Constitution 
and modi- shall, in their application to the High Court of Delhi, have effect IS 
::~DI subject to the following exceptions and modifications, namely:-
to whiCh . 
the provi-
.iona of 
Chapter V 
of Part 
VI of the 
Constitu-
tion &.J)ply 
to the 
Hllh . 
CoUrt of 
Delhi. 
(4) in article 217, the words "the Governor of the State" 
shall be omitted; 
(0) in article 219, the reference to the Governor of the State, 
and in the proviso to clause (3) of article 227, the reference to 20 
the Governor, shan be construed as a reference to the adminis-
trator of the Union territory of Delhi; 
(e) the provisions of article 225 shall not apply; 
(d) in article 229,-
(i) the references to the Governor of the State ahall be 2$ 
CODStrued as references to the administrator of the UnioD 
territory of Delhi; 
(ii) the references to the State Public Service Co~'" 
sian, the Legislature of the State and tpeConsolidated Fund 
of the State shan be construed, respectively, as refer~nce8 to 
the UniOD Public Service Commission, Parliament and the 30 
Consolidated Fund of India; 
(e) the provisions ~f article 230 shall apply subject 10 . tile . 
modifications that- . 
(i) in clause (1) thereof, for the wor.ds. "Blah .Coer1t' in 
both the places where they occur, the words ''High Court for 3S 
a Union territory" and for the words ceara,. ~mon.territory", 
the words "any other Union territory" shall be aubJ.Ututed; 

:3 
(li) "for clause·· (2) thereof, the following clause shall be 
IUbltltuteJ, namely:-
., .. ,... .~ ; r. . . • I.' .... r - I - r.',' . p • • • 
' .•. , . . .. . . . a (2)' Where the High Court for a Union territory 
. _ .exercises jurisdiction-ia·-re1ation-to---another -Unlon--·-
5 ... ,.. _ . ".' t- . ~ .. " t~"l.t9rY .... the. f~fe)'8Dce in ~icle 227 to the administrator 
-. -' ..• ' '.'JJf the UnIon territory of Delhi shall, in relation to .. y 
~ea, forms or tables for subordinate courts in that other 
UQtpp. ~ Writory, be ,CPDltrued u .a. reference to the 
administrator of that other Unfon territory.". 
10 , (I) Bet~een Pte. coming. into fo~ce of this section and the. appoint-
e:d day, ~the ~esidtmtmBY, after consultation with the Chief Justice 
. of rDdia"p'p~int the ~i~f Justice of the High Court ofDe1h1 and 
. as :m'any other J\ldge(j of th.e said.High Court as he thinks fit, and any 
i~~in~~~s •. so ,~~~~ . ~h.al.l. ta~~ ~ftect as from.the appointed day . 
.. .1 _ • 
15 5. (1) The High Court of Delhi shall have in respect of the JurlJdlc-
terrttMieg for ·the time beina inc'1uded in the Union territory of Delhi, tiOIl of 
.n·.uch origina1, appe1late and bth~r jurisdiction as, under the law: of 
." force-.~tely 'before tbeappointed day, is exercllable In Delhi 
respect of the said ~tiitoty by the Hi«hCourt of Punjab. 
30 ,.. (2) Notwlthstanding. anything .contained .in any law for the time 
~ be~~~ .~I) torce, t~e High Court Ilf Delhi shall also have In respect 
of the sald. t~t(u"Jes. ordinary original .civil jurisd1ction .in every 
'~#iit1iervalu~ of Wh~ch exceeds .twenty-five. thousand rupees. 
.' 
. ,G. G1~ The High Court of Delhi shall bave like powers to approve, Power to 
25 .tteimit; .enrol, remove and suspend legal practitioners, and to make eDI'Od 1 40:-
• VOCB_ 
.tulea with respect -to them, -as :are, under the law in force immediately etc. 
before t~ .appamted ,day, ,·exercisable·by the High Court of P:uDjab. 
" '1(2)' Tb~tight· -of . audience in the High Court of Delhi shall be 
(f4egulated in accordance With the like principles, as, immediately 
30 'Wore'tIN appOinted day, are {n force with -respect to the right of 
.·.udience -in -the High Court· of P1III1jab: .. 
Provided that subject to any' nue made or direction given by the 
High Court of Delhi in the exercise of the powers conferred by this 
seCtion,.:any.iers~n -v!~~ ~~m.~~ateiy .~ore the appointed day '8 
3!1~n ~.entJt~d 10 praetise or an attorney entitled tn act in the 
nmgh' 'Court ofl»un3ab shall be . reeo;msed as an advocate or an 
... .,. ~.ttomey eIrt1i1ed· to pJ;'a~ti~~ fn.' act, u the case ma1be. iJ\ the Hip 
• Court of peth!, 

Practice .- '1. Subject to the provisiODI of this Act, the law in force tmm .. 
and diately before the appointed day with respect to practice and PJ"OC" 0: 
procedure dm.e in the High Court of Punjab shall, with the Decell8.I'1 mod'''. 
in the" 0 tio~,~~y in relation to the High Court of Delhi and accordingly 5 
~ of the High Court of-DellifilWl have all such powers to make rules 
De1h1. and Qrders with respect to "practice and procedure u are Imm .. 
CUltody 
of the 
~:'~ifih· 
Court ot 
DelhL 
Form of 
"ft'ltI 
and other 
proceae8. 
diately before the appointed day exercisable by the High Court of 
'~ja~ and shall also ha\!e powers to make rules and.orders with rea-
peet to practice and procedure for the exerclae of Its ordinary orlPWIO 
civil jurisdiction: 0 • 
Provided that any rules or onters which are in °force immediately 
before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in 
the .HighCourt of Punjab shan, until varied or revoked by rules O!':o; _'" 
orders made by the High Court of Delhi. apply with the neceaary 1.5 
modifications in relation to practice and procedure in the HIgh Court 
of Delhi as if made by that High Court. 
8. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with 
respect to the custody of the Seal of the High Court. of Punjab 
Ihall, with the necessary niod~cations, apply with respect to the 20 
custody of 
0 
the Seal of the High Court of DeIhl. . 0 o. . -
9. The 
0 
law in force immediately before the appointed day with 
Tpqpect to_~he form of writs and other processes used, Issued ,;or 
awarded by the High Court of Punjab shall, with the Deceual')' 
modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other 25 
processes issued or awarded by the High Court of Delhi. 
Powers 10. (1) Where a single Judge of the High Court of Delhi exer-
of Judges. cises ordinary original civil jurisdlctton conferred by sub-section . (2) 
of section 5 on that Court, an appeal shan 11e from the judgment 
of the single Judge to a Division Court of that High Court. 30 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the law in force 
. immediately before the appointed day relating to' the powen of the 
-Chief Justice, single Judges and Division Courts of the mgh Court 
of Punjab and with respect to all matteraano 411ary to the exerclse .. 
of those powen shall, with the necessary modiftcatioDl, apply in 3, 
relation to the ,High Court of Delhi. 
Procedure 11. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relat-
aa to" ing to appeals to the Supreme Court from the Blah Court of 
:ppeals to P'lniab and the Judges and Division -Courts thereof shall, with the 
c~=me necessaryJIloditicatipns, applr ~ ~IJltJgn t9 tb~ HiBh egg" of ,,0 
Delhi. . 

~.' (1) Ixcept u herefnafterprovided, the High Court of ~ab TtlDlfer 
thall, .. tram the appointee! day, have no jUrisdlC,tio~.in re~t of of pro. 
the Union territory of Delhi., . ,0 ceedlDo 
__ ....... 0 "-(2}--Such pr~edlnga __ ~~g in the High Court of Punjab :: th, 
, bmnediate1y before the appointed daY'S, as are certifled, whether Court of 
before or after that' day, by the Chief Justice of that High Court Punjab 
, having ~gard to the p18c.~ .0 Of accrual of the cause of action and to the 
other circumstance~to be proe'eedfngs which ought to be heard and ~~ of 
decided by the High Court of ' Delhi, shall, as soon as may be after DeIhl. 
10 such certiflcation, be transferred to the High Court of Delhi. 
(3) Notwithstanding ap.ythmg contained in sub-sections (1) anel 
(2) of this section and in section 5, 0 but save as hereinafter provfded, 
the !Iia!", ... -·lIt' of Punjab sh~, have; and the High Court of De1h1 
aban ,,~ot have, jurisdiction" to entertain, hear or dispose of, appeals, 
I, application. for leave to appeal including leave to appeal to the 
Supreme Court, applications for review and' other proceedings 
where any such proceedings seek any reHef in respect of any order 
passed :'by the High 0 Court of ~njab before the appointed day: ' 
Provf4ed that It after any such proceedings have been entertained 
20,bv the Higb' Court 'of Punjab, it appears to the Chief Justice of that 
Higb Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of 
Delhi, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such pro-
ceedings shan thereupon be 0 transferred accordingly. 
(4) Any I)rder made by the HJRh tourt of Punjab-
25 (6) before the appOinted day, in any proceedings transferred 
'to the High Court of Delhi by virtue of sub-section (2); 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the Hirh 
Court of Punjab retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section (3), 
shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of the High 
30 Court' of, Punjab, but 'alsO as ,an ord,er made by the High Court of 
Delhi. " 0 
, Rilht D. Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is a~ to appear 
advocate entitled to practise or an attorney entitled to act, in the or to act 
High -Court of Punjab, aDd' was' authorised to appear or to act in 1n pro-
3! any proce'cdings tranafenreci from ~ that, High 0 Court to the High ~ 
Court of Delhi under section 12, shall have the right to appear or to ~llDIfer­
act, as the case may be, in the High Court of Delhi in relation to the ~ 
0: those ~roceedinga. Court of 
, ,"... .,':' '0" DelhI. 
14. For the purpoies. f)f liections 12 and, 17,- Iftterpre-
.~(J ',.. (4)pr~.un" ~1ta11 be ,deemed 'to be pending in a court tatkm. 
) , until that court has disposed of all issues between the parties, 
m~~4ipB any issues witb respect to tbe tuation Q' the costs 0 1 

o-tt .,L ',. 
r I ' ..... ' , 
--\--..... ' ..... 
Pendln. 
proceed-
inII 
before 
wbordl-
ute 
courts 
in Delhi. 
BztenIlon 
of the 
jurfJd~e­
tlon of 
the Hl.h 
Court of 
DeIhl. 
i 
',the proceedings and shall Include appeals, applications for leave 
to appeal to the Supreme Court, applfca~ons for review. peti_ 
tions for revision and petitions for writs; -. 
-, . - (b) references toa High Court shall be ronstnsed. as includ 7--
iDg 'references to a Judge, ,or Division Court thereof,and ~ 
references to an order made bya court OJ: a Judge shall be 
construed as Including references to a· sentence, judgment or 
decree paased or made by that -court of Judge. 
15. Save as provided .n section 4, nothing In this Act shall affect 
the .application to the High Court of 'Delhi of anv J)rovisions ot the (0 
Constitution a,nd, this Act. shall have effect subject to any 'provistcm 
that may be made on or after the appointed day w;tth ~et to that 
~High Court by any Legislature or other authoritY baving power to 
make such provision. .-. 
. .' H.' Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), of 15 
section 5, all proceedings pendin9. immediately before the ltl)llointed 
'day in any subordinate court in the Union territory of Delhi in or 
in' relation to any such civil suit as is referred to in that sub-seCtion 
shall be proeeed.ed with and disposed of ,s if thi~ Act had not' been 
passed. '. . .. - 20 
1'1. (1) As from' neb aate as the Central Governmeat may, lay 
notlfteatlon in the omclat Guette. a1tpoiDt (heftlnafter referred to 
." the 1m'Seribed date), the jari-dietiOll· of ¢he m«h. (:lJuri, of Delhi 
shatl extend iothe Ual.. territory of Dimaebal Pradesh. 
(2) As from the prescribed date the, Court of the Judicial Com- 25 
JillsclioneT for Himachal Pradesh shall cease. to function ,and is hereby 
abalished: 
Provided .that nothing in this sub-section shall prejudice' or affeCt 
the continued operation of any notice served, Injunction' isweCi, 
direction given, or proceedings taken before the nrescribed dale" bv 30 
the Court of the Judicial' Commissioner for Himachal -Pradesh 
Abolished by this sub-section. 
(3) The High Court of Delhi shall have, in respect of the terrt-
tories for ~e time being incluC:~d in the Union territary of Himachal 
Pradesh,- . ; 5 
(a) all such original, appellate and ot''ter jurisdiction ,as 
under the law in force immediately before the :prescribed date ~ 
is exercisable in. refJpect of the satd territories by the Court of~ 
the Judicial Commissioner for Himachal Pradesh; and also 
(b) ordinary original civil juriametion in every suit the value 40 
,of which exceeds, twentr-ftve th~sand rnpeel, notwithstanding 
Ilnything contained ill any law for the time being iii fDree. 

, 
"'-:(4) AU p.-oceediDp pceudlng in the Court of the Judicial Com-
__ .MntWlillioN&U,nu for Hi~cha1_Prade8h before the prescribed date sliaU 
abDd trauferred to the High Court of Delhi. 
(5) Azty order made before the prescribed date by the Court 
5 referred to in sub-section (4) ahall for. all purposes have effect not 
only as an order of that Court but also aa an order of the High 
Court of Delhi. 
(6) F~r the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the 
provisions of sections 6 to 11 and 13 shall, with the necessary modi-
1~ flcations, apply to the High Court of Delhi In th~ exer~~ _ of juris-
, .. )iction conferred upon it by this section. . -
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of sub-
lection (3), aU pl'oceec:liDgs pendiDg immediately before the pres-
cribed date in aay subordinate court in the Union territory of Hima-
IS chal Pradesh in or in relation to any such civil suit as is referred to 
in that clause shall be proceeded with and disposed of as if this Act 
ud flot been passed. 
18. (1) References in any law in force in the Union territory of Rule of 
DelbJ to the High Court of Punjab shall, as from the appointed day, CODlUuC-
20 be construed as references to the High Court of Delhi. t!OD. 
(2) References in' any law in force In the Union terrltcJry of 
Himachal Pradesh to the High Court of Punjab or to the Court of 
the Judicial Commissioner for that territory shall, as from the pres-
cribed date, be construed as references to the High Court of Delhi. 
25 19. The laws specified in· the Schedule shall be amended ill the Amend-
manner and with effect from the date speclfted therein. ment of 
certain 
law •. 
20. If any c:Uftleulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Power 
Att, the Central Government may, by notified order, make such pro- to remove 
vision as appears to it to be necessai".Y or expedient for th~ femoval =~ 
30 of the di1Bculty. eL 
21. For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law In Power to 
relation to the Union territory of Delhi or Himachal Pradesh, the adapt 
Central Government may, before the expiration of two years from law •. 
the appointed day in relation to the Union territory of Delhi and 
35 before the expiration of two years from the prescribed date in rela-
tion to the Union territory .of Himachal Pradesh, by order, make 
such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of 
repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient to give effect 

PUDjab 
Ad VI 
of 1818. 
.1 
to the provisions of this Act and thereupon every such law aha11 
have effect subject to the adaptations and DlPcWlcationa _. _~_ made 
until altered, repealed or amended. by a competent Leatalature:::=-or::;;;-----
other competent authority. 
THE SCHEDULE S 
(See section 18) 
L As from the appointed day, in the Punjab Courts Act, 1918, II 
in force in the Union territory of Delhi,-
(i) in section 25, for the worda "in original civil suits witb-
out limit as regards tb~·':;,Uue", the words ''In every orlgiDallO 
civil suit the value of which does not exceed twenty-tlve thou-
sand rupees" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in section 26, for the words ''The jurisdiction", the wordl 
and tlgures "Subject to the limit apecl1led in section 25, the 
jurisdiction'" shall be substItuted. IS 
ll. All from the prescribed date, in the Judicial CommfMionen' 
Courts (Declaration as High Courts) Act, 1950, in section 3, the 
expression "Himachal Pradesh," shall be omitted 
m As from the prescribed date, in the Himachal Pradesh 
(Courts) Order, 1948,- 20 
(:) throughout the Ore.(x, save as otherwise expressly pro-
vided, for the words "Chief Commissioner", the words "Lieute-
n~t Governor" shall be substituted and for the .words "Judicial 
Commissioner" or "Court' of the Judicial Commissioner', the 
words "High Court" shall be substituted, and such consequential 2S 
amendments as the ruJes of grammar may require shall be 
made; 
(ii) Chapter II shall be omitted; 
(iii) in paragraph 1.5, the words "the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner and" shall be omitted; 30 
(iv) in paragraph 20, for the words "in civil suits without 
Umit as regards the value", the words "in every clvll Illit the 
valUe of which does nc5'..~ exceed twenty-five thousand rupees". 
shall be substituted; . 
(v) in paragraph 21, for the words "The jurladiction", the 35 
words and figures "Subject to the limit specified In paragraph 
20, the jurisdiction" shall be substituted. 
(vi) in paragraph 36, sub-paragraph (1) shall be omitted 
and in sub-paragraph (2), for the words, brackets and figure 
"under sub-paragraph (1)", the words and figures "for th.4O 
exerci~e of the jurisdiction under paragraph 35" shall be 
substituted. 
11 of 1110. 
f 
1 
~ 

STATEMENT OF OBJ:ECTS ANI> REASOl'tS 
-
'Vnder the exifIWIII atranpment, a Citeuit Bench of the Punjab 
High Court functions in Delhi to deal with the High Court cases 
an.iftg in the Ullien territory of DeIhl ami the Delhi .Admi"Mtmtion 
::.~.pay" to ~Punjab Govermneat the aetua1 co.- of $be a..it 
.. Beadh in Delhi and au.o the ,roportionide coat on .count of tile 
. HiJh Court at Chanditarb. This arr8%llement is not very ..... *. 
~"I') anti the ctUeStioB of haviltg a aeparate High Coon for Delbi· las 
lleen \lD.del' cOnsideration for lome time ,put. The volume df wdtk 
. la,De1lU llaa· been on the increase . and is Hke!,. to iDcreue further. 
Hav., zeaud to the importance of oelhl,' its gowiq population 
and other considerations, it is proposed to have a separate Hlgh Court 
for l*lhi'. Thia would also facilitate the· imS;lem.en1ation: of the 
"'Mte for separatiol1 of'· th«! judiciary from the' ~~tiV~ ~ the 
·wuum tierrik>ty Gf Oelhi. At the s8JIlIe time; the eost of. the new 
High Court' may not exceed the expenses incurred at present. 
2. It is also proposed to extend the jurisdiction of the new High 
Court of Delhi to the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh and ab0-
lish the Court of the Judicial Commissioner there. It is further 
proposed that the new High Court should have original dvil juris-
diction in respect of suits the value of which exceeds Rs. 25,000/- _ 
. - l 
NEW l>ELHI; JAI SUKHLAL HATH!. 
The 1st December, 1965. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF'INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. lS/1/64-Judl. I, dated the 2nd December, 1965 
from Shri Jai Sukhlal Hathi, Minister of State in the lWnistry of 
Home Affairs to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President havillg been informed of"'-Lile subject matter of the 
Delhi High Court Bill, 1965, recommends the introduction and con-
sideration of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under Article 117 (1) and 
117 (3) of the Constitution of India. 
v·-, 9 
. ,.,. , 

~INANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under the exiltlng arrangement the Circuit BeDch of the Pwljab 
HiIh, Court functicma at Delhi to diapoIe of Hlth Court cu. arJaiq 
in the Union territory of Delhi. The Delhi AdmInistration AM te 
make contribution to the Government of Punjab on accouDt of tile 
aetual COIIt of the Circuit Bench and aJ..o proportioDate ~ of ... 
Hip Court at Chandigarh. The payments made on th .. two couafa 
durin, the yean -l.CMJ".JJ3, IH3-84 and IIM-85 have been re.pecttftly 
Ra. 8,G,OOO, Ra. 8,93,000 and Ra. 11,85,000 (in round thOU8allU). 
The detaila of the ~t of the new High Court at Delhi bave .. 
been fully worked out. It is, however, felt that it may DOt Mrll. 
the total paymenta now heini made to the GMemmeat ef Ptmja1t. 
i ... .; 
, .,,' I·- , " . 
I • 
• • • • • ~.ar #' •. " 

MsMOIlANDUM llBGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Claua 21 of the Bill empowers tbe Central Government to adapt 
oiatiJl, laws in order to facilitate their application to the Union 
territory of Delhi or Himaehal Pradesh. Thia power will be avail-
able until the expiration of two yean from the appointed day or the 
preeeribed date; u the case may be. 
The proposed deleeation of I.eillative power is of a normal 
eharaetm'. 
.. .' 
"j I 
I l 

, 
• 
~t­
mat and 
eendl-
tiODa of 
tile ofIIce 
aI.. 
lwlp of 
• HlIh 
Court. 
ANNEXURE 
.-
EX'I'IlACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
• 
, " 
• • • 
PAKT VI 
THE STATES 
• • * • • 
CBAPTD V.-TIII: HIGH COURTS IN THE STATIS 
• • • • • 
21'1. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the 
President by warrant under his hand and seal after consultation with 
the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State, and, in the 
ease of appointment of 8 Judge other than the Chief Justice, the 
Chief Justice of the High Court. and shall hold office, in the case of 
an additional or acting Judge, as provided in article 224, and in any 
other case. until he attains the age of sixty.-two years: 
Provided that-
(4) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addr_sed to 
the President, resign his office; 
(b) a Judge may, be removed from his office by the Pres!-
dentin the manner provided in clause (4) of article 124 for the 
removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court; 
(c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being 
appointed by the President to be a Judge of the Suprf"me Court 
or by his being transferred by the President to any other High 
Court within the territory of India. 
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge 
of a High Court unless he is a citizen of India and-
(4) has for at least ten years held a judicial ofBce in the 
territory of India; or 
(b) has for at least tell years been an advocate ,of a High 
Court or of two or more su( h Courts in succession. 
E:cp14nCltion..-For the purposes of this clause-
(4) in computing the period during which a person has been 
an advocate of a High Court, the.i·e shall be included any period 
during which the person has held ~udicial oftlce after he became 
lID advocate; 

13 
(b) in computing the period during which a' person has held 
judtcial ofIlce in the· territory of. India or been an advocate eI. a 
Hi;h Ce\u't, ther~_ ~aU be . included any period WoN the--eem ... ----
mem:ement of this Constitution during which he hu held judi-
. cia! ofIee in any area which was comprised before the fifteenth 
day (l)f August, 1947, within India as defined by the Government 
()1· India Ac.t. 1935, or bas been an ,edvoc.ate of anlY Hi.eh c.QUrt 
. in any such area, as the case JXlay be. 
(3) If any question arises as to the age of a Judge of a High 
C9urt, the question shall be decided by the President after consulta-
tiQ.t1 with the Chief Justice of India and the decision of the President 
shall be final. 
• • • • • 
219. Every person appointed to be a J:u.dge of a HIgh Court lhaU. Oath or 
before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the Gov- aftlrma-
~ of the ~State, or some person apPointed £1i1 that ·beJIlalf ,by him. tion b, 
~ oath o~ a8irmation according to the form. set out for the pUrpQSe~::- of 
In the Tlllrd SchedUle. Cou •. 
. . . . ~ 
225. Subject to the provisions of this Coustitution .and to the pro- Juriadic-
visions of any law of the appropriate Legi~lature made by virtue of tion ot 
powers conferred on that Legislature by this Constitution. the juris- existlnl 
diction of, and the law administered in, any existing High Court, !"Ilgh 
and the respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation CoutU .. 
to the administration of justice in the Court inc]udin~ any power to 
make rules of Court and to regulate the sittin~ of the Court and 
of members thereof sitting alone or in Di~.sion Courts. shall be the 
same as immediately before the commencement of this Constitution: 
Provided that any restriction to which the exercise of original 
jurisdiction by any of thp. High Courts with respect to any matter 
concerning the revenu~ or concerning any act ordered or done in the 
collectinn thereof was subject immediately before the c('mm~nce~ 
rilent of· this Constitution shall no longer apply to th~ e~ercise of 
such jurisdiction. 
• • • • • 
229. (1) Appointments of ofticers and s£'rvants of a High Court Oft\c:eJ',I . 
shall be made by the Chief Justice of the Court or such other Judge and aer.- . 
or officer' of tbeCourt as he may direct: vantl and, . the _- . 
Provided that the Governor of the State may by rule r.equme that peMei of'" 
in such cases as may be specified in the rule no l>Crson not alreMly High 
attached to the Court shall be appointed to any oftl~ connected with Courti. ~"l' 
the Court sav~ after con,ultation with the State Public Service Com-. . ..•.... 
million. 
'. , •• j~ 

14 -, 
(2) Subject to the provialoRl of IUlJ law made by the LepJatun 
of the State, the ecmditiODI of .. me. of omcera and servant. ... 
----~ 
HiIDl:!oUitllWr be-Iuch-as-may be prescribed by rul .. made by tJM 
Enen-
lion of 
jurlldic-
don of 
BlIh 
Court. to 
Union 
terri-
toriel. 
Orilinal 
juris~c­
tion of 
Diltriet 
JuctPl in 
suita. 
Chief Justice of the Court or by lOme other Judge or omcer of the 
Court authoriled by the Chief JU8tice to make rulea for the purpoee: 
. Provided that the rules made under this clause Ihall, 10 tar .. 
they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, requir. the 
approval of the Governor of the State. 
(3) The admjnistrative expenles of a HiIh Court, includiDf .n 
salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the om .. 
cers and servants of the Court, .,;;~:.~ be charged upon. the ConsoU .. 
dated Fund of the State, and any fees or other moneys taken by tile 
Court shan fonn part of that Fund. 
230. (1) ParUament made by law extend the jurildiction of • HiP 
Court to, or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from, an,. 
Union territory. 
(2) Where the High Court of a State exercises juriecliction in 
relation to a Union territory,-
(a) nothing in this Constitution shall be construed 81 em-
powering the Legislature of the State to increase, restrict or 
abolish that jurisdiction; and 
(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in re-
lation to any rules, fonns or tabl_ for subordinate c:ourt. in that 
territory, be construed as a reference to. the President. 
• •• • • • 
ExTRACTS FROM THE PUNJAB CO't7RTS ACT, 1918 
(VI 0'" 1918) 
• • • • • 
zs. Except as otherwise provided by any enactment for the time 
being in force, the Court of the District Judge shall have juritldtetion 
in original OW suits without limit i:..s' regards the value. 
Pecuniary 26. The jurisdiction to be exercised in original civil suits lUI re-
limltl of gards the value by any person appointed to be a Su~rdiD&te Judp, 
juriadie- shall De determined by the High Court either by meludiJl, him in • 
::O~- Clan or otherwise as it thinks ftt. 
DAte ••••• 
J ..... 

..... cr J'aOM "l11li JUDICIAL CoMJC8810Nas' Comrrs (In':'1..A8ATIGlf 
AS HIGH CoURTS) Al:.T, 1950 
--'-------_--'(15uDu850_) ____ _ 
• • • • • 
3. The Courts of the Judicial Commissioners for Himachal Pra- Declara-
deah, Manipur and Tripura (each of which ia hereiDatter referred to tlon of 
u a 3udicial Commissioner's Court) is hereby declared to be a High ~ert~ 
Court for the purposes oi articles 132, 133 and 134. c:m:,. 
• • • •.• Iionel'l' 
Cow1a u 
HiCh 
. --ii.::~:, Oourtl 
h'1'ftACT8 nOM 'nUl HIMA.CHAL PaAD.e (COUJt'1'8) 0._, INS 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER II 
COUltT OF THE JUDICIAL COMKI88l0Na 
(Omitted) 
• • • • • 
. -, CHAPTER II~ 
SUBORDINATE COORTa 
tor cer-
tain pur-
1*81. 
B I 
U. In addition to the Court of the Judicial CoJDJlliJlioner and the c'• ... 
Court. of Small Caules established under the Provincial Small Callie of Courts. 
Courts Act, 1887 (9 of 1887), and the courts established under any 
other law for the time being in force, there shan be the followm, 
cl ..... of Civil Courts, namely:-
(i) The Court of the District Judee; 
(ii) The Court of a Subordinate Judie. 
• • • • • 
JO. Save as otherwise provided by any other law foi-'lthe time' OriJlnal 
bein, in force, the Court of the District Judge shall have oriatnal jurtadle-
jun.dietion in civil suits without limit as regards the value. tiOll 
of ClYil 
21. The juriadiction to be exercised in ori,mal «:ivillR1itl • reprda Court&. 
the ftlue by any penon appointed to be a Subordinate Judie Ihal1 ::r 
8e determined hy the Chief Commia.ioner, after conmltation with 8ubcmU. 
the Judicial Commil8ioner, in luch manner u he thina 1lt. nate 
• • • •• Jud,8L 

1 ",,\. 
I~ 
Court-feet 31. (1) The Court ... fees payable on applications to the Court of 
p~.ble on the Judicial Commissioner for the exercise of ita jurisdiction.. under 
revialon. paragraph 35 shall be the same as those for the time being ~yable 
on like applications to the High Court of Judicature for the East 
Plln~ab. 
(2) 1f the Court of the Judicial Commissioner. on an application 
in respect of which the fee payable under sub-paragraph (1) has been 
paid. sets aside Or modifies a decree or order of the Court below or 
remands the case for a fresh decision, the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner may grant to the applicant a certificate authorising 
him to recelvt! back from the Deputy Commissioner of the District in 
which the Court is situated the full amount of such fee or such part 
thereof as the Court, having regard to the circumstances of the case, 
may think tit. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a High Court for the Union 
territory of Delhi, for the extension of the jurisdiction of 
that High Coun to the Union tenitory of Himachal Pradesh 
and for matters connected therewith. 
--
(ShriJai Sukhlal HOlbi, 
Minister 0/ Stau in the 
Ministry ~ Home AJ!air~ .. ) 