As INTRODUCJ:D IN Lea SABKA ON 
1 AUG 1911 
IMII No. 10 of 1877 
THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF MINISTERS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
furtheT to amend the Salaries and Allowances of MinuteTs Act, 1952. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances ot Ministers Short 
(Amendment) Act, 1977. title. 
S8 011952. S Z. For section 11 of the Salaries and Allowances at Ministers Act, 1952 Sublti-
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall tution 
be substituted, namely:- of DeW 
HCtion 
tor 
led.ion 11. 
"11. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out 
the purposes of this Act. 
10 (2) Every rule made under this Act after the commencement ot 
the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers (Amendment) Act, 1977 
shall be laid before each House ot Parliament and no such rule 
shalI come into force until it has been approved, whether with or 
without modifications, by each House of Parliament and published 
IS by the Central Government in the omcial Gazette.". 
Power to 
make 
rut •. 
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11 of the principal Valida-
Act, as it stood immediately before the commencement of this Act, no tioD. 

2 
rule made, or purporting to have been made, by the Central Government 
under that section with retrospective effect and no action taken or thing 
done in accordance with the rule so made, at any time before the com-
mencement of this Act, shall be deemed t~ be invaliri. or ever to have 
been invaLid by reason only of the fact that the Central Government had S 
no power to make such rule retrospectively under that section. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The salaries and allowances of the Union Ministers are governed by 
the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1152 (58 of 1952) and the 
rules made thereWlder. Sub-section (1) of section 11 of the Act empowers 
the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 
2. In exercise of the powers so conferred, the Central Government 
had been making rules from time to time and in respect of certain rules 
amending the Ministers' (Allowances, Medical Treatment and other 
Privileges) RuJ.ea, 1957, restrospective effect was given, though the Act 
does not provide for such retrospective effect. 
3. On the recommendations of the Committee on Subordinate Legis-
lation which examined these rules, it is now proposed to amend section 11 
of the Act so as to provide that every rule made under that section shall 
be laid before each House of Parliament and no such rule shall come into 
force until it has been approved, with or without modifications, by each 
House of Parliament and published by the Central Government in the 
Official Gazette. It is also proposed to validate the rules which have been 
given retrospective effect. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
CHARAN SINGH. 
NEW DELID; 
The 21st July. urn 
3 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELBGATlm LEGISLATION 
Clallle 2 Of the Bill seeks to substitute section 11 01. the- Actwbleb 
relates to rule making power of the Cmtral GoverameDt. Sub4eottOl'l (1~ 
of that seetion empowers the Central GoveUBliil!lllt to 'make n:des for'cliftY-
ing out tbe pufpMes of the Act. Sub-section (2) provides that tbe rules 
made under sub-section (1) shall come into force only after they have 
been approved by each House of Parliament with or without modifica-
tions. 
2. The matters with respect to which rutes m.y be made are mat .... 
of detail. The delegation; of 1egt81attw, puwer ., t_e_e, al normal 
character. 
4 
• 

irraAC'r; 'ftK)M '!'HE &LARIBS AND ALLoWANCBS 01' MINlSftRS Act, 1952 
(58 01' 1952) 
• • • • • 
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) All rules made under this Act shall be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament as soon as may be after they are made. 
• • • • • 
5 I 
Power to 
make 
rulel. 

A 
BILL 
further to Rmend the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952. 
(Shri Charon Singh, Ministe?' of Home Al1fJirs.) 