10K SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE PRIZE CHITS AND MONEY CIRCULATION SCHEMES 
(BANNING) BILL, 1978 
L-To be/As ill troduced in Ipk SabbaJ 
1. Page 6, in the marginal heading to clause 12,-
t2.r.. "Transi tiona" read "Trans1 tional" 
2. Page 6, line 37,-
~ "of" ~ "or" 
3. Page 7, line 8,-
!Ql:. "thousand" ~ "one thousand" 
4. Page 7, in the marginal heading to clause 14,-
l2l: "Repe al " ~ "Rape al s " 
NEW DELHI; 
May 12, 1978 
Vaisakha 22, 1900 ( Saka) 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
'5 MAY 1~7P. 
Bill No. 90 of ,\978 
THE PRIZE CHITS AND MONEY CIRCULATION SCHEMES 
(BANNING) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
to ban the promotion or conduct of prize chits and money circulation 
schemes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic 
of India,.s,foll0W8: ..... 
1. (1) This Act may be calIed the J;>rize Chits epd Money Circulation 
Schemes (~g) Act, 19'78. 
S (2) It ~ to the whole of India enept the State of Jammu and 
10 
Kashmir. 
2. In this Act. unless the context otherwise requires • .:.... 
(a) "conventional ahit" means a transaction whetbet- called chit. 
chit fIind.. kU1i. or 'by any other IWJle by or UDder' which a person 
responsible tor the COIlduct of the dlit ~ into an apeemeDt with 
a speclfted number of persons that every one of 'them shall subsc(ribe 
a certain sum ofi money (or eert6in quantity of gram instead) by way 
of periodical ins~U18Dts for • definite period ad that each such 
subscriber shall, in his tura, as determined by lot or by auction or by 
Short 
title, 
and 
extent. 
Defini-
tions. 

2 
tender or in su.ch other manner as may be provided for in the chit 
agreement, be en,tttied to a prize amount. 
Explana.tion.-In this clause "prize amount" shall mean the 
amount, by whatever name called, arrived at by deducting from out 
of the total amount paid or payable at each instalment by all the 5 
subscribers, 
(i) the commission charged as service charges as a pro-
moter or a foreman or an agent; and 
(ii) any sum which a subscriber agrees to forego, from out 
of the total subscriptions of each instalment, in consideration of 10 
the balance being paid to him; 
(b) "money" includes a cheque, postal order, demand draft, tele-
graphic transfer or money order; 
(c) "money circulation scheme" means any scheme, by whatever 
name called, for the making of quick or easy money, or for the re- 15 
ceipt of any money or valuable thing as the consideration for a pro-
mise to pay money, on any event or contingency relative or appli-
cable to the enrolment of members into the scheme, whether or not 
such money or thing is derived from the en~rance money of the 
members of such scheme or periodical subscriptions; 2C 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(e) "prize chit" includes any transaction or arrangement by 
whatever name called under which a person collects whether as a 
promoter, foreman, agent or in any other capacity, monies in one 
lump sum or in instalments by way of contributions or subscriptions 25 
or by sale of units, cert:iftcates or other instruments or in any other 
manner or as membership fees or admission fees or service char.gJes 
to or in respect of any savings, mutual benefit, thrift, or any other 
scheme or arrangement by whatever name called, and utilises the 
monies so collected or any part thereof or the income accruing from 30 
investment or other use of such monies for aU or any o~ the following 
purposes, namely: - ' ";, 
(i) giving or awarding periodically or otherwiJe'to i a-:apedfte4 
number of subscri~ as d~J~rmine~ by lot, draw 0;1:' ~,my other 
manner, pr'izes'or lifts tii.-c~h or iil' ':Idnd~ whether', or not 1;11e 35 
recipient of the prize or gift is under a liability 'to make any 'fur-
, ~. paym,etlt in .respect al such scheiDe'w arrangement; 
,-j. 
(ii) refunding to the subscrihers or such of them as have not 
Won any, prize or gift, the· whole Or pari of the' subsetiptMns, con-
tributions or other monies collected, with. or without any. bonus, 40 
,.~~;, premium,' 1n.~ m- et~; ad.~gW~byjw~~~n~~: callt:d, 
, n',' " on the termindOndl the lieheme ot artan~~,nt, 6r' ~~ ,or: ~r 
,,: ,.;, the exptry cofuthe 'pertM ;M!iptfl8ted theftlJl;:' , ;,r.<, , ,(, , ' , 
,: J ... j,.~,. ") :~~r .. ~) ... ,r\.I.,~; 
bui:~,;not iIlcl~~ ,. CC?nVeD1ij~'~~'" :,.,' I: ~ , , rlir." '. ' 
: (f); "Beierve oBlDk" Meatm tnie ,Reserve' :Blliilt o(indt~ ~9..l~t1t~ted 
under}tbe ' Rete"" Beak of ,It1dia 'A Jet, 1994:" :',';\'" ,;'C' '-
45 
I_11M. 

5 
3 
3. No person shall promote or ccmduct any prize chit or money circu-
lation scheme, or enrol as a member to any such chit or scheme, or 
participate in it otherwise, or receive or remit any money in pursuance of 
such chit or scheme. 
4. Whoever contravenes the proviaions of section 3 shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a tenn which may extend to three years, or with 
fine which ~ extend to fi.ve thousand rupees, or with both: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasonS tc the 
J 0 contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, the imprisonment 
shall not be J,ess than one year and the fine shall not be less than one 
thousand rupees. 
5. Whoever, with a view to the promotion or conduct of any prize chit 
or money circulation scheme in contravention of the provisions of this 
Act or in connection with any chit r:yr scheme promoted or conducted as 
15 aforesaid,-
(a) prints or publishes any ticket, coupon or other document for 
use in the prize chit or money cir~tion scheme; or 
(b) sells or distributes or offers or advertises for sale or distribu-
tion, or has in his possession for the purpose of sale or distribution 
20 any ticket, coupon or other document for use in the prize chit or 
money circulation scheme; or 
30 
(c) prints, publishes or distributes, or has in his possession for 
the purpose of pUblication or distIibution-
(i) any advertisement of the prize chit or money circula-
tion scheme; or 
(ii) any list, whether, complete or ,not, of members in the 
prize chit or money circulation scheme; or 
(iii) any such,' matter descriptive of, or otherwise relating 
to the prize chit or money circulation scheme, as is calculated 
10 aet;' as an tndueement to persons to participate in that prize 
chit or money circulation scheme or any other prize chit or 
money circulation scheme; or 
(d) brillgs, or inviteg any -person to send, for ·the purpose of sale 
or distrib1ol:tioll, any ticket, cou.PQJl, or otber dOC'UIX)ent.for use in a 
prize chlt ..or, money c,irculatioD ,r.eheme . .or .an.y advertiswnent ,of such 
prize chit -or money cifclUation scheme; or, "; " ' 
'(f!). 'uses any premfl(l~s: o~ ca~ses '~r ki{b*,-;lY'permtt~ any pre· 
mises t~ be used, 'fbr purposes' conriact~d ~th the ~mo~on or con-
duct of the prize chit or money circulation scheme;' or' ,"'. ,. 
Banning 
of prize 
chits 
and 
money 
circula-
tion 
schemes 
or enrol-
ment as 
members 
Or partici-
pation 
therein. 
Penalty 
for 
contra-
vening 
the pro-
visions 
of section 
3. 
Penalty 
for 
other 
offences 
in con-
nection 
with 
prize 
chits 
Or 
money 
circula-
tion 
schemes. 

4 
(1) causes or procures or attempts to, prQCure any perlon to do 
any of the above-mentioned acts" 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term wbich may extend 
to two years, or with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees, 
or with both: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, the imprison-
ment shall not be less than one year and the fine shall not be less than 
one thousand rupees. 
s 
Offences 6. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 10 
by company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, 
companies. was in eharge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 
of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
Power to 
enter, 
search 
and 
lleize. 
and punished accordingly: 15 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves 
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exer-
cised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 20 
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conniv-
ance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part ot, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such Ciirec-
tor, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 25 
of that offence and shall be "liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. • 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 30 
(b) '(director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
finn. 
7. (1) It shall be lawful for any police officer not below the rank of 
an officer in charge of a police station,-
(a) to enter, f,f necessary, by force, whether by day or nigat 35 
with such assistance as he considers neCessary, any premises which 
. he has reason to suspect, are being used for purposes connected with 
the pro1ll0tion or conduet of any prize chit or money circulation 
scheme in contravention of the provisions of tbis Act; 
(b) to search the saM p;re~ and ~he persons whom he may 40 
find therein; 
(e) to take into custody and produce before anr Jtid~cial Magis-
tr~te all such persons as are cOncer!1ed or againSt whom a com-
plafnt has· been made or cr~tble" ~forn'lation has Wen reeefved or 
a 1'Ie'8sonab1e suspicion eXists Of tbe!r' hBVtng been concenied with the 45 
uae of the said pr~1 for purposes connected with. or ~th the pro-
m~OIl or ,conduct of. any sllCh prUe chtt or money clroul,a,tion scheme 
as aforesaid; -

2 of 1974. 
10 of 1949. 
5 
10 
(d) to seize aU things found in the said premises which are in-
tended to be used, or reasonably 'Suspected to have been used; in con-
nection with any such prize chit or money circulation scheme as 
aforesaid; 
(2) Any officer authorised by the State Government in this behalf 
may-
(a.) at all reasonable times, enter into and search any premises 
which he has reason to suspect, are being u.d for the pur-
poses connected with, or conduct of, any prize chit or money cir-
culation scheme in contravention of the provisions of this Act; 
(b) examine any person having the control of, or, employed in 
connection with, any such prize chit or money circulation scheme; 
(c) order the production of any documents, books or records 
in the possession or power of any person having the control of, or 
15 employed in connection with. any such prize chit or money circulation 
scheme; and 
(d) inspect and seize any register, books of accounts, documents 
or any other literature found in the said premises. 
(3) All searches under this section shall be made in accordance with 
20 the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
8. Where any newspaper or other pUblication contains any material 
connected with any prize chit or money circulation scheme pro-
moted or conducted in contravention of the provisions of this Act or any 
advertisement in relation thereto, the State Government may, by notl-
25 ftcation in the Official Gazette, declare every copy of the newspaper 
and every' copy of the publication containing such material or the 
advertisement to be forfeited to the State Government. 
9. No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, or 
as the case may be, Chief Judicial Magistrate, shall try any offence 
30 punishable under this Act. 
10. All offences punishable under this Act shall be cognizable. 
11. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to any prize 'chit or 
Forfeiture 
of news 
paper and 
publication 
containing 
prize 
chit or 
money 
circulation 
scheme. 
Power 
to try 
offences, 
Offences 
under 
this Act 
to be 
cognizable. 
Act not to money circulation scheme promoted by- apply to 
35 
certain (a) a State Government or any officer or authority on its behalf; prize 
or 
: . (b), a company w,holly p~f!d by a Stllte Governmt!nt whlch 
does ,not CJ.rry on any busiriess other than the conducting of. a 
prize chit or money circulation scheme whether it is tn the nature 
of a COllven~pnal chit or. otherwise; or . 
, .~ 'a bankfDl eomp8Jty as deflri~"tn 'clause (c) of section 5 
o~ the B,anMttg' Re~atlo!t Act, 1949,' or 'a barilting insfltution 
notffled . by the . Cei1trar Gov~meftt r uD8i!r section M' of tliat Aet 
or the State Bank of rridla :eoitstftuted under secflon3 of the' state 
chits or 
money 
circulation 
schemes. 

Transitiona 
provisions. 
Bank of India Act, 1955, or a subsidiary bank cOllitituted under sec- 23 of 1955. 
tion 3 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959. or a 38 of 1959. 
corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Trans1er of Undertakings) Act, 1970, or 5 of 1970. 
a Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional S 21 of 1976. 
Rural Banks Act, 1976, or a co-operative bank as defined in clause 
(bii) of section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; or 2 of 198 •. 
(d) any charitable or educational institution notified in this 
behalf by the State Government, in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank. 10 
12. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a person 
ronducting a prize chit or money circulation scheme at the commence-
ment of thi6 Act may continue to conduct such chit or scheme for such 
period as may be necessary for the winding up of the business relating 
to such chit or scheme, so however that such period shall not in any 15 
case extend beyond a period of two years from such commencement: 
Provided that the said person shall furnish to the State Government 
or to such officer as may be authorised by it in this behalf and to such 
office of the Reserve Bank as may be prescribed in such form and 
within such period as may be prescribed. full information regarding the 20 
chit or scheme along with a winding up plan prepared in accordance 
with the provisions of any rules that may be made by the State Govern-
ment in this behalf under this Act: 
Provided further that if the State Government is satisfied, on an 
application made by the person conducting the prize chit, or money 25 
C'irculation scheme, that the chit or scheme cannot be wound up within 
the period fixed in the winding up plan furnished to the State Govern-
ment under the foregoing proviso, it may, in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank. permit such person to continue to conduct the business 
relating to the said chit or scheme for such further period a!l may be 30 
considered necessary having re,:tard to the circumstances of the case and 
the interests of the memben; of the said chit or scheme. 
(2) The State Governmf'nt mav. in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank. approve the windins:~ up plan fnrnished under sub-section (1) 
with or without modifications or reie~t the same and may grant or 35 
.. efuse to grant permission to continue to conduct that chit or scheme: 
Provided that no such windin~ up plan !ilhall be modified of rejected 
without giving an opportunity of being heard to the 'person who 
conducts such prize chit or money circulation scheme. 
(3) If any person fails to furnish full information regarding the said 40 
chit or scheme alon~ with it~ windinq up plan in the fonn Md within 
the. period prescribed, ne shall forfeit hf!!ri~ht to _ continue tht!! business 
reJating to the .sa,id chit or scheme on. the expiry of such period. 
(4) Notwithstanding anyt'hin:g to the contrary' eontainea in any 
agreement., or document etered ·into between any' penon 1lOnduct1ng 4S 
any· such . chit. or seheme and the . subscriber i· the'person COIldueth\g the 
chit or 'Scheme shall refund ·the mQn.i. 'OI" the .subseriptions. ~~eted 
tlU:~he . date ~f. default refen!ed to .U1.au'b4eetion ·(3}; . -.:' 

Andhra 
Pradesh 
Act 
30 of 1965. 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Act 19 of 
1975. 
'1 
(5) If any person fails to comply with the provisions ot sub-section 
(4), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to three thousand 
rupees, or with both: 
5 Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 
contrary to be mentioned in Lhe judgment of the court, the imprisonment 
shall 110t be less than one year and the fine shaLl not be less than 
thousand rupees. 
13. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial Power 
10 Gazette and in consultation with the Reserve Bank, make rules for the to make 
15 
20 
purpose of carrying out the provis~,ons of this Act. rules. 
(2) In particular and Without prejudice' to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the office of. the Reserve' Bank tg whom full infbrmation 
regarding any prize chit or money circulation scheme may be 
furnished under the first proviso to sub-section (1) of section 12, 
and the form in which and the period within which such informa-
tion may be furnished; 
(b) the particulars relating to the winding up plan of the 
business relating to prize chits or money circulation schemes, 
14. (1) The Andhra Pradesh Money Circulation Scheme (Prohibi- Repeal 
tion) Act, 1965, as in force in the State of Andhra Pradesh, and in the and 
saving. 
Union territory of Chandigarh and the Madhya Pradesh Dhan Pari-
chalan Skeem (Pratishedh) Adhiniyam, 1975, are hereby repealed. 
25 (2) Notwitbstanding the . repeal of· any Act referred to in sub-
section (1), anything done or any action taken under the p~ovilioDs of 
any such Act shall, in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, be deE!med to have been done or taken 
under the provisions of this Act as if the said provisiOns were in force 
30 when such thing'was'done or such action was taken and shall continue 
in force: accordingly until superseded by' anything done or any action 
taken under this Act; 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In June 1974, the Reserve Barut of India had constituted a Study 
Group under the Chairmanship of Shri James S. Raj, the then Chairman, 
Unit Trwit of India, for examining in depth the provisions of Chapter 
III B of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and the directions issued 
thereunder to non-banking companies in order to assess their adequacy 
in the context of ensuring the efficacy of the' monetary and credit 
poliCies of the country and affording a degree of protection to the 
interests of the depositors who place their savings with such companies. 
In its report submitted to the Reserve BJmk in July 1975, the Group 
observed that the prize chit/benefit/savings schemes benefit primarily 
the promoters and do not serve any social purpose. On the contrary, 
the Group has stated that they are prejudicial to the public interest 
and a'ffect the efficacy of the fiscal and monetary poliCies of the country. 
2, Prize chits would cover any kind of arrangement under which 
moneys are collected by way of 8ubecriptionl!l, contributions, etc. and 
prizes, gifts, etc. are awarded. The prize chit is really a form of lottery. 
Its basic feature is that the foreman or pr1>moter who ostensioly charges 
no commission collects regular subscriptions from the members. Once 
a member gets the prize, he is very often not required to pay further 
instalments and his name is dropped from further lots. The institutions 
conducting prize chits are private limited companies with a very low 
capital base contributed by the promoters, directors or their close 
relatives. Such schemes confer monetary benefit only on a few mem-
bers and on the promoter companies. The Group had, therefore, 
recommended that prize chits or money circulation sChemes, by what-
ever name called, should be totally banned in the larger interests of 
the public and SUitable legislative measures should be undertaken for 
the purpose. 
3. The Bill proposes to implement the above recommendation of the 
Group by providing for the banning of the promotion or conduct of 
any prize chit or mOlley circulation scheme, by whatever name called, 
and of the participation of any perlon in such chit or scheJne. The 
Bill provides for a period of two years within which the existing units 
carrying on the business of prize chits or money circulation schemes may 
be wound up and provides for penalties and other incidental matters. The 
repeal of the existing State legislations on the subject has also been 
provided for in the B1ll. 
NEW DELHI; H. M. PATEL. 
The 19th April, 1978. 
• 
, .. .... ... -. . ... 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 13 Of the Bill confers on the State Govern-
ments the power to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the 
Bill, in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India. Sub-clause (2) 
of that clause specifies the matters in respect of which rules may be made 
under this clause. These include the particulars relating to the winding 
up plan of the business relating to prize chits or money circulation 
schemes and the form in which and the period within which full 
1nformation regarding such chits or schemes may be furnished. to the 
State Government or the ofticer authorised by it in this behalf. 
2. The matters with respect to which rules may be made under this 
clause are matters of procedure or detail. The delegation of legislative 
power is thus normal in character. 

LOK SABHA 
, ;,'( I j{i 
.:':'l . : .. .L.: . .' ,~ . 
,. 
" .,,::. 
I I"" 
" 
A 
BILL 
to ban the promotion or conduct of prize chits and money circulation 
schemes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri H. M. Patel, 
Minister of Finance.) 