1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2014.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) existing entries 3 to 9 shall be renumbered as entries 4 to 10, respectively, and
before entry 4 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘3. Bhojpuri.’’;
Short title.
Bill No. 90 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
the Eighth
Schedule.
5

2
(ii) after entry 10 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘11. Magahi.’’;
(iii) entries 10 to 16 shall be renumbered as entries 12 to 18, respectively, and
after entry 18 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘19. Rajasthani.’’
(iv) entries 17 to 22 shall be renumbered as entries 20 to 25, respectively.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Language is not only a medium of communication, but also a sign of respect. Language
also reflects on the history, culture, people, system of governance, ecology, politics, etc.
‘Bhojpuri’ language is also known as Bhozpuri, Bihari, Deswali and Khotla and is a
member of the Bihari group of the Indo-Aryan branch of the Indo-European language family
and is closely related to Magahi and Maithili languages.
Bhojpuri language is spoken in many parts of north-central and eastern regions of this
country. It is particularly spoken in the western part of the State of Bihar, north-western part
of Jharkhand and the Purvanchal region of Uttar Pradesh. Many Bhojpuri magazines and
newspapers are published in the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. Bhojpuri language is
spoken by over 40 million people in the country. As per the Census 2001, the figure shows
that a total of 3,30,99,497 persons in the country have written Bhojpuri as their Mother
Tongue.
The history of Bhojpuri language dates back to 7th century. Due to a long history of
emigration from the Bhojpuri regions, this language has spread over all continents of the
world. It is also one of the national languages of Fiji spoken as ‘Fiji Hindi’.
Bhojpuri culture is popular even in countries like Nepal, Mauritius, Sri Lanka, Thailand,
England and Greece. In about twenty countries across the world, fifteen to sixty-five per
cent. of the population is Bhojpuri speaking. In Nepal, Bhojpuri is spoken by over two million
people. Bhojpuri is also spoken by over four lakh people in Mauritius.
Variants of Bhojpuri are spoken by descendants of Bhojpuri-speaking plantation
workers in several countries like Guyana, Suriname, Fiji, Trinidad and Tobago.
In addition to Bhojpuri, ‘Magahi’ is one of the prominent language spoken by millions
in the eastern part of India specially in various districts of the States of Bihar, Jharkhand,
Odisha and West Bengal. The language carries the rich cultural heritage and traditions of the
people residing in these areas.
Rajasthani is another prominent language having rich traditions spoken widely in the
States of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, Gujarat and Punjab. Around thirty-five
million people speak this language in the State of Rajasthan alone. Efforts have been made
by the eminent scholars to get this language the recognition which it deserves. However, the
language has not yet got the due recognition.
In view of above, in order to promote, integrate and empower Bhojpuri, Magahi and
Rajasthani languages and to protect the culture and traditions of the speakers of these
languages and also taking into consideration of these languages, which are spoken by
millions of people, it is necessary that these languages be given their due recognition by
including them in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution.
N
EW DELHI; RAJIV PRATAP RUDY
June 30, 2014.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
******
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1886LS—01.08.2014.