THE CONSTITUTION  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2011
By
SHRI S AT PAL M AHARAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution  (Amendment) Act, 2011.
2. In Part III of the Constitution, after article 24, the following sub-heading and article
shall be inserted, namely:—
"Right to time-bound delivery of service
24A. (1) All persons shall have the right to time-bound delivery of citizen  related
services.
 (2) The State shall, within six months of the coming into force of the Constitution
(Amendment) Act, 2011, by law, ensure the implementation of the right to time-bound
delivery of citizen related services.
(3) In making any law providing for effective implementation of the right to time-
bound delivery of citizen related services, the State shall ensure that—
Short title.
Bill No.  90  of  2011
Insertion of
new article
24A.
10
5
Right to time-
bound delivery
of citizen
related
services.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(a) every organization providing citizen related services compulsorily draws
Citizen's Charter giving such information as details of business transacted by
the organization, statement of services inlcuding standards, quality and time-
frame, the procedure regarding availing the services, the details of grievance
redressal mechanism, the procedure for accessing the mechanism and the
compensation in the event of failure of delivery of service;
(b) every person who is responsible for providing delivery of service is
held liable in the event of failure to deliver service within the stipulated time-
frame;
(c) as far as possible, the delivery of services, is also provided in a stipulated
time period through e-governance; and
(d) the law applies to all organizations, whether governmental or non-
governmental providing services on behalf of  State, which provide citizen related
services.”.
10
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
As India attained independence in 1947, the citizens were quite optimistic that the
social evils afflicting the great ancient Indian culture would fade away and that Independence
would usher in a new era of “Ram Rajya”—the dream of Mahatma Gandhi, the Father of the
Nation. Many social evils like female infanticide, dowry, sati, etc. are being checked by
enacting laws, however, unfortunately, the evil of corruption has assumed gigantic proportions
in the absence of any effective law to contain it.
People have to offer bribes to get their works done like works relating to land records,
issue of birth and death certificates, registration of properties, issue of driving licences,
registration of vehicles, sanction of loans, issue of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes
certificates, grant of scholarships to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, issue of passports,
electricity and water connections, settlement of issues relating to income tax and other taxes,
issue of ration cards and host of other works. Even foreigners and Non-Resident Indians
visiting India have to face the ignominy of paying bribes for their genuine works. Such
instances of corruption damage the image of our country internationally. It is also well-
known that the people are made to come again and again for getting their work done on one
pretext or other.
The country-wide support that the social activist Shri Anna Hazare garnered recently
in his efforts to ensure enactment of a strong and effective  Jan Lokpal Bill must be seen as
an outburst of  the anger of masses against the wide-spread corruption prevailing at each
and every level of administration. The situation needs to be controlled through political and
administrative efforts unless it becomes explosive.
Therefore, it is high time that the right to time-bound delivery of citizen related services
be made a Fundamental Right. At the same time, it is also necessary to make it obligatory on
the Central Government and the State Governments to enact appropriate laws for effective
implementation of this Right.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SATPAL MAHARAJ
September 1, 2011.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri Satpal Maharaj, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2435LS(S3)—18-11-2011.