1
Bill No. 90 of  2016
THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND
SENIOR CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRIMATI POONAM MAHAJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens Act, 2007
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title
and com-
mencement.
5

2
2. In the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007, (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, after clause (a), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
'(aa) "Fund" means the Senior Citizens Welfare Fund constituted under section
23A;'.
3. In section 8 of the principal Act, in clause ( 3), for the words "any claim for
maintenance", the words "any claim for maintenance or welfare of senior citizens" shall be
substituted.
4. In section 9 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
"(2) The maximum maintenance allowance which may be ordered by such
Tribunal shall be awarded taking into consideration:—
(i) the position and status of the parties;
(ii) the reasonable wants of the claimant; and
(iii) the value of the claimant's property and any income derived from
such property, or the claimant's own earning or earning from any other source.".
5. After Chapter III of the principal Act, the following chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Chapter IIIA
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SENIOR CITIZENS
19A. The State Government shall provide the following facilities to senior citizens—
(a) concessions—
(i) in all modes of transportation including reservation of seats and
earmarking of seats in local public transport;
(ii) in gas and telephone connections; and
(iii) in entrance fees in leisure and entertainment facilities, art and
cultural centres and places of tourist interests;
(b) higher rate of interest to senior citizens on savings schemes in public
sector banks; and
(c) ease of accessibility to senior citizens by—
(i) removal of physical barriers to facilitate easy movement of senior
citizens in all public buildings; and
(ii) modifications in designs of public transport vehicles for easy entry
and exit and strict enforcement of traffic discipline at zebra crossing to
facilitate senior citizens.
19B. (1) The Central Government shall designate an agency at the national
level for issuing Identity Cards to the senior citizens.
(2) The identity card issued under sub-section (1) shall be utilized to avail the
benefits of various Central and State Government schemes meant for senior citizens.
(3) The identity card issued under sub-section (1), shall contain particulars of
the senior citizens including blood group, allergies, ailment and medication and an
emergency contact number.".
Amendment of
section 2.
Amendment of
section 8.
Amendment of
section 9.
Insertion of new
Chapter IIIA.
Facilities for
the Senior
Citizens.
Senior Citizen
Identity Card.
56 of 2007.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. In section 20 of the principal Act,—
(a) for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(i) the Government hospitals or hospitals funded fully or partially by the
Government earmark not less than ten per cent. of the beds for senior citizens;";
and
(b) after clause (v), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(vi) health insurance for senior citizens is provided at affordable premium:
Provided that for senior citizens living below poverty line, the premium
shall be paid by the State Government;
(vii) facility of trained nurses is provided for needy ailing senior
citizens at their residences;
(viii) counseling facilities and information on the care and treatment
of senior citizens having psychological problems be provided;
(ix) non-Governmental organizations get grants, training and
orientation of their personnel and various concessions to provide
ambulance services, day care and health care to senior citizens in order to
complement the efforts of the State.".
7. In section 21 of the principal Act, after clause (iii), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(iv) voluntary organizations and associations of senior citizens are assisted to
provide helpline services, legal aid and other protective services;
(v) senior citizens who have been abandoned are provided quality residential
accommodation, medical facilities and all other concessions available under this Act;
and
(vi) police keeps a friendly vigil on senior citizens, either couple or single living
alone, and promote mechanism of interaction with neighborhood associations.".
8. After Chapter V of the principal Act, the following chapter shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER V A
SENIOR CITIZENS WELFARE FUND
23A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Senior Citizens Welfare Fund for the welfare of senior
citizens and there shall be credited—
(a) all sums received by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests
or transfer;
(b) all sums received from the Central Government including grants-in-aids;
(c) all sums from such other sources as may be decided by the Central
Government.
(2) All contributions to the Fund shall be provided income tax relief to the extent of
ten per cent.
(3) The State Governments shall also establish a similar Fund for the welfare of the
senior citizens in the States concerned.
(4) The Fund shall be utilized and managed in such manner as may be prescribed.
Amendment
of section 20.
Amendment
of section 21.
Insertion of
new Chapter
VA .
Constitution
of the Senior
Citizens
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
23B. (1) The Central Government shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts of the Fund including the income and
expenditure in such form as may be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred by him in
connection with such audit shall be payable from the Fund to the Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed by
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Fund shall have the same rights,
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India generally has in connection with the audit of the Government account, and
in particular, shall have the right to demand production of books of account, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Fund.
(4) The accounts of the Fund as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
thereon, shall be laid before each House of Parliament by the Central Government.".
Accounts and
Audit of the
Fund.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The legislation for the Maintenance and Welfare of the Parents and Senior Citizens
came into place with the development of the provisions of article 41 read with Entry 23 of the
List III Concurrent List of Schedule VIII of the Constitution.
The present Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 has
provisions with regard to maintenance of parents and senior citizens, establishment of old
age homes, medical care for senior citizens and specifies offences for non-fulfillment of the
above. Since this is the only Act which takes care of the rights of senior citizens, it should be
holistic in nature. The need is that focus should not be only in providing maintenance to the
elderly but also ensuring a qualitative and productive life for them in the private as well as in
public sphere.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens Act, 2007 with a view to provide for—
(a) special provisions for senior citizens including concessions in travel, gas
and telephone connections and entrance fees in leisure and entertainment facilities;
(b) issuance of identity card for senior citizens in order to avail the benefits of
various Central and State Government schemes of assistance;
(c) removal of physical barriers to facilitate easy movement of senior citizens in
public buildings and public transport;
(d) extension of the scope of the Maintenance Tribunal for speedy disposal of
complaints not only with regard to maintenance but also relating to fraudulent dealings,
cheating and other claims of the welfare of senior citizens;
(e) incorporation of certain criterion for the determination of the maximum amount
of maintenance for the senior citizens as well as his family;
(f) engagement of the services of voluntary organizations and associations of
senior citizens in providing helpline services, legal aid and other protective services to
senior citizens;
(g) constitution of Senior Citizens Welfare Fund for the welfare of senior citizens;
(h) affordable health insurance, specialized trained nurses, counseling facilities
to senior citizen and training, grants and concessions to non-governmental
organizations to provide ambulatory services, day care and health care to complement
the efforts of the State.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; POONAM MAHAJAN
November 16, 2015.
5

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117(1), 274(1) AND 117(3) OF
THE CONSTITUTION
————
[Copy of letter No. 15—36(72)/2015-16/AG.II dated 20 March, 2016 from
Shri Thaawarchand Gehlot, Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment to the
Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Maintenance and
Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens (Amendment) Bill, 2016 
(Amendment of section 2,
etc.) by Shrimati Poonam Mahajan, M.P., recommends to the House the introduction of the
Bill under articles 117(1) and 274(1) and consideration under article 117(3) of the Constitution.
————
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for creating necessary infrastructure in public buildings
and public transport for ensuring easy accessibility of senior citizens. It also provides for a
issuance of Identity card to Senior Citizens. Clause 8 provides for the constitution of Senior
Citizens Welfare Fund to which contribution from the Central Government shall be credited.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a sum of rupees hundred crore would be involved as recurring expenditure
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
7

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF
PARENTS AND SENIOR CITIZENS ACT, 2007
(ACT NO. 56 OF 2007)
* * * * * * *
2. (a) "children" includes son, daughter, grandson and grand-daughter but does not
include a minor;
* * * * * * *
8. (3) Subject to any rule that may be made in this behalf, the Tribunal may, for the
purpose of adjudicating and decided upon any claim for maintenance, choose one or more
persons possessing special knowledge of any matter relevant to the inquiry to assist it in
holding the inquiry.
* * * * * * *
9. (2) The maximum maintenance allowance which may be ordered by such Tribunal
shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government which shall not exceed ten
thousand rupees per month.
* * * * * * *
20. The State Government shall ensure that,—
(i) the Government hospitals or hospitals funded fully or partially by the
Government shall provide beds for all senior citizens as far as possible;
(ii) separate queues be arranged for senior citizens;
(iii) facility for treatment of chronic, and degenerative diseases is expanded for
senior citizens;
(iv) research activities for chronic elderly diseases and ageing expanded;
(v) there are earmarked facilities for geriatric patients in every district hospital
duly headed by a medical officer with experience in geriatric care.
* * * * * * *
21. The State Government shall, take all measures to ensure that—
(i) The provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through public media
including the television, radio and the print, at regular intervals;
(ii) The Central Government and State Government Officers, including the police
officers and the members of the judicial service, are given periodic sensitization and
awareness training on the issues relating to this Act;
(iii) Effective co-ordination between the service provided by the concerned
Ministries or Department dealing with law, home affiars, health and welfare, to address
the issues relating to the welfare of the senior citizens and periodical review of the
same is conducted.
* * * * * * *
Definitions.
Summary
procedure in
case of
inquiry.
Order for
maintenance.
Medical
support for
senior
citizen.
Measures for
publicity,
awareness,
etc., for
welfare of
senior citizen.
8

GMGIPMRND—3047LS(S3)—19-04-2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
————
(Shrimati Poonam Mahajan, M.P.)