1
THE PREVENTION OF INSULTS TO NATIONAL HONOUR
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
By
SHRI J.P. AGARWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Insults to National Honour (Amendment)
Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  90 of  2009
5

2
2. After section 3A of the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"4. Whoever intentionally passes disparaging and insulting remarks in any public
place or public view against any freedom fighter or publishes or causes to be published
such remarks in a book or through press or any other media by distorting the real facts,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with
fine, or with both.
Explanation— For the purpose of this section, the expression "freedom fighter"
means any leader or martyr or patriot, who inspired the national struggle for freedom of
the country.".
Insertion of
new section 4.
Punishment
for passing
disparaging
and insulting
remarks
against
freedom
fighters.
69 of 1971.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Freedom fighters have made a major contribution to the freedom of our country. It was
because of their struggle that we are citizens of an independent India today. Disrespectful
and highly derogatory comments and false statements are being made about freedom fighters
who made supreme sacrifices by putting their lives at stake and inspired the nation to attain
freedom.
Some authors are presenting distorted facts about freedom fighters in books brought
out by the Government and private publishers. There are many authors who do not have
adequate and authentic information about freedom fighters and they write factually incorrect
articles on them in private publications. Thus, they are creating confusion by presenting
distorted facts about freedom fighters, hurting the feelings of the ordinary citizens of the
country and the families of freedom fighters. This causes disrespect and insult not only to
the freedom fighters, but also to the nation.
It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act,
1971 and extend its scope so that such acts of criticising the freedom fighters may be brought
within its purview.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; J.P . AGARW AL
July 20, 2009.
3

GMGIPMRND—4003LS(S5)—27-10-2009.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971.
————
(Shri J.P. Agarwal, M.P.)