     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
  Bill No. 90 of  2022
THE AGRICULTURAL WORKERS (WELFARE  AND
PROTECTION) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI UNMESH BHAIYYASAHEB PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare and protection of agricultural
workers and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.(1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Workers (Welfare and Protection)
Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “adult” means a person who has completed eighteen years of age;
(b) “agriculture” with all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions,
includes floriculture, horticulture, sericulture, the raising of crops, grass or garden
produce, dairy farming, poultry farming, stock breeding, cutting of wood or grass,
gathering of fruit, raising of man-made forest or rearing of seedlings or plants;
(c) “agricultural dispute” means any dispute or difference between landowners
and landowners or between landowners and agricultural workers or between
agricultural workers and agricultural workers which is connected with the employment
or unemployment or the terms of employment with the conditions of labour, of any
person:
      Provided that where any landowner discharges, dismisses, retrenches or
otherwise terminates the services of, or denies employment to, an individual
agricultural worker, any dispute or difference between that agricultural worker,
and his employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge dismissal,
retirement, termination or denial of employment shall be deemed to be an
agricultural dispute notwithstanding that no other agricultural worker nor any
union of agricultural workers is a party to the dispute;
(d) “Agriculture Tribunal” means the Agricultural Tribunals constituted
under section 4;
(e) “Agriculture Welfare Officer” means an officer appointed under
section 6;
(f)”agricultural workers” means a person who follows one or more of the
agricultural occupations as notified by the Central Government in consultation with
State Government in the Schedule in the capacity of labourer on hire or in exchange
whether in cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind;
(g)”appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(h) “Conciliation Officer” means the conciliation officer appointed under
section 3;
(i) “Fund” means the Agriculture Worker’s Welfare Fund constituted under
section 7;
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(k) ‘Scheme’ means the Scheme for the Welfare of Agricultural Workers
formulated under section 8.
CHAPTER II
OFFICERS AND AGRICULTURAL TRIBUNAL
3.The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint any officer of the Labour Department not below the rank of Assistant
Labour Officer to be a Conciliation Officer for any area specified therein for the
purpose of performing the functions entrusted to a Conciliation Officer by or under
this Act.
4. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Agricultural Tribunal for any area specified therein for the purpose
of performing the functions of the Agricultural Tribunal under this Act.
(2) An Agricultural Tribunal shall consist of a sole member, who shall be an
officer not below the rank of Deputy Collector to be appointed by the appropriate
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
2
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
Definitions.
45
Appointment of
Conciliation
Officers.
Constitution
of Agricultural
Tribunals.

3
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
Appointment
of Agricultural
Welfare
Officer.
(3) The Central Government in consultation with the State Government may
prescribe rules for the procedure and functions of the Agricultural Tribunal.
5.(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint–
(a) such number of  its officers, or
(b) such number of  persons possessing the prescribed qualification, as
it deems fit,
to be inspectors for carrying out the purposes of this Act and
define the local limits within such inspectors shall exercise their powers.
(2) The appropriate Government shall prescribe powers and rules for making
an entry on land, inspection, examination or inquiry under this Act by the
inspectors appointed under sub-section (1).
CHAPTER III
AGRICULTURAL WORKERS’ WELFARE FUND
6. The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint a Agricultural Welfare Officer for carrying out the purpose of this
Chapter.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Government,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Agricultural Workers’ Welfare Fund to
which the Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute in
such a ratio as may be prescribed.
(2) The Fund constituted under sub-section (1) shall be utilised to give
effect to the provisions of this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Governments,
as soon as may be, but not later than one year from the commencement of this
Act, formulate a scheme for the Welfare of Agricultural workers.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the
Scheme shall provide for the agricultural workers,—
(i) a comprehensive insurance scheme;
(ii) old age pension;
(iii) free health care facilities; and
(iv) payment of compensation in cases of accident during agricultural
operations.
9.(1) Each State Government shall, in consultation with the Central Government,
by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute with effect from such date as may
be specified in the notification a Board to be called the Agricultural Workers’
Welfare Fund Board for the administration of the Fund.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having
perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be
sued.
(3) The Board shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having
experience of at least ten years in the field of farmers welfare, agriculture
or rural development;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson to be appointed by the State Government having
experience of at least seven years in the field of farmers welfare, agriculture
or rural development;
Appointment
of Inspectors.
Constitution
of Agricultural
Workers’
Welfare Fund.
Formulation of
a scheme for
the welfare of
A g r i c u l t u r e
worker.
Constitution
of Agricultural
Workers’
Welfare Fund
Board.
40
45

4
(c) two members of Parliament of whom one shall be from the House of
the People and the other member from the Council of States to be nominated
by the Presiding Officers of the Houses concerned:
Provided that the Member from the Council of States shall be appointed
in such a manner that he is in the Board of the State he has been elected
from;
(d) two members from the Legislative Assembly of the State in which the
State Government has notified for the constitution of the Board:
Provided that in the State having Legislative Council one of the
members shall be from the Council;
(e) a Central Agricultural Welfare Officer to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(f) a State Agricultural Welfare Officer to be appointed by the State
Government in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(g) a member from the field of law, economics or agriculture with
requisite qualifications who has been recommended and appointed by the
State Government in consultation with the Central Government.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other term of office of, and
the manner of filling casual vacancies among, the members of the Board shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(5) The names of the Chairperson, the Deputy Chairperson and the members,
shall be published in the Official Gazette.
10. The Fund shall be utilised for the following purposes, namely:–
(i) payment of unemployment or sustenance allowance to agricultural workers
during off season period;
(ii) free health facilities for the agricultural workers and their families in the
hospitals to be set up for the purpose;
(iii) free educational facilities to the children of agricultural workers;
(iv) payment of compensation of workers who sustain injuries during work;
(v) payment of compensation to families of workers who die in harness;
(vi) payment of premium for group life insurance cover of workers;
(vii) payment of disability allowance in case of accident at workplace and
the agricultural worker is not able to work further;
(viii) payment of old age pension to those workers who have attained sixty
years of age and are not gainfully employed;
(ix) provision of suitable facilities like canteen, health, recreation, water etc.
at work places;
(x) payment of bonus to workers; and
(xi) payment of maternity benefit and establishment of creche facilities for
the female agricultural workers covered under this Act.
CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF AGRICULTURAL WORKERS
11. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no adult agricultural
worker shall be required to work for more than eight hours in any day:
Utilisation of
the Fund.
Hours of
Work.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40

Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit
an agreement between the landowner and the agricultural workers for working
for less than eight hours as the case may be, on any particular day or days
or on all days of employment or to affect any custom or practice prevailing
in the locality under which the agricultural worker is required to work for less
than eight hours, as the case may be.
12. The period of work on each day shall be so fixed that no period shall
exceed four hours and that no agricultural worker shall work for more than four
hours before he has had an interval for rest for at least half an hour.
13. (1) Every landowner shall pay to any agricultural worker employed by him
the prescribed wages for each day of work done.
  (2) The Central Government in consultation of State Government may, from
time to time, by notification in the Gazette, fix the number of hours of work which
shall constitute a normal working day for the purposes of sub-section (1) either
for the whole State or any part thereof:
Provided that where the Government have fixed the number of hours of
work which shall constitute a normal working day in respect of any of the
categories of agricultural workers in the employment in agriculture under
Section 8 of the Code of Wages, 2019, the hours of work so fixed shall, until
a notification is issued under this sub-section, be deemed to have been fixed
under this sub-section.
14.(1) If any landowner pays less than the prescribed wages or refuses to
pay the prescribed wages to any agricultural worker, the agricultural worker or an
official of the union of which he is a member may make an application to the
Conciliation Officer appointed under section 3 for a direction under sub-section (2).
  (2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Conciliation
Officer shall, after giving the applicant and the landowner an opportunity of being
heard and after such inquiry, if any, which he may consider necessary, direct,–
(a) in the case of a claim arising out of the payment of less than the
prescribed wages, the payment to the agricultural worker of the amount
by which the prescribed wages payable to him exceeds the amount
actually paid by the landowner;
(b) in the case of a claim arising out of non-payment of prescribed
wages, the payment of the prescribed wages to the agricultural worker.
(3) An appeal against the decision of the Conciliation Officer shall lie
before the Agricultural Tribunal constituted under section 4 in such manner
as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER V
DISPUTES
15. (1) Where an agricultural dispute exists or is apprehended, the Conciliation
Officer may hold conciliation proceedings and shall, for the purpose of bringing
about a settlement of the dispute, without delay investigate the same and all
matters affecting the merits and the right settlement thereof and may do all such
things, as he thinks fit, for the purpose of inducing the parties to come to a fair
and amicable settlement of the dispute.
 (2) If a settlement of the dispute or of any of the matters in dispute is
arrived at in the course of conciliation proceedings, the Conciliation Officer shall
send a report thereof to the District Labour Officer together with a memorandum
of settlement signed by the parties to the dispute.
Daily intervals
for rest.
Minimum
Wage payable
to agricultural
workers.
Enforcement
of payment of
prescribed
wages.
Settlement of
Agricultural
Disputes.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
5
29 of 2019

  (3) If no such settlement is arrived, at the Conciliation Officer shall as soon
as practicable after the close of the investigation, send to the District Collector
through the District Labour Officer a full report setting forth the steps taken by
him for ascertaining the facts and circumstances relating to the dispute and for
bringing about a settlement thereof, together with a full statement of such facts
and circumstances, and the reasons on account of which, in his opinion, a
settlement could not be arrived at:
Provided that in a case where the agricultural dispute relates to an
agricultural land situated within the local limits of more than one revenue
district, the Conciliation Officer shall send the report to the District Collector
in whose jurisdiction the major portion of such land is situated.
(4) If on a consideration of the report referred to in sub-section (3), the
District Collector is satisfied that there is a case for reference to an Agricultural
Tribunal, he may, by order in writing, refer the agricultural dispute to the said
Tribunal for adjudication, and where the District Collector does not make such a
reference, he shall record and communicate to the parties concerned his reasons
therefore.
(5) Where an agricultural dispute has been referred to an Agricultural
Tribunal under sub-section (4), the Tribunal shall hold its proceedings expeditiously
and shall, as soon as practicable after the conclusion of the proceedings, but not
later than thirty days from the date of receipt of the reference by the Tribunal,
submit its award to the District Collector.
(6) The District Collector shall, within a period of fifteen days from the date
of receipt of the award referred to in sub-section (5), cause the same to be
published in his office and in the office of the Agricultural Tribunal in such manner
as may be prescribed and shall also forward copies of the award to the parties
concerned.
16. (1) Against any order passed by a Conciliation Officer under section 15,
an appeal shall lie to the Agricultural Tribunal within a period of thirty days from
the date of the order appealed against, and the decision of the Agricultural Tribunal
on such appeal shall be final.
 (2) The Agricultural Tribunal shall have no power to stay the operation of
the order of the Conciliation Officer pending disposal of the appeal.
17.  Notwithstanding anything contained in section 15, where any agricultural
dispute exists or is apprehended, the State Government shall, by order in writing
and for reasons to be stated therein, refer the dispute to the Agricultural Tribunal
constituted for the area in which the dispute exists or is apprehended, for
adjudication.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
18. (1) The executive officer of every local authority shall prepare a register
of agricultural workers residing within the jurisdiction of that local authority.
 (2) The Register shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed.
 (3) The register shall be maintained by the executive officer in such manner
as may be prescribed.
19. (1) Every landowner who employs agricultural workers shall maintain such
registers and records regarding number of employees, wages paid, etc. as may be
prescribed.
 (2) The registers and records referred to in sub-section (1) shall contain
such particulars and shall be kept in such place, as may be prescribed.
Appeal.
Reference or
decision of
disputes by
Government.
Register of
agricultural
workers.
Maintenance
of registers and
records by
landowners.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
45
50
6

20. Where any money is due to an agricultural worker from a landowner under
a settlement referred to in sub-section (2) of section 15, the agricultural worker
himself or any other person authorised by him in writing in that behalf or, in the
case of the death of the agricultural worker, his assignees or heirs may without
prejudice to any other mode of recovery make an application to the District
Collector for the recovery of the money due to him and if the District Collector is
satisfied that any money is so due, he shall proceed to recover the same as if it
were an arrear of public revenue due on land:
Provided that every such application shall be made within one year from
the date on which the money became due to the agricultural worker from the
landowner:
Provided further that any such application may be entertained after the
expiry of the said period of one year if the District Collector is satisfied that
the applicant had sufficient cause for not making the application within the
said period.
21. Every member of the Board and every officer appointed under this Act
shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860.
22.  The Central Government shall provide after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, necessary requisite funds, from time to time, for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
23. If any difficulty arises in implementing the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government shall have power to issue such orders not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act by notification in the Official Gazette as are required to
remove such difficulty.
24. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Gazette of
India, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
  (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
  (3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made before the State Legislature.
Recovery of
money due
from
landowners.
Officers and
Members of
Board to be
public servants.
Central
Government to
provide
requisite funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to make
rules.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
7

THE  SCHEDULE
[See sub-clause (f) of Section 2]
[Agricultural Workers]
Agricultural Workers includes any adult engaged in:–
(i) farming, including the cultivation and tillage of soil;
(ii) dairy farming;
(iii) pisciculture;
(iv) production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any horticulture,
floriculture commodity;
(v) raising of livestock, bee-keeping or poultry;
(vi) any practice performed on a farm as incidental to, or in conjunction with,
the farm operations (including any forestry or timbering operations and the
preparation for market and delivery to storage or to market or to carriage for
transportation of farm products); and
(vii) growing fodder or thatching grass or for grazing cattle;
8

9
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The agricultural sector in India is the largest sector in terms of employment
of the workforce. It consists of crop cultivation and other agricultural activities
such as forestry, livestock and fishing. The workers in this sector may be broadly
divided into wage workers, and farmers. Almost the entire agricultural sector
(except the Plantation Sector) is unorganised i.e., it has neither any formal system
of social security nor regulation of conditions of work which leads to exploitation
through coercion.
As per the estimates of the 2011 Census, there are close to 230 million people
who are employed as agricultural workers in India. More and more firm workers are
moving away from agriculture and this has been negatively affecting the country’s
productivity especially in crops which are labour intensive like paddy, wheat,
cotton, sugarcane and groundnut. Currently, the profession of agricultural labour
is of ‘all pain and no gain’ especially with respect to landless labourers who are
forced to work in the field of others without any means of protection. This poor
economic state is further worsened when coupled with the pitiable and hazardous
conditions of these workers. Excessive working hours lead to poor health and low
life expectancy across the profession. Accessibility towards basic healthcare and
education as well as essential social security schemes is virtually non-existent. The
seasonal nature of this profession further adds to the woes of these citizens, who
constitute the poorest thirty per cent. of the country who are left to fend for their
lives during off-season without any money.
The agricultural workers in the Unorganised Sector face problems that arise
out of deficiency or capability deprivation in terms of inadequate employment, low
earnings, low health, etc., as well as of adversity in the absence of fallback
mechanisms (safety net). These workers have limited or no formal social security
cover which increases their vulnerability during times of illness, old age,
unemployment and untimely death. The absence of social security mechanisms is
a critical factor in downturns in the conditions of these households, many of whom
are already very poor. It destroys the workers ability to contribute meaningfully,
and to increasing production and productivity. It leads to disaffection, increasing
social costs, widespread crimes, and persistent ill health.
The changing nature of agricultural production including the increased use of
chemicals and machinery is aggravating risks. This is particularly true in a number
of developing countries where education, training and occupational safety and
health services are largely inadequate. While there is a very long way to go in
terms of establishing a satisfactory life for these workers, it is sad to say that even
the bare minimum has not been done towards realising this very important goal.
The present Bill strives to constitute a Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund to
establish through basic policy measures the rights that these workers deserve. It
intends to cover agricultural workers, who are all agricultural wage workers not
protected under the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 and marginal and small farmers.
It also intends to provide a measure of social security to agricultural wage workers
and marginal and small farmers in the unorganised sector. Furthermore, the bill
seeks establishment of Agricultural Tribunals for the dispute resolution among the
Agricultural workers and the landowners. The bill further deals with rights of the
workers with respect to working hours and minimum wage. The bill seeks to protect
the rights of agricultural workers in an orderly fashion.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;    UNMESH   BHAIYY ASAHEB PA TIL
28 February, 2022

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government may constitute
for any area specified an Agricultural Tribunal. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for
appointment of persons as inspectors. Clause 6 provides for the appropriate
Government to appoint an Agricultural Welfare Officer for carrying out the purposes
of this Act. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall, in consultation
with the State Government, constitute a Fund to be known as the Agricultural
Workers Welfare Fund. It also provides that Central Government and State
Governments shall contribute to the Fund. Clause 8 provides for formulation of a
scheme by the Central Government for welfare of agricultural workers which include
a comprehensive insurance scheme, old age pension, free health care facilities and
payment of compensation in cases of accidents during agricultural operations.
Clause 9 provides for constitution of Agricultural Workers Welfare Board.
Clause 22 provides for the Central Government to grant necessary requisite funds
for carrying out the purpose of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore per annum would be involved from
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is likely to be involved.
10

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
11

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare and protection of  agricultural
workers and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Unmesh Bhaiyyasaheb Patil, M.P .)