Short title and
commencement.
THE INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT)
 BILL, 2020
By
SHRI JAYANT SINHA,  M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called as the Institutes of Technology ( Amendment)
Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
   Bill No.  90 of  2020
5

2
2.  After section 2 of the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
"2A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the
time being in force, the provisions of the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017
shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, Indian
Institute of Technology, Bombay, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras and Indian
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, which have been declared as Institutes of
Eminence by the Government of India.".
Application of
the National
Institute of
Management
Act, 2017 to the
Institutes of
Eminence.
Insertion of new
section 2A.
5
33 of 2017.
59 of 1961.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Institutes of Technology Act, 1961 was enacted inter alia to declare certain
institutions of technology to be institutions of national importance. Accordingly
twenty-three Indian Institutes of Technology have been declared as institutions of
national importance.
Recently, the Union Ministry of Human Resource Development under the
University Grants Commission (Declaration of Government Institutions as Institutions
of Eminence) Guidelines, 2017 for public Institutions has declared certain institutes
as "Institution of Eminence" including Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, Indian
Institute of Technology, Bombay, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras and Indian
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur to ensure complete autonomy to the selected
institutions, facilitate them to grow more rapidly and get more opportunity to scale
up their operations with more skills and quality improvement so that they become
World Class Institutions in the field of education.
It is expected that the above selected Insitutions will come up in top 500 of
the world ranking in 10 years and in top 100 of the world ranking eventually overtime.
To achieve the top world ranking, these Institutions shall be provided with greater
autonomy to admit foreign students up to thirty per cent. of admitted students; to
recruit foreign faculty upto twenty-five per cent. of faculty strength; to offer online
courses upto twenty per cent.  of its programmes; to enter into academic
collaboration with top 500 in the world ranking Institutions without permission of
UGC; free to fix and charge fees from foreign students without restriction; flexibility
of course structure in terms of number of credit hours and years to take a degree;
complete flexibility in fixing of curriculum and syllabus, among others.
The Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017 has been enacted to declare
certain institutes of management to be institutions of national importance with a
view to empower those institutions to attain standards of global excellence in
management, management research and allied areas of knowledge and is much more
comprehensive in nature than the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961. If the
provisions of the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017 are made applicable to
the Institutes of Technology declared as "Institution of Eminence", the said
institutes will become the World Class Institutions as envisaged.
The need is, therefore, to make applicable the provisions of the Indian
Institutes of Management Act, 2017 to all these Indian Institutes of Technology
declared as "Institution of Eminence" to achieve the objective of becoming a World
Class Institutions in the field of education.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; JAYANT SINHA
February 27, 2020
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed insertion of new section 2A provides for
the application of the provisions of the National Institute of Management Act, 2017
mutatis mutandis  to the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, Indian Institute of
Technology, Bombay, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras and Indian Institute
of Technology, Kharagpur which have been declared as Institutes of Eminence by
the Government of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. However at this stage it is not possible to
estimate the recurring or non-recurring expenditure likely to be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961
————
(Shri Jayant Sinha, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5692LS(S4)—13.03.2020.