THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI ASHWINI KUMAR CHOUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) existing entries 1 and 2 shall be renumbered as entries 2 and 3, respectively,
and before entry 2 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"1. Angika.";
(ii) after entry 3 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"4. Bhojpuri."; and
(iii) entries 3 to 22 shall be renumbered as entries 5 to 24, respectively.
Bill No. 90 of 2015
Short title.
Amendment
of the Eighth
Schedule.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Language is not only a medium of communication but also a sign of respect. Language
also reflects on the history, culture, people, system of governance, ecology, politics, etc.
'Bhojpuri' language is also known as Bhozpuri, Bihari, Deswali and Khotla and is a member of
the Bihari group of the Indo-Aryan branch of the Indo-European language family and is
closely related to Magahi and Maithili languages.
Bhojpuri language is spoken in many parts of north-central and eastern regions of this
country. It is particularly spoken in the western part of the State of Bihar, north-western part
of Jharkhand state and the Purvanchal region of Uttar Pradesh State. Bhojpuri language is
spoken by over forty million people in the country. As per the Census 2001, a total of
3,30,99,497 persons in the country have mentioned Bhojpuri as their mother tongue.
The prosperity of a society is earmarked by its linguistic heritage. If one goes through
the history of Bhojpuri language, it dates back to seventh century. Due to a long history of
emigration from the Bhojpuri regions, this language has spread over all continents of the
world. It is also one of the national languages of Fiji spoken as 'Fiji Hindi'.
Bhojpuri culture is popular even in countries like Nepal, Mauritius, Sri Lanka, Thailand,
England and Greece. In about twenty countries across the world, fifteen to sixty-five per cent.
of the population is Bhojpuri speaking. In Nepal, Bhojpuri is spoken by over two-million
people. Bhojpuri is also spoken by over four lakh people in Mauritius.
Variants of Bhojpuri are spoken by descendants of Bhojpuri-speaking plantation
workers in several countries like Guyana, Suriname, Fiji, Trinidad and Tobago.
In addition to Bhojpuri, Angika is an ancient language spoken by millions of people in
eastern part of Bihar consisting of the districts of Bhagalpur, Banka, Jamui and Munger and
in Santhal Pargana region of Jharkhand consisting of the districts of Sahebganj, Godda,
Deoghar, Pakur, Dumka and Jamtara and also in Malda District of West Bengal. Besides
India, Angika is also spoken in Terai region of Nepal. It is a language with rich tradition that
dates back to the Mahabharat Era. A large number of prominent scholars of Angika language
have contributed a lot to Angika literature. Hundreds of standard literary books are available
in Angika language. Angika is also taught at Post Graduate level at Tilkamanjhi University in
Bhagalpur in the State of Bihar. The language carries a rich cultural heritage which can be
witnessed in the traditions of the people residing in these areas. Because of onslaught of
English and Khari Boli, the future of this language appears to be flattened. It is, therefore, the
duty of the Government to protect the language, being an important part of our heritage.
In view of above, in order to promote, integrate and empower 'Bhojpuri' and 'Angika'
languages and to protect the culture and traditions of the persons speaking these languages,
it is necessary that these languages be given their due recognition by including them in the
Eighth Schedule to the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ASHWINI KUMAR CHOUBEY
March 10, 2015.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
EIGHTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
* * * * * *

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5612LS(S-3)—15-04-2015.