Short title.
THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Act, 2007.
2. In the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, in section 2, for clause ( e), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(e) "employee" means any person (other than an apprentice) who is
employed for wages, whether the terms of such employment are express or implied,
in any kind of work, manual or otherwise, in or in connection with the work of a
factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company, shop or other
establishment, to which this Act applies, but does not include any such person
who holds a post under the Central Government or a State Government and is
governed by any other Act or by any rules providing for payment of gratuity;'.
Amendment of
section 2.
39 of 1972.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN  LOK SABHA
Bill No.  90  of  2007

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (the Act) provides for payment of gratuity  to
employees employed in any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway
company or shop employing 10 or more workers.
2. The Central Government had extended the provisions of  the Act to the educational
institutions employing 10 or more persons vide this Ministry's notification No. S.O. 1080
dated 3rd April, 1997. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in its judgment dated 13th January, 2004,
in Ahmedabad Private Primary Teachers Association Vs Administrative Officer [AIR 2004
(SC) 1426] held that teachers are not entitled to gratuity under the Act, in view of the fact that
teachers do not answer description of "employee" who are "skilled", "semi-skilled" or
"unskilled". The Supreme Court observed that non-use of wide  language similar to definition
of "employee" as is contained in section 2(f)  of the Employees' Provident Funds and
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, reinforces the conclusion that teachers are not covered
in that definition. Para 26 of the said judgment reads as follows:—
"Our conclusion should not be misunderstood that teachers although engaged
in very noble profession of educating our young generation should not be given any
gratuity benefit. There are already in several States separate statutes, rules and
regulations granting gratuity benefits to teachers in educational institutions which
are more or less beneficial than the gratuity  benefits  provided under the Act. It is for
the Legislature to take cognizance of situation of such teachers in various
establishments where gratuity benefits are  not available and think of a separate
legislation for them in this regard. That is  the subject matter solely of the Legislature
to consider and decide.".
3. Keeping in view the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, it is proposed to
widen the definition of "employee", in order to extend the benefits of gratuity to the teachers,
by amending the same.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; OSCAR FERNANDES.
The 7th September, 2007.
2
SERVER5 \ BILL-2007 \ LS \4594LS

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (the Act) provides for payment of gratuity  to
employees employed in any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway
company or shop employing ten or more workers. The Bill amends the definition of "employee"
in section 2(e) of the Act so that teachers shall also be entitled for payment of gratuity.
2. The responsibility for administration of  the  Act vests mainly in the State Governments
and the liability for payment of gratuity vests in the employer. The employees of the Central
Government and  State Governments who are getting gratuity under any other Act or rules
are not covered under the Act. However, as respects teachers employed  by institutions
aided by the Central Government, the liability on employers  may involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. The exact expenditure to be incurred on this account cannot
be estimated at this  stage.
3. Apart from the above, no other expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature from
the Consolidated Fund of India is envisaged.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972
(39 OF 1972)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(e) "employee" means any person (other than an apprentice) employed on wages
in any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop,
to do any skilled, semi-skilled, or un-skilled, manual, supervisory, technical or clerical
work, whether the terms of such employment are express or implied and whether or not
such person is employed in a managerial or administrative capacity, but does not include
any such person who holds a post under the Central Government or a State Government
and is governed by any other Act or by any rules providing for payment of gratuity;
* * * * *
4
SERVER3 \ BILL-2007 \ LAW \2865LAW
Definitions.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
————
(Shri Oscar Fernandes, Minister of Labour and Employment)
MGIPMRND—4594LS(S5)—19.11.2007.