As intropuce In Lox SABHA

22 NOV 20!

Bill No. 90 of 2001

THE PROVISION OF COMMUNICATION FACILITIES IN EVERY
VILLAGE BILL, 2001
By
Suri Rampas ATHAWALE, M.P.
A
BIL’
to provide for the facilities of telephone and post and telegraph office in all the villages
of the country.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— Z

1. (/) This Act may be called the Provision of Communication Facilities in every village
Act, 2001.

(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, the words and expressions
used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 and

the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to
them in these Acts.

Short title

commencement,

Definition.


Provision of
pee thy

facilities in

villages.

Power to
make rules.

2

3, The Central Government shalll provide in every village throughout the country the
following facilities, namely:—
@a post and telegraph office; and
()a public telephone connection with STD facility under the control of head of
the Village Panchayat,
4. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.

5



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In India, eighty-five Percent of the people live in villages. There are number of villages
in remote areas inhabited by tribals and backward classes, For the last 54 years of our
independence, no development work has been done at such Places. There are no postal
facilities available in these areas, There are no telephones and Virtually the villages have no

Hence this Bill.

New Detar; RAMDAS ATHAWALE
November 22, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every village shall be provided with the facilities of
telephone, telegraph and postoffice by the Cental Government. The Bil therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
about rupees two hundred crore per annum will be involved as a recurring expenditure out
‘of the Consolidated Fund of India.

‘Asum of rupees fifty lakh will also be involved as a non-recurring expenditure.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make tules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The tules will relate to matt

ters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the facilities of telephone and post and telegraph office in all the
villages of the country.

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2801LS—09-10-2001.