As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 90 of  2024
THE PROMOTION OF ORGANIC FARMING BILL, 2024
By
Shri Rajkumar Chahar, M.P.
A
BILL
to promote organic farming in the country, reduce dependency on chemical fertilizers  
in farming and highlight ill effects on health of the individuals and for  
matters connected therewith. 
Whereas it is expedient to promote organic farming in India to ensure sustainable 
agricultural practices, improve soil health, protect the environment, and safeguard human 
health;
And Whereas it is necessary to reduce the dependency on chemical fertilizers due to 
their adverse effects on soil, water, human health and the overall ecosystem.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Promotion of Organic Farming Act, 2024.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint.  
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5

2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “agricultural produce” includes wheat, paddy, pulses, sugarcane, cotton, oil seeds, 
coarse grains like maize, millet, jowar, bajra, gram, soyabean, fruits and vegetables 
such as potato, onion, tomato, cauliflower, cabbage including such other agricultural 
or horticultural produce which are used for human consumption or for any medicinal 
purposes;
(c) “Board” means the National Organic Farming Board established under section 3;
(d) “chemical fertilizers” means substances synthesized chemically that are added to 
soil to supply one or more plant nutrients essential to the growth of plants;
(e) “organic farming” means a method of farming that excludes the use of synthetic 
chemicals, fertilizers, pesticides, and genetically modified organisms and relies  
on techniques such as crop rotation, green manure, compost and biological pest  
control; and
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
   3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a Board to be known as the National Organic Farming Board for carrying 
out the purpose of the Act. 
   (2) The Board shall be responsible for promoting organic farming in the country.
   (3) The composition, powers and functions of the Board shall be such as may be 
prescribed.
   4.  (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Board, formulate 
schemes to provide financial and technical assistance to farmers adopting organic 
farming in such manner as may be prescribed.
   (2) The schemes formulated under sub-section (1) may include subsidies, financial 
assistance and training programs to the farmers aimed at encouraging organic farming 
practices.
   (3) The appropriate Government shall implement the schemes formulated under 
sub-section (1) in their respective States in such manner as may be prescribed.
   5. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a certification process for certifying any agricultural produce as an organic 
product to ensure their authenticity and quality under their jurisdiction. 
   (2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every certified organic product under 
sub-section (1) shall carry a label indicating their organic status in such manner as may be 
prescribed.
   6.  (1) The Central Government shall promote research and development in organic 
farming through various agricultural research institutions in such manner as may be 
prescribed.
   (2) The Central Government shall ensure that research and  development under  
sub-section (1) focus on developing sustainable organic farming techniques, improving crop 
yields and finding natural alternatives to chemical fertilizers and pesticides.
2
10
5
Definitions.
15
20
Establishment 
of the National 
Organic 
Farming Board.
Schemes and 
Incentives 
for Organic 
Farmers. 25
30
35
40
Certification 
and Labeling .
Research and 
Development.

   7.  Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punishable with such 
penalty as may be prescribed.
   8.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Board for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act.  
   9. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central 
Government, the State Government or any officer of these Governments for anything done 
in good faith under this Act.
   10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 
     Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
   (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament.
   11. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
   (2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.
   (3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
 
.
3
5
10
Penalty.
Protection of 
Action Taken in 
Good Faith.
Power to 
Remove 
Difficulties.
15
20
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
Power to make 
rules.
25

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Continuous use of chemical fertilizers leads to soil degradation, reducing its fertility and 
productivity over time. Chemical fertilizers often cause soil acidification, which adversely 
affects the growth of crops. Excessive use of chemical fertilizers leads to water pollution due 
to runoff, contaminating rivers, lakes and groundwater. Nitrogen-based fertilizers contribute 
to the emission of nitrous oxide, a potent greenhouse gas that contributes to climate change. 
 Over-reliance on chemical fertilizers creates a dependency cycle, requiring increasing 
amounts for the same yield. The cost of chemical fertilizers imposes a financial burden on 
farmers, reducing their profitability. Residues of chemical fertilizers on crops can pose health 
risks to consumers, including various chronic diseases such as cancer, endocrine disruption, 
and developmental disorders. Chemical residues in food can lead to acute poisoning and 
long-term health issues for consumers. The need is to promote organic farming in India as a 
sustainable agricultural practice, reducing the dependency on chemical fertilizers. 
 The proposed Bill seeks to address the adverse effects of chemical fertilizers on soil 
health, environment and human health and to provide a framework for supporting and 
encouraging organic farming across the country. 
 Hence this Bill.
       New Delhi;           RAJKUMAR CHAHAR
    July 9,  2024.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the National Organic Farming Board 
for carrying out the purpose of the Act. Clause 4 provides for the Central Government to 
formulate schemes to provide financial and technical assistance to farmers adopting organic 
farming including subsidies, financial assistance and training programs to the farmers 
aimed at encouraging organic farming practices. Clause 5 provides for the appropriate 
Government to establish a certification process for certifying any agricultural produce as 
an organic product to ensure their authenticity and quality under their jurisdiction. Clause 
6 provides for the Central Government to promote research and development in organic 
farming through various agricultural research institutions. Clause 8 provides for the Central 
Government to provide adequate funds for carrying out the purpose of the Act. The Bill, 
therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is 
estimated that a sum of rupees twelve hundred crore would involve as recurring expenditure 
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved. 
 
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.
 
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to promote organic farming in the country, reduce dependency on chemical fertilizers  
in farming and highlight ill effects on health of the individuals and for  
matters connected therewith. 
 
————
(Shri Rajkumar Chahar, M.P.)