As INTRODUCED IN LoK: SABRA OR 
2 8 AUG 1987 
Bill No. 91 of 188" 
THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANK BILL, 1987 
ARRANGEMENr OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
'=UViK 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitioru;. 
CHAPTER II 
arrAM:rD"MD'l' 01' TBIl NATIONAL HOUSING BAxJ[ oAJn) CAPITAL 'NCR»Cf 
3. Establishment and incorporation of National Housini Bank. 
4. Capital. 
CHAPTER III 
MANAG:a:MIllfT OF THE NA'l'lONAL HOUSING B.ANx 
5. Management. 
6. Board of Directors. 
7. Term or office of Chairman, Managing Director and other 
directors, S€:rvice conditions, etc. 
8. Disqualifications. 
9. Vacation and resignation of office by directors. 
10. Casual vacancy in the office of Chairman or Managing Director. 
11. Meetings of Board. 
12. Executive Committee and other committees. 
13.· Member of Board or committee thereof not to participate in 
meetings in certain cases. 
CHAPTER IV 
BUSINESS OF THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANE 
14. Business of the National Housing Bank. 
15. Borrowings and acceptance of deposits by National Housing 
Bank. 
16, Loans in foreign. currency. 
17. Power to transfer rights. 
18. Power to acquire rights. 
19. Power to impose conditions for accommodation. 
20. Power to call for repayment before agreed period. 

(ii) 
Cuuns 
21. National Housing Bank to have access to recorda. 
22. Validity of loan or advance not to be questioned. 
23. National Housing Bank not to grant loans or advanc •• ,ainat 
its own bonds or debentures. 
24. Power to inspect. 
25. Power to collect credit information. 
26: Power to publish information. 
27. Advisory services. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO HOUSING FINANCE INSTITUTIONS REC.IlVDfQ 
DEPOSITS 
28. Definition of depoliiit. 
29. Chapter V not to apply in certain case&. 
JO. Nation",l Housing Bank to regulate or prohibit issue of pr08-
pectus Or advertisement soliciting deposita of money. 
31. Power of National Housing Bank to collect information from 
housing finance insthutions as to deposits and to give directiona. 
32. Duty of housing finance institutions to furnish statements, etc. .• 
required by National Housing Bank. 
33. Powers and duties of auditors. 
34. Inspection. 
35. Deposits not to be solicited by unauthorised persons. 
36. ChaptE:r V to override other laws. 
CHAPTER VI 
FuNDS, AlCCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
37. General Fund and other funds. 
38. Preparation of balance--sheet, etc., of National Housing Bank. 
39. Disposal of surplus. 
40. Audit. 
4:1. Returm. 
4'2. Annual report on housing. 
CHAPI'ER vn 
MIsCELLANEOUS 
43. Staff of National Housing Bank. 
44. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy. 
4:5. Defects in appointment not to invalidate acts, etc. 
46. Protection of action· taken under the Act. 
4:7. Indemnity of directors. 
48. Exemption from tax on income. 
4:9. Penalties. 

euUDI 
50. Offences hy companies. 
81. Cognizance of offences. 
52. Application (If fine. 
(iii) 
53. Bankers' Books Evidence Act 18 of 1891. to apply in relation .. 
Nationa~ Housing Bank. 
54. Liquidation of National Housing Bank. 
55. Power of the Board to make regulations. 
56. Amendment of certain enactments. 
57. Power to re:rr.ove difficulty. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 

Bill No. tl of Its' 
- -THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANK BILL, 1967 
A 
BILL 
to 'tat"blish a bank to be known as the NGtional Hou.sing Bank to operate 
as c:& principal agen~ to promote housing finance institutions both 
elt loCCll and regionc:&Z levels c:&nd to prouide jinancic:&l c:&nd other 
arpport to S1I.ch i1l8tit-u.tions and f<Yr mcltters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Repub-
lic of India as follows:-
CHAPI'ER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the National Housing Bank Act, 1987. Short 
(Z) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates 
may bellppointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference 
10 in any: provision to the COlWIlencement of this Act shall be construed as 
• reftfNnce ttl the coming into forC'e of that provision. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a.) "&am" means the Board of Directors of the National HoUl-
ing' Benk referred. td in section 6; I 
tiUe, 
extent 
and 
com· 
menee-
ment. 
Defini· 
tions. 

Eata)).. 
liab. 
%Dent. 
and in-
corpora-
tfonol 
National 
HousiD, ' 
Bank. 
Capital 
(b) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Board appointed 
under section 6; 
(e) "director" means a director appointed under section 6; 
(d) "housing finance institution" includes every institution, 
whether incorporated or n9t, which primarily transacts or has as 5 
its principal object, the transacting of the business of providing 
finance for housing, whether directly or indirectly; 
(e) "Managing Director" means the Managing Director appoint-
ed under section 6; 
U) "National Housing Bank" means the National Housing Bank 10 
established under section 3; 
(g) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; 
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made under 
this Act; IS 
(i) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India constitu-
ted under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act. 1934; a ot. J.NA. 
m words and expressions uaed herein and not defined but 
defined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, shall have the mean- 20 101. lII6. 
ings respectively assigned to them in that Act; 
(k) words and expressions used herein and not defined either in 
this Act or in the Reserve Bank of India Act. 1934, but defined in the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949, shall have the meanin~ respectively 
IlSSigned to them in the Banking Regulatton Act, 1949. 
CHAPrER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANK AND 'CAPITAL THEREOlI' 
3. (1) With effect from such dote as the Central Government may, 
by notification. appoint, there shall be established for the purposes of 
this Act. a bank to he known as the National Housing Bank. 
lS 
(2) The National Housjn~ Bank shall be a body CO!"Dorate with the 30 
name aforesaid havin.g perpetual succession and a cOl umon seal vlJith 
power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, holr3 and diRnose 
of property and to contract, and may, by that name, sue and be sued. 
(3) The head office of the National Housing Bank shl'lll be at Bomb;'1y 
or at such other place as the Reserve Bank may, by notification, specify. 3S 
(4) The National Housing Bank mav ests.blish offices, branches or 
aRencies at any place in India, and with the previous a-pproval of the 
Reserve Bank, by notification, increase the said capital up to five hun-
4. The authorised and paid up capital of the National Housin~ Bank 
'Shall· be one ,hundred crares, of rupees and shall be. subscribed by the .40 
Reserve Bank : 
Provided'that the C.entraIGovernm.ent m!\v. in ~nn~l1ltati(')n wtth the 
~rve Bank,· by 1'H'I~flcati01'l.: increase the' nid ~tntai ~p to five tiun-
c!Te(t" mres of nip~·s and the eapital so increased shall aiso ~ subs-
enDed 1:;y tlhe Reserve Bank. 4S 
2 of 1934. 
10 of 
1141. 

3 
CHAPTER nr 
MANAGEMENT OF THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANK 
_ 5. (1) The general superintendence, direction and management of 
the affairs and business of the National Housing Bank shall vest in the 
. S Board of Directors, which shall exercise all powers and do all acts and 
. things, which may be exercised or done by the National Housing Bank. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board, in discharging 
its functions, shall act on business principles with due regard to public 
interest. 
10 (3). Subject to the provisions of. sub-section (1) and save as otherwiae 
provided in the regulatioIl5 made under this Act,-
(a) the Chairman, if he iii holding offices both as the Chainna.n 
'and the Managing Director, or 
(b) the Managing Director, if the Chairman is absent, 
IS shall also have powers of general superintendence, direction and manage-
mlmt of the affairs and business of the National Housing Bank and 
lnay also exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be 
~ e:lcerdsed Or done by the and shall act on business principles with due 
regard to public interest. 
20 M) The Managing Director shall, in the 'discharge of his powers and 
'functions, follow such directions as the Chairman may give. 
(5) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the National 
~iousing Bank shall be guided by such directions in matters of policy 
involving public interest as the Central Government in consultation with . , 
2S tl1e Reserve Bank, or the Reserve Bank, may give in writing. 
6. ,(1) The 'Board of Directors of the National Housing Bank shall Board of 
: cp~ist of the following, namely: - Direo-
(a) 'a Chairman and a Managing Director: 
PrOvided that the same person may be appointed as Chairman 
30 and as Managing Director; 
35 
(b) three directors from amongst the experts in the field ot 
housing, architecture. engineering, sociology, finance, law, manage-
ment and corporate planning or in ,any other field, special Know-
ledge of which is considered useful to the National Housing Bank; 
(c) three directors who shall be persons with experience in the 
working of jnstitution~ involved in providing funds for housing or 
engaged in housing, development; 
(d) two directors from out of the directors of the Reserve Bank; 
tori. 

Termaof 
office Of. 
Chair-
1DIlD, 
Manaaing 
Director 
and other 
Director~. 
lervico 
condi-
UODS, etc. 
Disquall. 
fk:atioDi. 
4 
(e) three directors from amongst the officials of the Central 
Government; 
(j) two directors from amongst the officials of the State Govern-
ment . 
. (2) The Chairman, the Managing Director and other directors ex- 5 
clua.mg me wreet.ors releneC1 to m <:!ause ((I.), ·shall be appo~nted by tn. 
Central Lrovernment in consultatwn wlth the .H.eserve .HanK and C1lrectors 
the Central li-overnmetlt. may, in consultatlOn with the Reserve Hank, 
7. (1) The Chairman and the Managing Director shaU hold office for 
such term, not exceedmg five years and shall recelve such salary and 10 
allowances and be governed by such terIIUl and conditions of service lUI 
the Central Government may, in <:aosuJ.tation with the Reierve Hank, 
speci1y and £hall be elig!l;>.Le for re-appointment: 
Provided that the Chairman or, as the cale may be, the ManaaiJ;l& 
Director shall, notwlthitandmg the expirat!on of hl' tlirm, oontinu. W Ii 
hold olliee until rna lIucceSlior enten upon hia office. 
(2) The directors referred to in clauses (0) and (c) of aub-iection 
(l) of sec Lon 6 Shall hold office for a term of three years: 
Provided that any such director shall, notwithstanding the expiration 
of his term, cont!nue to hold office until his succeasor enters upon hi8 lO 
office. 
(3) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank, remove the Chairman or the Managing Director, or any other 
director referred to in sub-section (2), at any time before the expiry of 
hi!. term of office after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing 25 
cause against the proposed removal. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (3), 
the Central Government, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, shall 
have the right to tenninate the term of office of the Chairman or, as the 
case may be, the Managing Director, at any time before the expiry 01. 30 
lhe term specified under 8ub-section (1), by giving him notice of not 
less than three months in writing or three months' salary and allowancel 
in lieu thereof and the Chairman or the Managing Director. as the CBH 
rnay be, shall also have the right to relinqui8h his office at any time 
before the expiry of the term specified under sub-section (1), by giving 3' 
to the Central <rl>vernment notice of not less than three month8 in 
writing or three monthe' salary and allowances in lieu thereof. 
(5) The directors shall be paid such fees and allowances as may be 
prescribed for attending the meetings of the Board or of any of its com-
mittees and for attending to any other work of the National Housing 40 
Bank: 
Provided that no such fee shall be payable to any director, who 18 In 
official of the Government or a director of the Reserve Bank. 
8. No person shall be a director of the Board. if he-
(a) is, or becomes of unsound mind and has been so declared by 4S 
• competent court; or 

(b) is or has been convicted of any offence which. in the opinion 
of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
(c) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as insolvent or has 
iuspended payment of his debts or has compounded with his credi-
5 tors; or 
(d.) has, for any reason, been removed or diSmissed from the 
service of-
(i) the Government, or 
(ii) the Reserve Bank; the State Bank or any other bank, or 
10 (iii) any public financial institution, or state financial cor-
poration, or 
(iv) any other co.rporation owned or controlled by the Gov-
ernment. 
9. (1) If a director--
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualiilcations mentioned in 
section 8; or 
(b) is absent without leave of the Board for three or more con-
secuti ve meet.ngs thereof, 
hi~ seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
20 (2) Any director may resign his office by giving notice thereof in 
writing to the authority that appointed or, ao the case way be, nominated 
him and his resignation being accepted by such authority or if his 
resignation is not sooner accepted, on the expiry of three months from 
the receipt thereof by such appointing authority, he shall be deemed 
25 to have vacated his office. 
10. If the Chairman, or as the case may be, the Managing Director, is 
by infirmiLy or otherwise rendered incapab.le of carrying out his duties 
0r is absent on leave or otherwise, in circumstances not involving the 
vacation of his appointment, the Central Government may, appoint 
30 another person to act in his place during his absence. 
11. (1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at 
its meetings, as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Chai.rman, or, if for any reason he is unable to attend a meeting 
35 of the Board, the Managing Director, or, in the event of both the Chair-
man and the Managing Director being unable to attend a meeting, any 
other director nominated by the Chairman in this behalf and in the 
absence of such nomination, any director elected by the directors pre-
sent hom among themselves at the meeting, shall preside at the meet-
40 ing. 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board 
shall be decided by a majority of votes of the directors present and voting, 
and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or, in his absence, 
the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote. 
Vacation 
IIl1d re-
signa-
tion of 
office 
by de-
rectors. 
Casual 
vacancy 
in the 
oftlce of 
Chair-
manor 
Managiq 
Director. 
Meetinp 
of 
Board. 

Execu-
tive Com-
mittee 
and 
other 
Commit· 
tees. 
Member 
of Board 
Of com-
dttee 
thereof 
not to 
partici-
pate in 
meetings 
incer-
tain 
cases. 
Business 
ofltlie 
National 
Housing 
Bank. 
12. (1) The Board may constitute an Executive Committee consisting 
Of such number of directors as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Executive Committee shall discharge such functions as may 
be prescribed, or, as may be delegated to it, by the Board. 
(3) The Board may constitute such other committees, whether con- 5 
sisting wholly of directors or wholly of other persons or partly of directors 
and partly of other persons as it thinks fit for such purposes, as it 
may decide and any committee so constituted shall discharge such func-
tion& as may be delegated to it by the Board. 
(4) The Executive Committee or any other committees constituted 10 
under this section shall meet at such times and places and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meet-
ings, as may be prescribed. 
13. Any director of the Board or any member of a committee, who has 
any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter corning up for 15 
consideration at a meeting of the Board or a committee thereof, shall, 
as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come to his know-
ledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and the dis-
closure shall be recorded in the minutes of the Board, or the committee, 
as the case may be, and the director or member shall not take any part 20 
in any deliberation or decision of the Board or the committee with res-
pect to that matter. 
CHAPTER IV 
BUSINESS OF THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANK 
14. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the National Housing Bank 25 
may transact all Or any of the foll:>wing kinds of business, namely:-
(a) promoting, este.blishing, supporting Or aiding in the promo-
tion, establishment and support of hOUSing finance institutions; 
(b) making of loans and advances or rendering any other 
form of financial assistance whatsoever to housing finance institutions 30 
and scheduled banks; 
(c) subscribing to or purchasing stocks, shares, bonds, deben-
tures and securities of every other description; 
(d) guaranteeing the financial obligations of housing finance in-
stitutions and underwriting the issue of stocks, shares, bonds, deben- 35 
tures and securities of every other description of housing finance .,. institutions; __ .. rt -. - --
(e) drawing, accepting, discounting Or rediscounting, buying or 
selling and dealing in bills of exchange, promissory notes, bonds, 
debentures, hundies, coupons and other instruments by whatever 40 
name called; 
(1) forming, promoting and managing subsidiaries for carryInJ 
out all or any of its functions under this Act; 

'1 
(g) undertaking research and surveys on construction techni. 
ques and other studies relating to or connected with shelter, housing 
and human settlement. 
(h) formulating one or more schemes, for the purpose of mobi-
5 lisation of resources and extension of credit for housing; 
(i) formulating one or more schemes. for the ~nomically 
weaker sections of society which may be subsidised by the Central 
Government or any State Government or any other source; 
(j) organising training programmes, seminars and symposia 
10 .on matters relating to housing; 
(k) providing guidelines to the housing finance institutions to 
ensure their growth on sound lines; 
(1) providing technical and administrative assistance to housing 
finance institutions; 
15 (m) co-ordinating with the Life Insurance Corporation of India, 
the Unit Trust of India, the General Insurance Corporation of India 
and other financial institUtions, in the discharge of its overall func-
tions: 
(n) eXerCISIng all powers and functions in the performance of 
20 duties entrusted to the National Housing Bank under this Act or 
under any other law for the time being il} force; 
(0) acting as agent of the Central Government, the State Govern-
ment or the Reserve Bank .or of any authority as may be autho,rised 
by the Reserve Bank; 
25 (p) any other kind of business which the Central Government 
may, on the re~ommendation of the Reserve Bank, authorise; 
(q) generally, doing of all such matters and things as may be in-
cidental to or consequential upon the exercise of its powers or the dis-
charge of its duties under this Act. 
30 15, (1) The National Housing Bank may, for the purpose of carrying 
35 
40 
out its functions under this Act-
(a)' issue and sell bonds and debentures with or without the 
guarantee of the Central Government, in such manner and on such 
terms as may be prescribed, 
(b)' borrDw money front the Central. Government and from any 
other authority Or orllanisatiQn fir institution ap.rovl"d by thatGov-
ernment on fiuch t"l'mo; pn~ ('ondHion" AS m":v be a~reed upon; 
·(c) accept deposits repayable after the exoirv of a period which 
shall not be less than twelve months from the date of the makfng of 
the deposit on such terms as may be J;!enerally or specially be anprov-
ed by the Re!=erve Bank; 
(d) borrow money from th~ R"serve Ban'f{-
'(i) repayable on dE'!l'1nnrl nr nl1 the ~')(pirv of f1~ .. o n","!n"s 
not exceeding eighte"l1 Mnnths fr0TY'1 the flatp (-,f the lTl"kint1' or 
loan or advance, on such terms and conditions tneIudfn~ the terms 
Borrow-
ingsand 
accep_ 
tance of 
deposits 
byNa-
tional 
Housin, 
Bank. 

Loans in 
t.on;jgn; 
cur-
feDc,-. 
8 
relating to security and purpose as may be specified by the Re-
serve Bank; 
(ii) out of the National Housing Credit (Long Term Opera-
tions) Fund established under section 46D of the Reserve Bank 
of India Act, 1934 or any of the purposes specified in that Section; 5 2 of 193t. 
(e) receive for services rendered, such remuneration, commis-
sion, commitment charges, consultancy charges, service charges, royal-
ties, premia, licence fees and any other consideration of whatever 
description; 
ID reeelve gifts, grants donations or 'benefaetions from Govern· 10 
ment or any other source. 
(2) The Central Government may, on a request being made to it by 
the National Housing Bank, guarantee the bonds and debentures issued 
by the National Housing Bank as to the repayment of prinCipal and the 
payment of interest at such rate as may be fixed by that Government. 15 
16. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act, 1973 or in any other law for the time being in force re-
lating to foreign exchange, the National Housing Bank may, for the 
purpose of making loans and advances under this Act, borrow in such 
manner and on such cO'nditions as may be prescribed in consultation with 20 
the Reserve Bank and with the previous approval of the Central Govern-
ment, foreign currency from any bank or financial institution in India 
or elsewhere. 
'(2) The Central Government may. where necessary, guarantee any 
loan taken by the National Housin~ Bank under sub-Iilectlon (1) or any 25 
.part thereof as to the repayment of pricipal and the payment of interest 
and other incidental charges, ' 
(3) All loans and advances made by the National Housing Bank 
out of foreign currency borroweo under sub-section (1) shal~ be expres-
sed in terms of foreign currency as eqUivalent of Indian currency, cslcu- 30 
lated in accQrdance with the rate of exchang-e prevailing: at the time of 
~ant thereof, and the amount due thereunder shall be repayable in 
equivalent Indian currencv. calculated in accordance with the rate of 
exchange prevailin~ at the time of repavment of such loan or advance. 
(4) Any loss or profit in connection with any borrowing- of forei$l 3'5 
currency under sub-section (1) or with its repayment on account of any 
fluctuation: in th~ rate of exchange accruing- ' 
'(a) during the period within wh5ch th" l!)an nr arivance is repay-
able by the housinrr finan('e institution or the ]1eriod of actual repay-
ment thereof bv the said housinf! finance institution. whichever is 40 
longer, shall be reimbursed by, Or paid tn, l'I.S the ca!'le may ·be, the 
housin~ fin~"'-('e institlltioT1 of ~1"'h loans nnd advances; 
(b) after th~ expirv nf the period spedfled ion clallse" (a),-
m sh~l1 bE' b(')rne bv the Nati(')nal HousinlZ Bank in respect 
of normal m~rJret, flllctlJatit)l'Is in foreign exchange: 4~ 
(ii) shall 00 relmlmNleil by. 01' pAid to. as the ~a:'!e may be, 
the Central {'wOvernment in resnect of fluctuation other th .. n the 
nonnal market fluctuations in foreign exchange. 
46 of 
1973. 

9 
Explanation.-If any question arises as to whether any fluctuation 
is a normal market fluctuation or not, the same shall be decided. by the 
Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final. 
17. The rights and interests of the National Housing Bank (including 
5 any other rights incidental thereto) in relation to any loan or advance 
made, or any amount recoverable, by it, may be transferred by the 
National Housing Bank, either in whole or in part, by the execu~ion or 
issue of any instrument or by t.he transfer of any instrument by endorse-
ment, or in any other manner in which the rights and interests in relation 
10 to such loan or advance may be lawfully transferred, and the National 
Housing Bank may, notwithstanding such transfer, act as the trustee 
2 of 1882. within the meaning of section 3 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, for the 
transferee. 
18. The National Housing Bank shall have the right to acquire, by 
15 transfer or assignment, the rights and interests of any housing finance 
institution (including any other rights incidental thereto) in relation to 
any loan or advance made, or anv amount recoverable by such institution, 
either in whole or in part. by the execution or issue of any instrument 
or by the transfer of any instrument or in any other manner in which 
20 tlie rights and interests in relation to such loan or advance may be law-
fully transferred. 
19. In entering into any transaction under this Chapter with anv bor-
rowing housing finance institution, the National Housing Bank may 
.. ~ impose such conditions as it may think necessar" or expedient fO,r pro-
25 tecting the interests of the. National Housing Bank. 
20. Notwithstandin~ ::tnvthincr to the contrarv contained in any agree-
ment, the National Housing Bank may. by notice in w:ritjn~, require any 
borrowing housin/! fimmce :nstitutioo to dh;~harge forthwith in full its 
liabilities to the NAtional Housin'" Bank-, F> 
30 (a) if it appears to the Board that false 01' misleadin~ information 
in any material particular was given in the application for the loan 
or advance; or ' 
(b) if the borrowing housing finance institutinn has faileo t,., 
comply with anv of the tet'Ins of the agreement with the National 
35 Housing Bank in the matter of the loan or advance; 0.1' 
(c)' if there is a reasonable apprehension that the borrowin~ 
hOUSing finance institution is unable to pay its debts or that proceed-
ings for Hquidation m8:-,' he commenced in respect t.hereof; or 
(d) if for any reason, it is necessary so to do to protect the 
40 interest!; of the National Housing Bank. 
21. (1) The National Housin~ Bank shall have free access to all such 
records of any housing finance institution which seeks to avail of anv 
credit facilities from the National Housing Bank and to all such recol'ds 
of any person who seeks t,., avail of any credit facilities from such housing 
45 finance institution, the perusal of which may anpear to the National 
Housing Bank to be necessary in connection with the p"ovidin<r of financp. 
or other assistance to such housinr: finance institution or t.l1e refinllncing 
of any l(')an or advance made to such person by that housing flnance 
institution. -I 
Power to 
transfer 
rights. 
Power to 
acquire 
ri:.:hts. 
Power to 
impose 
condi-
tions for 
aCCC)-
moda-
tion. 
Power to 
call for 
repay-
ment 
before 
agreed 
period 
National 
Housing 
Bank to 
have 
access to 
reco)'ds. 

Validity 
of loan 
orad. 
vance 
not to 
be qUeI-
tioned. 
Na1jl:mal 
Housing 
Bank 
not to 
make 
loans or 
advances 
against 
its own 
bonds or 
deben-
t~8. 
Power to 
inspect. 
Power to 
collect 
credit 
lntorma. 
tion. 
10 
(2) The National Housing Bank may require any institution or person 
referred to in sub-section (1), to furnish to it copies of any of the records 
referred to in that sub-section and the institution or the person, as the 
case may be, shall be bound to comply with such requisition. 
22. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other 5 
law for the time being in force, the validity of any loan or advance made 
by the National Housing Bank in pursuance of the provisions of this 
Act shall not be called in question merely on the ground of non-compliance 
with the requirements of such other law or of any resolution, contract, 
or any instrument regulating the constitution of the borrowing housing 10 
finance institution: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall enable any company or 
co-operative society to obtain any loan or advance where the instrum~nt 
relating. to the constitution of such company or co-operative society 
does not empower such company or co-operative society so to do. 15 
Z3. The National Housing Bank shall not make any loan or advance 
on the security of its own bonds or debentures. 
24. (1) The National Housing Bank may, at any time, and shall. on 
being directed so to do by the Reserve Bank~ cause an inspection to be 
made by one or more of its officers of any housing finance institution 20 
to which the National Housing Bank has· made any loan Or advance or 
grallted any other financial assistance, and its books, accounts and other 
documents; and the National Housing Bank shall supply to the housing 
finance institution a copy of its report on such inspection. 
(2) :rt shall be the duty of every officer, employee or other person or 25 
persons incharge of the whole or part of the affairs of the housing 
finance institution to prodUCe to any officer making an inspection under 
sub-section (1), all such books, accounts and other documents in his 
custody or power and to furnish within such time as the said officer may 
specify any statements, information relating to the affairs of the housing 30 
finance institution as the said officer may require of him. 
25. (1) The National Housing Bank may, for the purpose of the 
efticient discharge of its functions discharge its functions under this Act 
at any time direct any housing finance institution to submit to It credit 
information in such form and within such time as may be specified by 35 
the National Housing Bank from tir;:te to time. 
(2) Ev,ery housing finance institution shal1, notwithstanding anything 
to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force Or in 

11 
any instrument regulating the constitution thereof Or in any agreement 
executed by it, relating to the secrecy of its dealings with its consti-
tuents, be bound to comply with any directions issued under sub-section 
(1) . 
5 (3) The National Housing Bank may, for the purpose of the efficient 
discharge of its functions under this Act collect from the Central and 
S~ate Governments, local authorities, the Rese.rve Bank, any bank or 
such financial or other institutions as the Reserve Bank may specify in 
this behalf, credit information or other informat:on. 
lO Explanatictn.-For the purposes of this section and section 26, credit 
information means any information relating to-
(0 the amount of loans and advances and other credit facilities 
granted for the purpose of housing; I 
(ii) the nature of security taken for such loans, advances or 
15 other credit facilities; 
(iii) the guarantees furnished; and 
(iv) any other information Which has a bearing on the credit-
worthiness of the borrower. 
26. The National Housing Bank, if it considers it in the public interest 
20 so to do, may publish any credit information Or other information ob-
tained by it under this Act, in such consolidated form or in any other 
form as it thinks fit. 
27. The National Housing Bank may provide advisory services to the 
Central and State Governments. local authorities and other agencies 
25 connected with housing, in respect of-
30 
(a) formulation of overall policies aimed at promoting the 
growth of housing and housing finance institutions; 
(b) legislation relating to matters having a bearing on shelter, 
hOUSing and human settlement. • I 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO HOUSING FINANCE INSTITUTIONS 
RECEIVING DEPOSITS 
28. In this Chapter the term 'deposit' shall have the meaning assigned 
to it in section 451 of the Reserve Bank of India Act 1934. , 
35 29. (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to deposits 
accepted by a housing finance institution which is a firm or an unincor-
porated association of individuals. 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the firms 
and unincorporated ass<>ciations of individuals referred to in sub.section 
40. (1) shall continue to be governed by the provisions of Chapter IIIC of 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
Power to 
publish 
informa-
tion. 
Ad-
visory 
services. 
Defini.. 
lion of 
deposit. 
C~apter 
not to 
apply in 
certain 
cases. 

National 
Housiq 
Bank to 
reau.. 
late or 
prohibit 
issue of 
prospec-
tus or 
adver-
tisement 
soliciting 
deposits 
of 
money. 
Power of 
National 
Housing 
Bank. to 
collect 
l'nforma-
tion 
from 
housinl 
fiDaDCe 
institu-
tions as 
to de-
posits 
and to 
give 
direc-
tions. 
it 
30. The National Housing Bank may, if it considers necessary in the 
pub:ic interest so to do, by general or special order,-
(a) regulate Or prohibit the issue by any housing finance insti-
tution of any prospectus or advertisement soliciting deposits ot 
money from the public; and S 
(b) specify the conditions subject to which any such prospectus 
or advertisement, if not prohibited, may be issued. 
31_ (1) The National Housing Bank may at any time direct that 
every housing finance institution accepting deposits shall furnish to th8 
National Housing Bank in such form at such intervals and within such 10 
time, such statements, information or particulars relating to or connected 
with deposits received by the housing finance institution. as may be 
specified by the National Housing Bank by general or special order. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powe.r vested in the 
National Housing Bank. under sub-section (1), the statements, informa- 15 
tion or particulars to be furnished under sub-section (1), may relate to 
all or any of the following matters, namely. the amount of the deposits. 
the purposes and periods for which. and the rates of interest and other 
terms and conditions on which, such deposits are received. 
(3) The National Housing Bank may, if it considers necessary in the 
public interest so to do. give directions to housing finance institutions 20 
accepting deposits either generally or to any group of housing finance 
institutions accepting deposits, and in particular, in respect of any 
matters relating to, or connected with, the receipt of deposits. including 
the rates of interest payable on such deposits, and the periods for which 2S 
deposits may be received. ' . 
(4) If any housing finance institution, accepting deposi~ fails to 
compI)' with any direction given by the National Housing Bank, under 
sub-section (3). the National Housing Bank may prohibit the acceptance 
of del Dsits by that housing finance institution. 30 
(5) Every housing finance institution, receiving deposits, shall, if so 
required by the National HOUSing Bank and within such time as the 
National Housing Bank may specify, cause to be sent at the cost of the 
housing finance institution. a copy of its annual balance sheet and profit 
and loss account or other annual accounts to every person from whom 3S 
the housing finance institution holds, as on the last day of the year to 
which the accounts relate, deposits higher than such sum as may be 
specified by the National Housing Bank. 

1 of 1956, 
13 
32. Every housing finance institution shall furnish the statements, 
information or particulars called for, in such form as may be prescribed 
and to comply with any direction given to it, under the provisions of 
this Chapter, 
5 33. (1) The audi,tor of every housing finance institution ~hal1. 
enquire whether or not the' housing finance institution has fur-
nished to the National Housing Bank such statements, info.rmation or 
particulars relating to or connected with deposits received Iby it, as are 
required to be furnished under this Chapter, and the auditor shall, except 
. 10 where he is satisfied on such enquiry that the housing finance institution 
has flU'nished such statements, informations Or particulars, make a report 
to the National Housing Bank giving the aggregate amount of such 
deposits held by the housing finance institution, 
(2) Wtcre, in the case of a housing finance institution, being a com-
15 pany, the auditor has made, Or intends to make. a report to the ;National 
Housing Bank under sub-section (1), he shall include in his report under 
sub-section (2) of section 227 of the Companies Act, 1956. the contents 
of the. report which he has made, or intends to make,- to the National 
Housing Bank. 
Duty oJ 
houSli'n" 
finance 
institu-
tions to 
furnish 
state-
ments. 
etc.. reo 
quired 
by Nu. 
tIional 
Housing 
Bank. 
Powers 
and 
duties of 
auditors. 
20 34. (1) The National Housing Bank may, at any time, cause an inspec- In~pcc· 
tion to be made by one or more of its officers Or employees or other tion. 
persons (hereafter in this section referred to as the inspecting authority) 
of any housing finance institution accepting deposits, for the purpose of 
verifying the correctness or comple~eness of any statement, information 
25 or particulars furnished to the National Housing Bank or for the purpose 
of obtaining any information or particu1a.rs ,which the housing finance 
institution has failed to furnish on being called upon to do so. 
(2) It shall ~ the duty of every director or member of any Com-
mittee or other body or any person for the time being vested with the 
30 management of the whole' or part of the affairs of every housing 
finance institution accepting deposits or other officer or employee 
thereof to produce to the inspecting authority £,,11 such books, accounts and 
othe.r documents in his custody or power and to furnish that authority 
with any statement and information relating to the business of the 
35 institution as that authority may require of him, within such time as 
,may be specified by that authority. 
(3) The inspecting authority may examine on oath any director or 
member of any Committee or body or any other person for the time 
being vested with the management of the affairs of the housing finanf!e 
40 instituti<m. accepting dePosits, or any officer or employee thereof.' in 
relation to Its business. 

Deposits 
not to be 
solicited 
by un-
authoris-
ed per-
sons. 
Chapter 
Vto 
Override 
other 
laWS. 
General 
Fund. 
and other 
Funds. 
Prepa-
ration of 
balance 
sheet, 
etc. of 
National 
Housing 
Bank. 
D'spollal 
of 
surplus. 
as. No person shall solicit on behalf of any housing finance institution 
either by publishing or causing to be published any pro~pectus or adver-
tisement or in any other manner deposits of money from the public 
unless-
(a) he has been authorised in writing by the said housing 5 
finance institution to do so and specifies the name of the institution 
which has so autho.rised him; and 
(b) the prospectus or advertisement complies with any order 
I made by the National Housing Bank under section 3Q and with any 
other provision of law for the time being in force applicable ·to the 10 
pubJication of. such prospectus or advertisement. 
38. The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force. or any instrument having effect by virtue of any IlUCh 
lavv. 15 
CHA.PTER VI 
FuNDs, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
37. (1) With effect from such date as the Reserve Bank may specify, 
the National Housing Bank shall establish a fund to be called the General 
Fund and all payments by the National Housing Bank shan be made out 20 
of the said General Fund. . 
(2) The Board may, lll1d shall, if so directed by the Reserve Bank, 
create a special fUnd or a reserve fund or such other funds as may be 
prescribed. 
38. (1) The balance sheet and accounts of' the National Housing 25 
Bank sha!l be prepared and maintained in such form and manner as may 
be prescribed. . , 
(2) The Board shall cause. the books. and accounts of the National 
Housi ng Bank t::> be balanced and closed as on the thirtieth day of June, 
each year. 30 
31. After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation 
of assets and all other matters for which provision is necessary or ex-
pedient or which is usual1y provided for by bankers, the National Housing 
Bank shall !Tansfer-
(i) for a period of fifteen years, following the accounting year 3S 
during which the National Housing Bank is established, the amount 
remaining (hereafter in this section referred to as surplus) such of 
the funds referred to in section 37 as the Reserve Bank may specify, 
and 
. (it) after the expiry of the said period of fifteen years the ~ 
}ifational Housing Bank shall. after making provision for the fundi 
referred to in Sf!ction 37 transfer the balance of rurplus to the 
Reserve Bank. 

15 
40. (1) The accounts of the National Housing Bank shall be audited AudiL 
by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors under sub-section (1) of 
1 of !9S6. section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956, who shall be appointed by the 
Reserve Bank, for such tenn and on such· remuneration as the Reserve 
5 Bank may fix. . 
(2) The auditors shall ·be supplied with a copy of the annual balance-
sheet Of the National Housing Bank and it shall be their duty to examine 
it together with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto and they 
shall have a list d~livered to them of all books kept by the National 
10 Housing Bank and shall at all reasonable times have access to the boob,. 
accounts, vouchers and otner documents of the National Housing Bank. 
(3) The auditors may, in relation to the accounts of the National 
Housing Bank, examine any director of the Board or any oftlcer or other 
employee of the National Housing Bank and shall be entitled to require 
J 5 from the Board or officers or other employees of the National Housing 
Bank such information and explanation as they may think necessary fo.r 
the performance of their duties. 
(4) The auditors shall make a .report to the National Housing Bank 
upon the annual balance sheet and accounts examined by them and in 
20 every such report, they shall state whether in their opinion the balance-
sheet is a full and fair balance-sheet containing all necessa.ry particulat's 
and properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of the state 
of affairs of the National Housing Bank and in case they had called for 
any explanation or infonnation from the Board Or any officer or other 
25 employee of the National Housing Bank, whether it was given and 
whether it was satisfactory. ' 
(5) The National Housing Bank shall furnish to the Reserve Bank 
within three months from the date on which the annual accounts of the 
National Housing Bank are closed and balanced, a copy of its balance-
30 sheet as on the close of the relevant year together with a copy of the 
profit and loss account for the year and a copy of the auditors" report 
and a report of the working of the National Housing Bank during that 
year. 
41. The National Housing Bank shall furnish, from time to time. to 
35 tlhe neserve Bank such information and returns as the Reserve Bank 
40 
may ~·equire. 
42. The National Housing Bank shall make an annual repOrt to the 
Reserve Bank on the trend and progress of housing in the country and 
in that report may make such suggestions as it may think nece~ry or 
expedient for the development of housing. 
CHAPTER. VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
43. (1) The National HOtlSing Bank may appoint such number of 
ofB~ and other' employees as· it considers necessary or desirable for 
the efficient perl'onnance of its functions and determine the tenriJ and 
. 4S conditions of their appointment and service. ; . 
Returns. 
Annual 
report 
on 
housing. 
staft' or 
National 
Housing 
Bank • 

Obliga-
tion as to 
fidelity 
and 
~ecrecy. 
Defects 
in 
appolint-
ment 
not to 
invalJ-
date 
acts, 
ctc. 
16 
(2) The duties and conduct. telVls and conditions of service and the 
establishment ,and maintenance of provident fund or any other fund for. 
the benefit of the officers and other members of staff of the National 
Housing Bank: shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(3) The National Housing Bank may depute any officer or any mem- 5 
ber of its staff for such period and on such terms and cohditions as it 
may determine, to any institution including a housing finance institu-
tion. 
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall empower the National 
Housing Bank: to depute any officer or member of its staff to any inst!- 10 
tution on any salary, emoluments or other terms and conditions which 
is or are less favourable to him than that or those to which he is entitled 
to immediately befo~e such deputation. 
(5) The National Housing Bank may, without prejudice to the pro-
visions of section 54AA of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 receive 15 2 of 1934. 
or take on deputation any officer or other employee from any institu-
tion including a housing finance institution for such period and on such 
terms and conditions as it may think necessary in the in teres: of the 
National Housing Bank. 
44. (1) The National Housing Bank shall not, except as otherwise 20 
requh'ed by this Act Or any other law, divulge any information relating 
to, or to the affairs of, its constituents except ,in circtJms~ances in which 
it is, in accordance with the law or practice and usage customary among 
bankers, necessary or appropriate for the National Housing Bank to 
divulge such information. 25 
(2) Every direct')r, member of a committee, auditor, advisor, oiRcer 
or other employee of the National Housing Bank Or of the Reserve 
Bank, whose services are utilised by the National Housing Bank under 
the provisions of this Act, shall, before entering upon his duties, make 
a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in' the First 
Schedule to this Act. 30 
45. (~) No act or proceeding of the Board or of any committee of 
the National Housing Bank shall be questioned on the ground merely 
on the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, 
the Board or the committee as the case may be. , . 
(2) No act done by any person acting in good faith as a director 
of the Board or as a member of a committee of the National Housing 
Bank shall become invalid merely on the ground that he was disquali-
fied to Le a director or that there was any other defect in his appoint-
35 
ment. 40 

17 
46. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the National 
Housing Bank or any director or any offiee·r or o~er employee of the 
National Housing Bank or any other person authorised by the National 
Housing Bank to discharge any functions under this Act for any loss 
5 or damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of thi5 Act or of any 
other law or provision having the force of law. 
47. (1) Every director shall be indemnified by the National Housing 
Bank against all losses and expenses incurred by him in, or in relation 
10 to. the discharge .of his duties, except such as are caused by his own 
wilful act or default. 
(2) A director shall not be responsible for any other director or 
for any officer 01' ,other employee of the Naticmal Housing Bonk or 
for any loss or expenses resulting to the National Housing Bank from 
15 the insufficiency or deficiency of the value of, or title to, any property 
or secu!'ity acquired or taken on behalf of the National Housing Bank 
. or the insolvency or wron~ul act of any debtor or any person under 
obligation to the National Housing Bank or anything done in good 
, faith in the execution of the duties of his office in relation thereto. 
43 of 1961 20 48. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961, 
or any other enactment for the time being in force relating to tax on 
income, profits or gains. the National Housing Bank shall not be liable 
to pay incom~-tax, or any other tax in respect of its income, profits or 
. gains derived. 
25 49. (1) Whoever in any return, balance-sheet. or other document or 
in any information required Or furnished by or under or for the pur-
p:lses of any proviSion of this Act, wilfully makes a statement which 
is false in any material particular, knowing it to be false, or wilfully 
omits to make a material statement, shall be punishable with imprison-
30 ment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
(2) If any person fails to produce any book, account or other docu-
ment, OT to furnish any statement or ~nformation· whioch, under the 
provisions of this Act, it is his duty to produce or furnish, he shaH 
35 be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees 
in respect of each offence and in the case of a continuing failure, with 
Lin additional fine which may extend to one hundred rup.ees for every 
day during which the failure continues after conviction for the first 
such !failure. 
40 (3) If any per san-
(a) receives any deposit /fin contravention of any direction 
gIven or order made under Chapter V; or 
(b) issues any prospectus or· advertisement otherwise than in 
a"cordance with section ·35 or any order made under section 30, as 
45 the case may be; 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
takea 
under 
the Act. 
Indem-
~ty of 
direc-
tors, 
Exemp-
tion 
from 
tax on 
income . 
Penal-
ties. 

Offences 
bycODl-
pBnI.'Ca. 
Cogni-
zance ot 
offences. 
18 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment !for a term which may 
extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend,-
(i) in the case of 18 contravention falling under clause (a), 
to twice the amount of deposit received; and 
(ii) in the caSe of a contravention falling under clause (b), to 5 
twice the amount of the deposit called for by the prospectus or 
advertisement . 
. (4) If any other provision of this Act is contravened or if any 
default is made in compliance with any other requirement of this Act, 
or of any order, regulation, or direction made or given or condition 1_0 
imposed thereunder, any person guilty of 'such contravention or default 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand 
rupees and where a contravention or default is a continuing one with 
further fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day, 
after the first, during which the contravention or default continues. 15 
so. (1) Where an offence has been committed by a company_ every 
person who, at the time the offence 'Was committed, was in· charge of, 
and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business 
of the company, as well as the companY,shall be deemed to be guilty 
of the oftence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 20 
accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves 
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
had eierdsed all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 25 
offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
an offence under this Act has been committed by a compan'y and it 
jg proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
{'~nnivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any 30 
,Jirector. manager. secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director. manager. secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
<tuilt~, llf that offence and shall be liable to be poceeded against and 
punished accordingly. 
F..rplanation.-For the purposes of this section-
(c) "company" means any body corporate and includes a' firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm, 
35 
51. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable 40 
under this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by an officer 
of the National Housing Bank, generally or sp~ially authorised in 
writing in this behalf by the National Housing Bank, and n,o {'ourt 
other than that of a Metrouolitan Magistrat,e or a Judicial Mag;st":''lte of 
the first class or a court superior thereto shall try any such offence. 4S 

19 
• (2) NotwiUutanding anything contained in th~ Code 01 Criminal 
2 of 1974. Procedure, 1973, a Magistrate may, if he sees reason so to do, dispense 
with the personal attendance of the· officer of the National Housing 
Bank filing the complaint but the Magistrate may in his discretion, at 
5 any stage of the proceedings, direct the ~rsonal attendance of the 
complainant. 
10 
52. A court imposing any fine under this Act may direct that the 
whole or any part thereof shall be applied in, or towards payment of, 
tt,e cost of the proceedings. 
53. The Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891, shall apply in relation to 
the National Housing Bank as if it were a bank as defined in section 
2 of that Act. 
54. No provision of law relating to the winding up of companies shall 
15 apply to the National Housing Bank and the National Housing Bank 
shall not be placed in liquidation save by order of the Central Govern-
ment ann in such manner as it may direct. 
55. (1) The Board may, with the previous. approval of the Refierve 
Bank and in consultation with the Central Government, by notification, 
make regulations not inconsistent with this Act to provide for all 
20 matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpo~e 
of giving effect to the proviSions of this Act. 
30 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of~the fore-
going power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, nal'l1:ely:-
(a) the fees and allowances that may be paid to the directors 
for attending the meetings of the Board or its committees under 
sub-section (5) of section 7; 
(b) . the times and places at which the Board maX meet, and 
the rules of procedure that may be followed in regard to the transac-
tion of business under sub-section (1) of section 11; 
(c) the number of members that the Executive Committee may 
consist, the functions that it may discharge and times and places 
at which it shall me. and the rules of procedure that it may follow 
in the transaction of business under section 12; 
35 (4) the manner and terms of issue and redemption of bonds ani 
debentures under clause (a) of sub-Section (1) of section 15; 
(e) the manner· in which and the conditions subject to which 
the National Housing Bank .may borrow in foreign currency under 
sub-section (1) of section HI; 
App:ica-
tion of 
fine. 
Banker,,' 
Books 
Evidence 
Act, 
18 Of 
1091, to 
apply ill 
relation 
to Na-
tional 
Housing 
Bank .. 
Liquida· 
tion of 
National 
Housing 
Bank. 
Power of 
the 
Board to 
make 
regula-
tions. 

Amend-
ment of 
certain 
enact-
ments. 
Power to 
remove 
diffi· 
culties. 
20 
(f) the form in which the statements, information etc. is to be 
furnished under section 32; 
(g) the special fund, reserve fund and other funds to be creat-
ed under sub-section (2) of section 37; 
(h) the form and manner in which the balance-sheet and 5 
accounts shall be prepared· and maintained under sub-section (1) 
of section 38; and 
(i) the duties and conduct, salaries, allowances and conditions 
of servi~ of the officers and other members 0f staff of the National 
Housing Bank under section 43; ](I 
(j) the establishment and maintenance of provident fund and 
any other fund for th~ benefit of officers and other members of staff 
of the National Housing Bank under section 43; and 
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Any regulation which may be made by the Board under this Act 15 
may be made by the Reserve Bank, in consultation with the Central 
Gove~nment, before the expiry of three months from the date of estab-
lishment of the National Housing Bank, and any regUlation so made 
may be altered and rescinded by the Board in the exercise of its powers 
under this Act. . 
(4) The power to make regulations conferred by this section shall 
include the power to give retrospective effect to the regulations or any 
20 
of them from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this 
Act, but no retrospective effect shall be given to any regulation so as to 
p.rejudicially affect the interests of any petson to whom such regulation 25 
may be applicable. 
(5) The Central Government shall cause every regulation made 
under this Act to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House"of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or' more 30 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid~ both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the regulation or bo1fu Houses 
agree that the regulat!on should not be made, the regulation shl:!oll there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 35 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
ue wi1 haut prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that regulation. 
56. The uactments specified in the Second Scheduled to this Act shall 
be amended in the manner provided therein and unless otherwise pro- 40 
vided in that Schedule. such amendments shall take effect on and from 
the date or establishment of the National Housing Bank under section 3. 
57. If any difficulty arises. in giving effect to the p.rovisions .of this 
Act. the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Ad, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of . a 
period oi three years from the commencement of this Act. 
45 

21 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 44 (2)] 
DEcLARATION OF FlDJI:L1TY' AND SECRl!lCY 
I,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. do pereby declare that I will iaithfully, 
S,trully and to the best of my skill and ability execute and perform the 
duties required of me as director, member of the ................... . 
committee, auditor, advisor, officer or other employee (as the case may 
be) of the National Housing Bank and which properly relate to t.he 
office or position held by me in or in relation to the said National Hous-
10 ing Bank. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be com-
municated to any person not legally entitled thereto any iniormation 
relating to the affairs of the National Housing Bank nor will I allow 
any such persOn to inspect or have access to any books or documents 
15 belonging to or in the possession of the National Housing Bank and r'e-
lating to the business of the said National Housing Bank or the business 
of any person having any dealing with the said National Housing Bank. 
20 
Sign;::!d before me. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 56) 
AMENDMENlS TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS 
PART I 
(Slignature) 
AMENDMENTS TO THE REsERVE BANK OF INDIA AI:r, 1934 
25 (2 OF 1934) 
AMENDMENTS 
1. In 'section 2, after clause (ccc), the following clause shall be in-
serted, namely:-' ! 
"(ecce) 'National Housing 'Bank' means the National Housing 
30 B,,~ established under flection 3 of the National Housing BallkAct, 
~9&7;" ~ 
3S 
40 
·45 
2. In section 11,-
(i) after clause (W), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(4DD) the making to the National Housing Bank of loami 
and advances and g,eneraliy assisting the National Housing Bank 
in such' manner and on such terms as may be determined by 
the Central Board;"; 
(ii) after clause (4G), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(4GG) the making of loans and advances to, and the 
purchasing of bonds and debentures of, the National Housing 
Bank out of the National Housing Credit (Long Term Opera-
tions) Fund established under section 46:.0;"; . 
(iii) after clause (8A) , the following claUSe shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(8AA) the promoting, establishing, supporting or aiding in 
the pramotion,establish.p:lent and support of any financial insti-
tution, whether as its subsidiary or otherwise;". 

National 
Housinl 
Credit 
(Long 
Term 
Opera-
tions) 
Fund. 
22 
3. In the Explanation: to sub-section (1) of section 42 in su~lause 
(ii) of clause (c), after the words "or from the Reconst~ction Bank", 
the words "or from the National Housing Bank" shall be inserted. 
4. Aftez4 section 46C, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:- 5 
"46D. (1) The Bank shall establish and maintain a Fund 1.0 be 
known as the National Housing Credit (Long Term Operations) 
Fund to which shall be credited every year such sums of money as 
it may consider necessary. 
(2) The amount in the said Fund shall be applied by the Bank 10 
only to the following objects, namely:-
(a) the making to the National Housing Bank of loans a»d 
advances for the purpose of any business of the National Housing 
Bank; 
(b) the purchasing of bonds and debentures issued by the IS 
National Housing Bank.". 
PART n 
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANlONG Rl:GULATION ACT, 1949 
(10 or IIM9) 
~ 
1. In section 5, after clause (ftc), the follOwing clause shall be insert-
ea, namely:-
'(ffd) "National Housing Bank" means the National Housing 
Bank established under section 3 of the National Housing Bank 
20 
Act, 1987;'. 2S 
2. In sub-section (1) of section 18, in the, Explanation, in suD-clause 
(ii) of clause (a) ,after the words "or from the Reconstruction Bank", 
the words "or from the National Housing Bank" shall be inserted. 
3. In section MA, in sub-section (3). after the words "the Reconstruc-
tion Bank", the words "the National HOUSing Bank" shall be inserted. 30 
4. In section 36AD, in sub-section (3), after the word. "the Recons-
truction Bank", the words "the National Housing Bank" shall be inserted. 
5. In section 56, the clause (1), in the Explanation, in sub-clause (ii) 
of clause (a), after the words "the Reconstruction Bank", the words "the 
National Housing Bank" shall be inserted. 35 
PART III 
AMENDMENT TO THE INDUSTRIAL DIsPUTFS Acr, 1947 
(14 OF' 1947) 
AMENDMENT 
In section 2, in clause (a), after the words "the Industrial Recons- 40' 
truction Bank of India", the words and figures "the National Housing 
Bank e~tab1ished under section 3 of the National HousIng Bank Act, 
1987" shall be inserted. 

23 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 44 .(2)] 
DECLARATIoN' OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY 
I, .................... , do hereby declare that I will faithfully, 
5 truly and to the best of my skill and ability execute and perform the 
.duties· required of me as director, member of the ..................... . 
comffiittee, auditor, advisor, officer or other employee (as the case may 
be) of the National Housing Bank and which properly relate to the 
. office or position held by me in or in relation to the said National Hou. 
10 tng Bank. 
PART IV 
AMENDMENT TO THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965 
(21 OF 1965) 
.AMENDMENT 
15 In section 32, after sub-clause (f) of clause (ix), the following sub-
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"Uf) the National Housing Bankj". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Housing is a basic need and serves to ful1il the fundamental objective 
of providlng shelter. The existing institutional framework for providing 
.oUBing finance is yet to develop fully. It is, therefore, necessary to create 
a housing finance structure through establishzn~nt of appropriate institu-
.tions at various levels which would mobilise resources and promote 
housing activity. , ~ 
2. A high level group which looked into the problem, reconunended 
that a National Housing Bank be established as an apex housing financial 
institution to function as the principal agency for the promotion of"housing 
finance institutions at various levels, to co-ordinate the activities of these 
institutions, to promote modilisation of resources for housing and to 
extend financial support to the housing finance institutions. 
3. The Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of a National 
Housing Bank with a view to giving effect to the aforementioned recom-
mendations of the high level group. In addition, the National Housing 
Bank will also play a role in the formulation of policies designed to pro-
mote housing in the country and provide guide-lines for the working of 
all the agencies connected with housing. 
4. The Notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain the provisions 
of the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 20th August, 1987. 
NARAYAN DATI' TIWARI, 
PRESIDENTS RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 7 (6) /87..cP, dated the 21st August, 1987 from 
Shri Narayan Datt Tiwari, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-GeneraI, 
Lok Sabha.l 
The President, having been infonned of the subject matter of the 
propdsed National Housing Bank Bill, 1987, recommends the introduc-
tion of the Bill in Lok Sabha under articles 117 (1) and 274 (1) of the 
Constitution and its consideration by Lok Sabha under article 117 (3) 
thereof. 

Notes on clauses 
ClIause 2. defines the expressions used in the Bill. 
Clause 3 provides for the establishment of the National Housing 
Bank and its offices, branches and agencies. 
Clause 4 provides fot the capital of the National Housing Bank, which 
will initially be one hundred crores of rupees and the same may be in-
creased up to five hundred crores of rupees by the Central Government 
in consultation with the Reserve Bank. The entire capital be .subscribed 
by the Reserve Bank. 
Clauses 5 and 6 provides fot the management of ~ 'National Housbg 
Bank and for the vesting of the affaIrS and busineM of that Bank in a 
Board of Directors. The BOard Will have apart from other directors, two 
directors to be nominated by the Reserve Bank. There will also be a 
representation from experts in the fteld of housing. architecture, en-
gineering, sociology, finance, law, etc. 
ClaU8es 7, 8 aM 9 provide for the term of office of Chairman, Manag-
ing Director and other directors and their service conditions, their dis-
qualifications and vacation and resignation of oftice. 
Clause 10 provides for the filling up of casual vacancy in the office of 
the Chairman or Managfng Director. 
Clause 11 provides for the meetings of the Board and observance of 
l"ules of procedure in this regard. 
CLause 12 provides for the constitution of an Executive Committee 
and such other comnilttees for sueb. purposes as the Board may decide. 
Clause 13 p.t'ovides that a Member of the Board or Committee. not to 
participa~e in meetings in certain: cases. 
Clause 14 gives details of the business to be transacted by the Natio-
na] Housing Bank. 
The primary re$ponsibility of· the National Housing Bank will be to 
promote regiOnal and local level houBing finance institutions with the 
object of mobilising resources fot' financing housing construction. It will , 
provide capital as also professional expertise and support in the initial 
years to new institutions to be set up at the local. level. Co-o»dination 'of 
the activities of the housing finance· institutions and other agencies con-
Reeted with housing wUl be one of its 4nportant functions.. To provide 
guarantee and linder-writing facilities to housing finance institutions in 
keeping with the apex role contempla~ for it would be another acti-
vity of the Natiol'Ull. Housing Bank. The National Housing Bank will . 
formulate schemes for mobilising resources and extending credit for 
2S 

26 
housing including that for the economically weaker sections of the society 
which may be supported by subsidies from the Central or any of the 
State Government or any other source. It will need to maintain c!0;i8 
liaison with the Life Insurance Corporation of India. Unit Trust of India, 
General Insurance Corporation of India and other financial institutions, 
which lend significant financiaJ. support to the existing housing finance 
institutions. The National Housing Bank will also undertake studies, 
research and surveys relating to shelter, housing, construction techniques 
etc., and to prOvide technical and administrative assistance to housing 
finance institutions. 
Clause 15 enables the National Housing Bank to borrow from the 
open market through the issue of bonds and debentures whether guar-
anteed by the Central Government or not. It also provides for borrow-
ings from the Central Government and other institutions approved 
by that Government and to accept deposits of long-term duration. Be-
sides, it wU1 be entitled to short-term accommodation from the Reserve 
Bank. It can also avall of long-term loans out of the National Housing 
Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund to be established by the Reserve 
. Bank, for the purpose of any business by the National Housing Bank. 
This clause also enables the National Housing Bank to accept gifts, grants 
and donations or benefactions from Government or any other source. 
Clause 16 enables the National Housing Bank. to borrow in foreign 
currency with the prior approval of tr.e Central Government and sets 
out the procedure to be follOwed for grant of loans and advances by the 
National Housing Bank out of the foreign currency borrowings and for 
booking of the loss or profit in connection therewith. 
Clauses 17 and 18 enable the National Housing B~ to transfer or 
acquire the rights and interests in relation to any loan or advance granted 
by it or by any other Housing finance institution. 
Clnuse 19 provides that while entering into any transaction under 
Chapter IV with a borrowing institution, the National Housing Bank 
may Impose such conditions as it may deem necessary for protecting the 
interests as also to achieve the objectives of this Bill. 
Cla'USe 20 provides for the circumstances which the National Housing 
Bank may call for repayment of any loan or advance before the due date 
fOT its repayment. 
C1a.'USe 21 provides that the National Housing Bank shall have free 
access to all the records of a borrowing institution which may be consi-
dered ne-::essary in connection with providing financial or other 
assistance. 
Clause 22 provides that the validity of the loans and advances ex-
tended by the National Housing Bank shall not be questioned merely on 
the ground of non-compUance with any requirements ot any resolution, 
contract, etc., but nothing in this clause shall render valid any loan or 
advance obtained by any company or co-operative aociety where the 
said company or co-operative society is not empowered by ita memor· 
andom to obtain loans or advances. ; . :',l'I'n 
Clause 23 provides that the National Housing Bank shall not grant 
loans or advances on the security af its own bonds and debentures. 

27 
Clause 24 empowers the National Housing Bank to inspect at its own 
instance or on the direction of the Reserve Bank, the books and accounts 
of any housing finance institution to which it has extended financial assis-
tance of whatsoever nature and. make it obligatory for the National Hous-
ing Bank to :furnish a copy of its inspection report to the institution 
concerned. It also casts an obligation on the officers and other employees 
of the housing finance institutions to produce to the inspecting officer all 
books and accounts and other documents as also to furnish any state-
ment and information a8 may be required within the time specified by 
him. 
Clause 25 empowers the National, Housing Bank to collect credit 
information from the Musing finance institutioIUI relating to loans and 
advances and other credit facilities granted, nature of security taken 
therefor, guarantees furnished and any information having a bearing on 
the borrower's credit worthiness and casts an obligation on the housing 
finance institutions to turn:ish credit information sought by the National 
Housing Bank. 
Clause 26 enables the National Housing Bank to publish the credit 
information or any other information obtained by it under this Act, in 
any form as it thinks fit. 
Clause 27 deals with advisory services which the National Housing 
Bank may provide to the Central and State Governmer1ts, local autho-
rities and other agencies connected with housing, in regard to formula-
tion of policies aimed,.at promoting the growth of housing and housing 
finance institutions as also matters having a bearing on shelter, housing 
and human settlement. 
ClaUBe 28 definies the term 'deposit in Chapter V. 
Clause 29 provides that the Chapter relating to receiving of deposita 
shall not apply to firms and unincorporated associations of individuals 
but they will continue to be governed by the provisions of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934 in this regard. 
Clauses 30 to 32 provid for conferring of powers on the, National Hou-
sing Bank to regulate various activities of housing finance institutions in 
accordance with the acceptance of deposits from the public. These would 
cover the amount of the deposits, the purposes and periods for which, 
and the rates of interest and other terms and conditions on which, they 
are received. ' 
Clause 33 provides for audit of accounts of the housing finance institu-
tions which have accepted deposits and casts on an auditor of a housing 
finance institution a duty to ensure compliance of the requirements like 
furnishing information, statements or particulars to the National Hou~ 
ing Bank regarding the deposits held by the housing finance institutions. 
Clause 34 empowers the, National Housing Bank to cause an inspection 
to be made of any housing finance institution accepting deposits for veri-
fying the correctness or completeness of any information furnished by it 
or for ensuring compliance by' it of any of its obligations under this Bill 
Clause 35 prohibits soliciting of deposits by unauthorised persons. 
Clause 36 enables the provisions of Chapter V to override other laws. 
Clause 37 provides for the establishment of a General Fund and . such 
other fund or funds as the Board may consider necessary, or if so 
directed by the Reserve Bank. 

Clause 38 proVlde.:; for the preparation of balance-sheet and accounts 
of the National Housing Bank in a !orm and manner prescdb,ed by tl:.e 
regulationf' made under clat!se 54. 
Claruse 39 provides that aft~ mijkmg ;pn>VlSl.()tlll f<>r bad and 
doubtful debts, depreciation of assets and all other matters for which 
proviBion~ is necessary or expedient or which is uauaUy provided by 
banker&. the surplus funds for the first fifteen yean foUowing the 
accounting year during which the National Housing Bank was established 
shall be transferred to the General Fund or such other funds which the 
Reserve Bank has specified and that after the expiry of fifteen years the 
balanc~ of surplus shall be transferred to the Reserve Bank. 
Cla.UBe 40 provides for the audit of the accounts of the National 
Housing Bank by an auditor to be appointed by the Reserve Bank. 
Clause 41 provides for the National Housing Bank to furnish such 
Teturns as the Reserve Bank may require. 
Clause 42 makes it obligatory for the National Housing Bank to make 
an annual report to the Reserve Bank on the trend and progress of hous-
ing in the country. 
Clause 43 provides for the staff of the Natibltll\ Housing Bank 
01a.use 44 provides that the directors, Members of Committees, auditors, 
adVisers, officers and other emplayees of the National Housing Bank 
alIall znake a _laration of fidallity and secrecy in the fonn set out in 
tke !'tnt Schedule. 
Clau.se 45 provides that any defects in appointments, etc., shall not 
i~vwdate acts of the Board or its Committees. 
Ctat4se 4G re~~s ~o pro~ection of a<:tion taken in good faith. 
Clau,se 47 seeks to ind~nify the cli,~tprs of th,~ Natio~l Housing 
Bank against all losses and expenses incurred by them in, or ~n relation 
to, the discharge of their duties other than those caused by their own 
wilful acts or defaults. 
C4£use 48 provides for exemption of the National Housing Bank from 
payment of income-tax and all other taxes On inoome.proftts or gains 
and on t'le lines of Similar exemption given to the Reserve Bank of India, 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, Industrial Deve-
lopment B8nk of India and Export-Import Bank of India. 
Cklu.cre 49 provides for penaltie~ for making false statements in any 
returns, balance-sheet or ~ther documents furnished to the National 
Rousing ~nk or for failure to produce books, accounts or ather docu-
~~nts required by the National Housing Bank. It also provides for 
penalties for contraventions of the provisions of Chapter V or of any 
direction or order under that Chapter. 

29 
Clause 50 provides for the responsibilities of the companies and their 
directors. etc .• and the cozmequences of any failure in this regard. 
C1.a:use 51 provides for the cognizance of the offences. 
Clause 52 provides that a court imposing any fine under this Act may 
direct that the whole or any part thereof shall be applied in, or towarda 
payment of tl-.e costs of the proceedings. 
Clause 53 provides for the application of the Bankers' Books Evidence 
Act, 1891 in relation to the National HOUSing Bank. 
Cbause 54 deals with the liqUidation of the National aousing Bank 
and provides that the National Housing Bank shall not be placed in liqui-
dation, save by an order or the Central Government and in such manner 
as it may Oirect. 
Clause 55 seeks to empower the Board of Directors of the National 
Housing Bank, with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank and in 
consultation with the Central Government to make regulations includ-
ing retrospectively, for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of 
the Bill. It has also been provided that the Central Government shall 
cause every regulation made before the Houses of Parliament. 
Clause 56 seeks to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949. the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the 
Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, in tbe manner set out in the Second 
Schedule. 
Clause 57 provides for removal of difficulties. 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
The First Schedule gives the form for making the declaration of fide-
lity and secrecy. 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
PART I 
AMENDMENTS TO THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT. 1934 
One amendment provides for the Reserve Bank making loans and 
advances to and generally assisting the National Housing Bank in these 
matters. 
One of tt..e amendments enables the Reserve Bank to promote, estab-
lish, support or aid in promoting, establishing or supporting any financial 
institution, as its subsidiary or qtherwise. This amendment would enable 
th~ Reserve Bank to promote the National Housing Bank its wholly 
owned subsidiary. Another amendment provides for the Reserve Bank 
establishing and maintaining a fund known as the National Housing Credit 
(Long Term Operations) Fund and to which the Reserve Bank will also 
make an annual contribution. The amendments also provide for making 

30 
loans and advances to and the purchasing of bonds and debentures of~ 
the National Housing Bank out of the National Housing Credit (Long 
Term Operations) Fund. 
The other amendments are mainly consequential to the setting up of 
the National Housing Bank. 
PART II 
AMENDMENTs TO THE BANKING REGULATION AcT, 1949 
The amendments to the Banking Regulation Act. 1949 ensure that:-
(i) the National Housing Bank is not compelled by any autho-
. rity to give inspection of any of its books of accounts or other docu-
ments or furnish or disclose any statement of information. when it 
claims that such documents, statement or information is of a confi-
dential nature; 
• 
(ii) a person is penalised who may,-
(a) obstruct any person from lawfully entering or leaving 
any office or place of business there. or 
(b) hold, within the office or place of business of National 
Housing Bank any demonstration which viola~s or which pre-
vents or which is calculated to prevent the transaction of nor-
mal business by the National Housing Bank. 
Other amendments are mainly consequential to the setting up of the 
National Housing Bank. 
PARTS III AND IV 
AMENDMENTS TO T!IE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES Acr, 1947 AND THE PAYMENT 
OF BONUS AI::.T. 1965 
These are consequential. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 14 (i) provides for formulation of schemes by the National 
Housing Bank for the economically weake.r sections of the society which 
may be supported by the subsidy contributed by the Central Government. 
The extent of subsidy would depend upon the allocation made by the 
Central Government in that behalf from time to time as also the number 
and nature of the scheme, by the National Housing Bank involving sub-
sidy the exact quantum of which cannot be anticipated at this stage. 
2. Clause 15 (1) (b) empowers the National Housing Bank to borrow 
money from Cent.ral Government. Clause 15 (1) (f) empowers the 
National Housing Bank to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions 
from the Central Government. It is not possible at this stage to visua-
lize the amounts that the Central Government may make· available to 
the National Housing Bank under claUSe 15 (1) (b) and (f). 
3. Clause 15 (2) read with clause 15 (1) (a) provides that the Central 
Government may on a reque-st made by the National Housing Bank, 
guarantee the bonds and debentures issued by the Bank as to the re-
payment of principal and payment of interest at such rate as may be 
fixed by that Government. The extent of this contingent liability will 
depend upon 'the size of the market borrowings of the National Housing 
Bank and the exact quantum of which would be known only after the 
Bank has started functioning. 
4. Clause 16 (2) envisages guarantee by the Central Government for 
the borrowings by the National Housing Bank in foreign currency. This 
guarantee involves liability of a contingent nature and the extent of 
such liability, if any, wqllld be known only after the Bank has started 
functioning. 
5. Clause 16 (4) (b) (ii) provides that in certain circumstances the loss 
or profit in connection with any borrowing of foreign currency under sub-
clause (1) shall be reimbursed by, or paid to the Central Govern-
ment. It is not possible to visualize at this stage the ,quantum of such 
loss or profit which may have to be reimbursed by or paid fa the Central 
Government. 
6. No other provisions of the Bill involves any ether expenditure of 
recurring or non-recurring nature from and out of the Consolidated Fund 
of India. 
31 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 55 of the Bill confers on the Board of the 
National Housing Bank power to make regulations, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank and in 
consultation with the Central Government. Sub-clause (2) of that clause 
spec~fies matters which such regulations may provide for. These include. 
among other things, fees and allowances that may be paid to the Direc-
tors for att~nding the meetings of the Board or its committees; the times 
and places at which the Board may meet and the rules of procedure 
that may' be followed in regard to the transaction of business; the number 
of Members that the Executive Committee may consist, the functions 
that may ;be discharged, the times and places at which it will meet and 
the rules of procedure that may follow; the special fund, the reserve 
fund and other funds to be created; the form and manner in which the 
balance-sheets and accounts may be prepared and maintained; the man-
ner and terms of i~ue and redemption of bonds and debentures; the 
manner in which and the conditions subject to which the National 
Housing Bank may borrow in foreign currency; the form in which the 
statements, information etc. is to be furnished; the dutieo; and conduct. 
salaries.. allowances and other conditions of service of officers etc.: and 
the establishment and maintenance of provident fund and other funds. 
2. Sub-clause (4) of clause 55 empowers the Board to make regula-
tions in respect of the above matters with retrospective effect from a date 
not earlier. than the date of commenecement of the Act. This power is 
mbject to safeguard that no retrospective efTect shall be given to any 
regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interest of any person to whom 
such regulation may be applicable. Clause 57 of the Bill empowers the 
Centra' Government to remove by order any difficul'y which mav arise 
in ~ving effect the provisions of ~he leiislation, ani this power is 
limitei to three. years. This is by way (\f abundant caution and for 
covering difficulties which it is not practicable to visualize. 
As the matter with respect of which under clause 55 pertain t.') matters 
'.)f procedu.re or detail as the making of re.gu'ations with retrospective 
eftect is subje::t to the safeguard aforementl(\ned and the ma~ters witb 
regard to which under c~ause 7 pertain to matters which it is not 
practicable to visualize at this stage, the delegation of legislative power 
is of a normal character. 
32 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRAcr FROM THE REsERvE BANK OF INDIA 4CT, 1934 
(2 OF 1934) 
• • • • • 
42. (1) Every bank included in the Second Schedule shall maintain 
with the Bank an average daily balance the amount of which shall not 
be less than three per cent. of the total of the demand and time liabili-
ties in India of such bank as shown in the return referred to· in sub-
sectIOn (2): 
Provided that the Bank may, by notification in Gazette of India, 
increase the said rate to such higher rate as may be specified in the 
notification so however that the rate shall not be more than fifteen pe" 
cent. of the total of the demand and time liabilities. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
* • ... ... • 
(c) "liabilities" shall not include--
... ... • ... ... 
(ii) the amount of any loan taken from the Bank or from 
the Development Bank or from the Exim Bank or from the 
Reconstruction Bank or from the National Bank; 
... ... ... • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949 
(10 OF 1949) 
* • ... ... • 
18. (1) Every banking company, not being a scheduled bank, shall 
maintain in India by way of cash reserve with itself or by way of 
balance in a current account with the Reserve Bank or by way of net 
balance in current accounts or in one or more of the aforesaid ways. 
a sum equivalent to at least three per cent. of the total of its demand 
and time liabili.ties in India as on the last Friday of the second preced-
ing (ortmght and ~hall submit to the Reserve Bank before the twentieth 
day of every month a return showing the amount so held on alternate 
Friday!> during a month with particulars of its demand and time liabili-
ties in India on such Fridays or if any such Friday is a public holiday 
under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, at the close of business on 
the preceding working day. 
E.rplanation.-In this section, and in section 24,-
(a) "liabilities in India" shall not include-
'" • • • • 
(iil) any advance taken trom the Reserve Bank or from the 
Development Bank or from the Exim Bank or from the Recon-
struction Bank or from the National Bank by the banking 
company; 
• .. • ... • 
33 
Cash 
reserves 
of 
scheduled 
banks 
to be 
kept 
with 
the 
Bank. 
Cash 
reserves 

Produc-
tion of 
documents 
of confid-
ential na-
ture. 
Punish-
ments for 
certain 
activi-
ties in 
relation 
to 
banking 
companies. 
Act to 
apply to 
coopera-
tive socie-
ties subject 
to modifi-
cations. 
Cash 
reserves 
34 
MA. (1) ... ... ... ... • 
(3) For the pur.\>oses of this section "banking company" includes the 
Reserve Bank, the bevelopment Bank, the Exim Bank, the Reconstruction 
Bank, the National Bank, the State Bank of India, a corresponding new 
bank, a regional rural bank and a subsidiary bank . 
... ... 
36AD. (1) • ... 
... 
... 
... 
... • • 
(3) For the purposes of this section "banking company" includes the 
Reserve Bank, the Development Bank, the Exim Bank, the Reconstruction 
Bank, the National Bank, the State Bank of India, a corresponding new 
bank, a regional rural bank and a subsidiary bank. . 
... * * ... ... 
56. The provisions of this Act" as in force for the time being, !Bhall 
apply to, or in relation to, co-operative societies as they apply 11;0, or in 
relation to, banking companies subject to the following modifications, 
namely:-
(j) for section 18, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
18. (1) Every co-operative bank, not being a State co-operative 
hank for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as a "sche-
duled State Co-operative Bank"), shall maintain in India by way 
of cash reserve! with itself or by way of balance in a current ac-
count with the Reserve Bank Or the State co-operative bank of the 
State concerned or by way of net balance in current accounts. or. 
in the case of a primary co-operative bank, with the cental co-
operative bank of the district concerned, or in one or more of thi-
aforesaid ways, a sum equivalent to at least three per cent of the 
total of its demand and time liabilities in India. as on the last Fri-
day of the second preceding fortnight and shall submi.t to the 
Reserve Bank before the fifteenth day of every month a return 
showing the amount so held on alternate Fridays during a month 
with particulars of its demand and time liabilit!es in India on such 
Fridays or if any such Friday is a public holiday under the Nego-
tjable Instruments Act, 1881, at the close of business on the preced-
jng working day. 
Explanation.-In this section and in section 24-
(a) "liabilitiC!$ in India" shall not include--
• 
• 
* • ... • 
(13) any advance taken from a State .Government, 
the Reserve BaI'lk, the Development· Bank; the. Ex~m 
Bank, .the Reconstruction Bank, the National Bank or 
from the National Co-operative Development Gorpora-
tion established under section 3 of the National Co-
opertive Development Corporation Act, 1962 by the co-
operative bank; 
• • • • 

lj of 194R. 
15 of 1941<. 
34 lIf 1948. 
4h of 1941( 
19 of 1952. 
'27 of 19.53. 
11 of 1956. 
43 of 1959. 
4701 1'161. 
5H of 1962. 
.52 of 196.1. 
37 of 1964. 
43 of 1971. 
21 or 1976. 
EXTRACT Jo'ROM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
(14 OF 1947) 
• • • • • 
Dcfini· 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or lions. 
context,-
(a) "appropriate Government" means-
(i) in relation to any industrial dispute concernin2 any 
industry carried on by Or under the authority of the Central 
Government, or by a railway company or concerning any such 
controlled industry as may be specified in this behalf by the 
Central Government or in relation to an industrial dispute con-
cerning a Dock Labour Board 'established under section 5A of 
the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948, or 
the Industrial Finance' Corporation of India established under 
section 3 of the Industrial Finance Corporat:on Act. 1948, or 
the Employees' State .Insurance Corporation established un.del' 
section 3 of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, or the 
Board of Trustees constituted under section 3A of the Coal 
Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948, 
or the Central Board of Trustees and the State Boards of 
Trustees constituted under section 5A and section 5B, respec-
tively, of the Employees' Provident Fund and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, .1952, or the "Indian Airlines" and "Air India" 
Corporations established under section 3 of the Air Corpora-
tions Act, 1953, or the Life Insurance Corporation of India 
established under section 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation 
Act, 1956, or the Oil and Natural Gas Commission established 
under section 3 of the Oil and Natural Gas Commission Act, 
1959, or the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corpora-
tion established under section 3 of the Deposit Insurance and 
Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961, or the Central Ware-
hOUSing Corporation established under section 3 of the Ware-
housing Corporations Act, 1962, or the Unit Trust of India 
established under section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963, 
or the Food Corporation of India established under section 3. 
or a Board of Management establishment for two or "l1ore 
contiguous Slates under section 16, of the Food Corporations 
Act, 1964, or the International Airports Authority of India con-
stituted under section 3 of the International Airports Authority 
of India Act, 1971, or a Regional Rural Bank established under 
section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, or the Export 
Credit and Guarantee Corporation Limited or the Industrial 
Reconstruction Bank of India . 
• • • • • 
35 