DiU No. ,I of 1'51. 
THE PAYMENT OF WAGES (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LOK SABRA) 

10 
IS 
Bm No. 21 of 1957. 
TIm PAYMENT OF WAGES (AMENDMEN1j BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoB: SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Payment of Wage, Act, 1938. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Wages (Amend- Soon title 
ment) Act, 1957. and com-mencement· 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 1 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (hereinafter. Amendment 
referred to as the principal Act),- of Icc:tion .1 I. 
(i) in sub-section (5), for the words "the Act",! the words 
41thls Act" shall be substitutecl; and 
(ti) in sub-section (6), for the words "two hundred rupees", 
the words "four hundred rupees" shall be substituted. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act.- Amof .~ent -... .. onz. 
(0 for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:- . 
C (i) "factory" means a factory as defined in clause (m) 
of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948;'; 
(ii) in clause (ii)-
(1) for item (c), the following item shall be ,ubstitu-
2G ted, namely:-
U (c) inlaIld vessel, mechanically propelled;"; 

z 
(Z) after item (fl, the followlng item Mall be wert4Ml, 
namely:-
"(g) establishment in which any work relating to 
the construction, development or maintenance of 
buildings, roads, bridges or canals, or relating to opera- 5 
tions connected with navigation, irrigation or. the supply 
of water, or relating to the generation, transmission 
and distribution of electricity or any other form of 
power is being carried on;"; and 
(iii) for clause (ui) , the following clause shall b. eubftitu- 10 
ted, namely:-
I (vi) "wages" means all remuneration (whether by way 
of salary, allowances or otherwise) expressed in terms of 
money or capable of be~so expressed which would, if 
the terms of employment, express or implied, were fuIfUled, IS 
be payable to a person employed in respect of bis employ-
ment or of work done in such employment, and includes-
(a) any remuneration payable under any award or 
settlfmlentbetween the parties or order of a court; 
(b) any remuneration to which the petlaD~o 
employed. is entitled in respect of over time work or 
holidays or any leaveperlOd; 
(e) any additional remuneration payable under 
the terms of employment (whether ealled a bonus or 
by any other name); 2$ 
(d) any sum which by reason of the termination 
of employment of the person employed is payable 
under any law, contract or instrUment which provides 
for the payment of such sum, whether with or without 
deductions, but does not provide for the time within 30 
which the payment is to be made; 
(e) any sum to which the person employed is 
entitled under any scheme framed under . any lew for 
the time being in force; 
but does not include- 3S 
(1) any bonus (whether under a scheme of "profit 
sharing or otherwise) . which does not form part of the 
remuneration payable under the terms of employment 
'or which is not payable under any award or settlement 
between the parties or order of a court; 40 

s 
10 
IS 
3 
(Z) the value of any house-accommodation, or of 
the supply of light, water, medical attendance or other 
lIDlerllty or of any service excluded from the computa-
tion of wages by a general or special order of the State 
Government; 
(3) any contribution paid by the employer to any 
peD8ion or provident fund, and the interest which may 
Move accrued thereon; 
(4) any travelling allowance or the value of any 
travelling concession; 
(5) any sum paid to the employed person to defray 
special expenses entailed on him by the nature of hi8 
employme~t; or . 
(6) any gratuity payable on the termination of 
employment in cases other than those specified in sub-
clause {d).'. 
,. In section 3 of the principal Act, in clause (a) of the proviso, Ameodmellt 
for the words, brackets, letter and figures "clause (e) of sub- ofsection 3. 
z, of 1934. section (1) of section 9 of the Factories Act, 1934", the words, 
20 brackets, letter and figures "clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 
63 of 19.... 7 of the . Factories Act, 1948" shall be substituted. 
5. In 'SeCtion 7 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
of aection 7. 
(i) in sub-section (1), the Explanation .shall be re-numbered 
as Explanation 1, and after the Explanation as so re-numbered, 
2S the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:-
30 
35 
·'Exp14nation n.-Any loss of wages resulting from the 
imposition, ior good and sufficient cause, upon a perion em-
ployed of any of the following penalties, namely:-
(i) the withholding of increment or promotion 
(including the stoppage of increment at an efficiency 
bar) ; 
(ii) the reduction to a lower poet or time scale or to 
• lower stage in a time scale; or 
(iii) suspension; 
shall not be deemed to be a deduction from wages in any 
case where the rules framed by the employer for the im-
position of any such penalty are in conformity with the 
requirements, if ;any, which may be specified in this behalf 
by the State Government by notification in th~ Official 
Guette."; 

AlBendJ'llen t 
of lectiOl1 
I". 
Amendment 
of .cctlon 
17· 
-'~ ............... . 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for clause (d), the following clause 
.hall be substituted, namely:-
" (d) deductions for house-accommodation supplied. by 
the employer or by Government or any housing board set 
up under any law for the time being in force (whether the 5 
Government or the board is the employer or not) or any 
other authority engaged in the business of subsidising house-
accommodation which may be specified in this behalf by 
the State Government by notification in the OfBclal Gazette;"; 
and 10 
(iii) for clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(k) deductions, made with the written authorisation 
of the person employed for payment of any premium on hit 
life insurance policy to the Life Insurance Corporation of 
India established under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 15 
1956, or for the purchase of securities of the Government of 31 of 1956. 
India or of any State Government or for being deposited in 
any Post Office Savings Bank in furtherance of any savings 
scheme of any such Government;". 
•. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the 20 
words, brackets and figures "sub-section (1) of s~on 10 of .the 
Factories Act, 1934", the following shall be substituted, namely:- 2, of 193 •• 
"sub-section (1) of section 8 of the Factories Act, 1948". 
7. In section 17 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1)-
(a) for the words, brackets and figures "An appeal 
against a direction made under sub-section (3) or Bub-section 
(4) of section 15", the following shall be substituted, 
namely:-
25 
"An appeal against an order dismissing either wholly 30 
or in part an application made under sub-section (2) of 
section 15, or against a direction made under sub-section 
(3) or sub-section (4) of that sectio:t:l"; 
(b) for the words "the direction", the words "the order 
or direction" shall be substituted; and 35 
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely: - . 
II (2) Save as provided in cub-section (1), any order dis-
missing either wholly or in part an application made undet... 
63 of IP4i .. 

S 
10 
IS 
S ef 1901. 
20 
6 
sub-section (2) of section 15, or a direction made under sub-
section (3) or sub-section (4) of that section shall be final.". 
8. After section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall IllIertion of 
be inserted, namely:- :~:, 17 A. 
"17A. (1) Where at any time after an application has been Conditional 
made under sub-section (2) of section 15 the authority, or where ~}t~=r~~ 
at any time after an appeal has been filed by an employed person of employer 
under section l7 the court referred to in that section, is satisfied :~~:er 
that the employer or other person responsible for the payment ~e.pon.ible 
f d ect· 3' l'k I d f ,or payment o wages un er s Ion IS 1 e y to eva e payment 0 any of Wiles, 
amount that may be directed to be paid under section 15 or sec-
tion 17, the authority or the court, as the case may be, after giv-
ing the employer or other person an opportunity of being heard, 
direct the conditional attachment of so much of the property of the 
employer or other person responsible for the payment of wages 
as is, in the opinion of the authority or court, sufficient to satis-
fy the amount which may be payable under the dire.ction, 
(2) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, relat-
ing to attachment before judgment under that Code shall, 10 
far as may be, apply to any order for conditional attachment 
under sub-section (1) ,". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REAs6N~ 
By the enactment in 1936 of the Payment of Wages Act,-it "'u 
intended to ensure that-
(i) wages actually disbursable to workers covered by the -
Act are disbursed within the prescribed wa~e.period; and 
(ii) employees get their full wages without any deduct10Dl 
which are not specially authorised by the law. 
The working of the Act has shown that the Act requiree to be 
amended in certain respects. It is also considered desirable to extend 
the benefit of the Act to a larger category of persons. The important 
proposals relate to raising the wage limit from Rs. 200/- a month to 
Rs. 400/-, extension of the Act to construction industry and revision 
of the definition of the term "wages". The reasons for the amend-
ments are, wherever necessary, given in the notes OD c1auHl 
attached to this Bill. 
G.L.NANDA. 
NEW DEua; 
The 19th N01)ember. 1957. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2 (ii) .-The existing wage limit of two hundred rupees 
was fixed in 1936. The pattern of the earnings of the wage groups 
intended to be protected by the Act has since undergone considerable 
change. Accordingly it is proposed to apply the Payment of Wages 
Act to a person who is employed on wages not exceeding four 
hundred rupees a month in any establishment covered by the Act. 
Clause 3 (ii) .-Construction industry which employs a large 
number of workers has assumed great importance during recent 
years owing to the large hydro-electric and power schemes that are 
under construction. The workers in the construction industry 
engaged in the construction and maintenance of roads, bridges, 
canals, buildings, or in operations connected with irrigation, naviga-
tion or supply of water or generation, transmission and distribution 
of electricity or any other form of power stand in need of protection . 
. Clause 3 (iii) .-The existing definition of the term "wages" has 
given rise to certain practical difficulties particularly in regard to 
interpretation of certain words used in the definition. In some cases 
the High Courts have ruled that the word "wages" did not mean 
"potential wages" but "wages earned". Now-a-ooys the terms of 
payment under contracts of employment are frequently modified by 
the awards of tribunals or by the terms of binding settlements. The 
wages revised stautorily through adjudication, arbitration, concilia-
tion or similar statutory process should also be deemed to be wages 
for purposes of the Act. The definition of "wages" has accordingly 
been recast and made comprehensive and clear. 
Clause 5 (i) .-The question whether reduction in wages, conse-
quent upon any punishments imposed like suspension, stoppage of 
increments, reduction to lower post or ~ale, etc., would be deduc-
tions authorised under the Payment of Wages Act has been a subject 
of conflicting rulings, by courts of law. The intention of Govern-
ment has been that the deductions consequent upon punishments 
under service rules should be authorised deductions under the Act. 
It is, therefore, intended to make it clear that any deduction in 
wages consequent upon imposition of punishments under the service 
rules will be authorised deductions under the Act. 
7 

a 
Clause 5 (ii) .-Under section 7 (2) (d) of the Payment of Wages 
Act, deductions for house-accommodation can be made only when the 
accommodlQtion is supplied by the employer. Under the Subsidised 
Industrial Housing Scheme of the Government of I~dia; State 
Governments construct tenements which are let out to industrial 
workers on suitable rents. To enable easy collection of rent of such 
tenements, it is proposed to amend the Act to enable deduction of 
rents in such cases from the· wages of the concerned workers. 
Clause 5 (iii) .-With the nationalisation of life insurance business 
it has been considered desirable to allow deduction of insuran_ce 
premia from the wages of employees, at their written authorisation 
and necessary provision to this effect has been made. 
Clause 5 (iii) .-The amendment proposed will enable workers to 
subscribe to Government securities like the National Plan Loan, 
National Cash Certificates, and deposits in Post Office Savings Banks 
in pursuance of savings schemes. 
Clause 7.-Dismissal of a claim by an authority was not consi-
dered as a "direction" under section 15 and therefore it is proposed 
to make a provision for an appeal against an order dismissing a 
claim. 
Clause S.-Recovery in execution of a direction made by an 
authority under the Act takes a long time. Arrears of wages also 
do not get sufficient priority in case the concern is wound up. To 
safeguard' the workers' interests in such cases it .is proposed to em-
power the authority to order conditional attachment of the property 
of the employer or other person responsible for the payment of 
wages, pending disposal of the application, unless the employer or 
other person deposits with the authority an amount sufficient to 
satisfy the claim or gives security for a like amount. 

25 011934. 
• 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EX~CTS FROM THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936 
(No. 4 OF 1936) 
• • • • • • • 
LO) ~uili~ 
stent. 
• • • • • • • • commence 
(5) The State Government may, after gIvmg three months' 
notice of its intention of so doing, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, extend the provisions of the Act or any of them to the pay-
ment of wages to any class of persons employed in any industrial 
establishment or in any class or group of industrial establishments. 
(6) Nothing in this Act shall apply to wages payable in respect 
of a wage-period which, over such wage-period, average two hun-
dred rupees a month or more. 
meat and 
application. 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject Definitions. 
or context,-
(i) "fac~ory" means a factory as defined in clause (j) of 
section 2 of the Factories Act, 1934; 
• 
(ii) "industrial establishment" means any-
-(a) tramway or motor omnibus service; 
(b) dock, wharf or jetty; 
(c) inland steam-vessel; 
• • • • • • • 
(vi) "wages" means all remuneration, capable of being 
expressed in terms of money, which would, if the terms of the' 
contract of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled, be 
payable, whether conditionally upon the regular attendance, 
good work or conduct or other behaviour of the person employ-
ed, or otherwise, to a person employed in respect of his employ-
ment or of work done in such employment, and includes any 
bonus or other additional remuneration of the nature aforesaid 
which would be so payable and any sum payable to such person 
9 

10 
by reason of the termination of his employment, but does not 
include-
(a) the value of any house-accommodation, supply of 
light, water, medical attendance or other amenity, or of any 
service excluded by general or special order of the ~1:Jate Gov-
ernment; . 
(b) any contribution paid by the employer to any pen-
sion fund or provident fund; 
(c) any travelling allowance or the value of any travel-
ling concession; 
(d) any sum paid to the person employed to defray 
special expenses entailed on him by the nature of his em-
ployment; or 
(e) any gratuity payable on discharge. 
~e~pon8i- 3. Every employer shall be responsible for the payment to 
~~~%ent ~fr persons employed by him of all wages required to be paid under 
wases, J this Act: 
Provided that, in the case of persons employed (otherwise than 
by a contractor)-
(a) in factories, if a person has been named as the mana-
ger of the factory under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 
9 of the Factories Act, 1934, :l.S of 1934. 
. (b) in industrial establishments, if there is a person res-
ponsible to the employer for the supervision and control of 
the industrial establishment, 
(c) upon railways (otherwise than in factories), if the 
employer is the railway administration and the railway ad-
ministration has nominated a person in this behalf for the 
local area concerned, 
the person so named, the person so responsible to the emp!oyer, or 
the person so nominated, as the case may be, shall be responsible 
for such payment. 
til til • • til • 
Deductions 7. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (2) 
b~:zaY section 47 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890, the wages of an 
from wages," ployed person shall be paid to him without deductions of 
kind except those authorised by or under this Act. 
of 
em- 9 of 1890. 
any 
Explanation.-Every payment made by the employed person to 
the employer or his agent shall, for the purposes of this Act, be 
deemed to be a deduction from wages, 

11 
(2) Deductions from the wages of an employed person shall be 
made only in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and may 
be of the following kinds only, namely:-
(a) fines; 
(b) deductions for absence from duty; 
(c) deductions for damage to or loss of goods expressly 
entrusted to the employed person for custody, or for loss of 
money for which he is required to account, where such damage 
or loss is directly attributable to his neglect or default; 
(d) deductions for house-accommodation supplied by the 
employer; 
'" '" '" '" '" '" 
(k) deductions, made with the written authorization of 
the employed person, in furtherance of any War Savings 
Scheme, approved by the State Government, for the purchase 
of securities of the Government of India or the Government 
of the United Kingdom. 
'" '" '" '" '" '" 
14. (1) An Inspector of Factories appointed under sub-section Inspectors. 
25 of 1934. (1) of section 10 of the Factories Act, 1934, shall be an Inspector 
for the purposes of this Act in respect of all factories within the 
local limits assigned to him. 
'" '" '" '" '" '" 
17. (1) An appeal against a direction made under sub-section Appeal. 
(3) or sub-section (4) of section 15 may be preferred, within 
thirty days of the date on which the direction was made, in a 
Presidency-town before the Court of Small Causes and elsewhere 
before the District Court-
(a) by the employer or other person responsible for the 
payment of wages under section 3, if the total sum directed 
to be paid by way of wages and compensation exceeds three 
hundred rupees, or 
(b) by an employed person, if the total amount of wages 
claimed to have been withheld from him or from the unpaid 
group to which he belonged exceeds fifty rupees, or 
(c) by any person directed to pay a penalty under sub-
section (4) of section 15. 
(2) Save as provided in sub-section (1), any direction made 
under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 15 shall be 
final. 
• • '" • • '" 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Payment of Wages Act, 1936. 
(Shri Gulzarilal Nanda, 
Mi .. ;ster of Labour aM 
. Employment and Planning.) 