LOK SABRA
CORRI GENDUM
to
SALARYAi.\ffiALLOVlANCES OF LEADERS OF OPPOSITION
INPARLIAMENTBILL,1977
L:To belAsintroducedinLokSabha7
Page2, line40,-
for"secretariattl read"secretarialII
(§aka)
_~ct.


As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABBA 
- 6 AUG '911 
,m No. " 0('1117 .. , . 
THE SALARY AND ALLOWANCES OF LEADERS 
OF OPPOSITION IN PA.RLIAMENT BILL, 1971 
A 
BILL 
to prooide for the salary and a.llowcuaces of Leaders of Opposition. in 
Parlia.ment 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Salary and Allowances of Ltladers of 
Opposition in Parliament Act, 19'77. 
S (2) 1t shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the OftlC'ial Gazette, appoint. 
Short 
title 
and 
COM-
mence-
ment. 
Z. In this Act, "Leader of the Opposition", in relation to either Houte DeJIDitkID 
of Parliament, means that member of the Council of States or the Ho~ 
of the People, as the case may be, who is, for the time being, the lade!:. 
10 in that House of the partY in opposition to the Government navin, ~e. 
greatest numerical strength and recognised· as such by tlie Chairman of 
the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the 
case may be. 
Expla.na.tion..-WheI'e there are two or more parties in opposition to 
IS the Government,in the Council of States or 'in the HOUle of the People 
having the same numerical strength, the Chairman of the Council 01' 
States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may be, shall, 
having regard to the status of the parties, recognise anyone of the Leaders 
of such parties as the Leader of the Opposition for the purposes of this 
20 section and such recognition shall be final and conclusive. 
. . 
L l..t;· ~~~.Jg- be paid to .cla ~ 01. .tIr.e ~",:.,....,..f Sa.,': 
two thousaDcl, two h .... drecI and 8ftv l'II .... ". ....... L;, .. 1 ,' .• ; I,; .. Of Lea. '. , den of 
.'-J.~ ll.: ;.)~:~. OpposI_ 
tion. 

Residence 
for Lea-
ders of 
Opposi-
tion. 
Travel-
lint and 
dally 
allow-
ances to 
Leaders 
of Oppo-
sition. 
MedIMlr. 
treat-
ment, etc., 
to Lea-
ders or 
Opposi-
tion. 
Leaders 
Of Opposi. 
tion DOt 
to draw 
salary or 
allow-
ances •• 
Members 
of Parlia-
ment. 
Ameniaill.· 
to~, 
ders Of. 
Oppolil~ 
tion. 
2 
4. (1) Each Leader of the Opposition shall, so long as 'he continues as 
such Leader, and for a period of one month immediately thereafter, be 
entitled without payment of rent to the use of a furnished residence and 
no charge shall fa" on the Leader of the Opposition personally in respect 
of the maintenance of such residence. S 
(2) In the event of the death of a Leader of the Opposition, his family 
shall be. entitled to the use of the furnished residence occupied by him-
(a) for a period of one month immediately after his death, with-
out payment of rent and no charge shall fallon his family in respect 
of the maintenance of such residence, and 10 
(b) for a further period of one month, on payment of rent at such 
rates as may be prescribed by rUles made in this behalf by the Cen-
tral Government and also charges in respect 01. electricity and water 
consumed in that residence during such further period. 
E~lanQjtion.-For the purposes of this\fl8Ction, "residence" includes the IS 
Ita, ,cuuuters and other buildings appurtenant thereto, and the garden 
t~· .• d."maUdenance" in relation to a .residence includes the payment 
olloca1~ftI_ -d. taxe&.aadi tJw prMWen of elecmcity and; water~ . 
5. Subject to aDY 1'U'1es made in this behalf by the Central Govemment, 
a Leader of the Opposition shall be entitled to- 20 
(a) travelling allowances for himself aDd the members of his 
faJDiI)' .. aad) fOil" the ~,of'bis and' his ',family!s etiets-
(i) in reaped of the journey ;~Q Delhi from. his ua1l8l place of 
resideilce outside Delhi for assuming office, and 
(ii) in respect of the journey from. Delhi to· his uaual plaec 2S 
of residence outside Delhi on relinquishing, otIi~; and 
(b) travel1m,. and daily allowances in respeet of. tou .. vader. 
taken by hbn in the discharge of his duties u Leader ,of...da. 0.-, 
tion, whether by sea, 18nd' or air. 
I!' 'Sob,eet 11.0 any .rul.es. made in this behalf hy. the CeD.tr.al Go ......... , .30 
• P.ftd8r of·tlie Opposition IQld the members of. his famil)- .hall he ~ ~ 
free' ofeharee: to accommodation in hospitals .m.aiQtaiDe4 b)' the·Go ... l'II- .. 
ment .-d· abo to medical treatment. 
7. No Leader of the Opposition in receipt of a salary or allowance under 
thia A.ot shall be entitled; to receive any sum out of funds provided by 3S 
p~ by; w8yof salary. 01'1 alloWance. in respect of his membersnlp of 
either. HoQl8 of, Fariiameat. 
8. ('~'.8~·to·..,.·ruhs made In thJs behalf by the Ceuual.Gov .... 
ment, each Lead.,· efthe Opposltton shall' be entitled to telephon.e and 
seeretariat facilities. 

3 ' 
(2) 'Subjeet,to any rules made 'in tbis behalf by the lCeattal Govern-
ment, .ch Leader of the Opposition shall be entlded' 'to .' C'Obveyaace 
allow_Dee of three .hunched rupees ,per month. 
' •. 'l"he date on whichaBY pttrsonbecame or ·ceased to be 'a Leader of 
5 .the Opposition shall be published in the Official Gazette,eftd any such 
notification shall be conclusive evidence of the fact that he became, or 
ceased to be, a 'Leader of the QIlPosition on that date for ill·the· purposes 
of this Act. 
"1. (1) 'The Central 'Government may, by notifteatton 'br~ !Offtcial 
10 GHette, make rules' for carrying out the ,purposes of tHis Aet. 
IS 
20 
"(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality' of the fore-
goJ.aglpower, -such !J'ules ,may provide ·for all or an.yof ·the ,foU.wMig 
matters, namely:-
(4) the rates at ,which ·rent shall be ~yab1e by tbefamily of a 
deceased Leader of the Opposition to the Use of the furnisbecl·r88i-
dence occupied by him under clause (b) of sub-section (2) 01 sec-
;Uon 4; 
'(l;) ·the·travelling 'and :daily lallowances :admtnible':to 18 ILeader 
--of ,the I OppoSition under :section 6; 
(c) the medical treatment admissible to a Leader of the Oppo-
sition and the members of.his family under <'Section ,6; 
(8) . the telephone and . secretarial facUlties admissible toa LeBder 
of "the (!)pposltion and the 'conditions sub~t to 'wbleh :he 'Shall be 
entitled to conveyance allowance under section 8. 
25 (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid. as 500n as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in Bession, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
30 said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not -be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment ahall be with· 
out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
3S 11. In the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament 
Act, 1954,-
(i) in clause (b) of section 2,-
(4) in sub-clause (i), the word "and" at the end shall bt" 
omitted; 
NoWlca_ 
tion res-
peetin, 
the date 
on which 
persons 
became 
or ceased 
to be 
Leaden 
of Opposi. 
tion to 
be conclu-
sive 
evidence 
thereof. 
Power 
to make 
ruI ... 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 30 
of 19M. 

Amend-
ment of 
Act 10 
of 1959. 
4 
(b) after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(iii) a Leader of, the Opposition as defined In the Salary 
and Allowances of Leaders of Opposition in Parliament 
Act, 1977;"; S 
(ii) in the Ezplanatio,t to sub-section (1) of section 6, after the 
words and figures "the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 
1952/', the words and figures "a Leader of the Opposition as defined 
in the Salary and Allowances of Leaders of Opposition in Parliamont 
Act, 1977," shall be inserted; 10 
(iii) in sub-section (4) of section 8A,-
(a) for the words "an oftlcer of Parliament", the words "as 
.an officer of Parliament" shall be substituted; and 
(b) for the words ", or both''', the words and figures "or as 
a Leader of the Opposition as defined in the Salary and Allow- IS 
ances of, Leaders of Opposition in Parliament Act, 1977, or has 
served in all or any two of such capacities" shall be substituted. 
12. In the ParHament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, 1959, in 
section 3,-
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, 20 
namely:-
"(00) the office of a Leader of the Opposition in Parliament;"; 
(ii) the Explan4tion at the end shall be numbered as EzplaM-
tion I, and after Explanation 1 as so numbered, the following 
E.:rpl.a.nation shall be inserted, namely:- 25 
'Explanation 2.-ln clause (aa), the expression "Leader of 
the Opposition" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the 
Salary and Allowm,ces of Leaders of OppositIon in Parliament 
Act, 1977.'. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In a Parliamentary democracy, the leader of the opposition has an 
important role to play. In the United Kingdom, Australia and Canada, 
the leader of the opposit.ion has been accorded statutory recognition. In 
India, a number of States have started giving facilities and amenities to 
the leaders of the opposition in the State Legislative Assemblies. Having 
regard to the important role of the leader of the opposition in a Parlia-
mentary democracy, it is considered that the Leaders of Opposition in the 
House of the People and the Council of States should be accorded statu-
tory recognition and given salaI'y and cerbin other facilities .and ameni-
ties to enable them to discharge their :t:unctions in Parliament. The Bill 
mainly seeks to achieve the above objects. 
2. Certain consequential amendments to the Salary, Allowances and 
Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954 and the Parliament (Pre-
vention of Disqualification) Act, 1959 are also being proposed in the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; RA VINDRA VARMA. 
The 4th August, 1977. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the payment to each leader: of the 
opposition a salary of two . thousand, two hundred and fif~y rupees .per 
month. Clause 4 provides for housing facilities to each leader of the oppo-
sition. Clauses 5 and 6 of the Bill provide for travelling and daily allow-
8D.CeS . and .medical treatment to each leader of the opposition. Under 
clause 8, each leader of. the opposition shall be entitled to telephone and 
secretarial facilities as may be prescribed by rules. Claus~ 8 also provides 
for the payment of a conveyance allowance of three .hundred rupees per 
,month to each leader of the opposition. 
2. Expenditure towards the payments, referred to above, cannot be esti-
.mated precisely. However, the expenditure will, approximately, be two 
lakh rupees per annum. 
3. There will be no non-recurring expenditure. 
6 
.. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. Sub-clause (2) of this 
clause enables the Central Government to make rules to provide for the 
rates at which rent shall ·be payable by the family of a deceased Leader 
of the Opposition to the use of the furnished. residence occupied by him, 
the travelling and daily allowances, the medical treatment and the tele-
phone and secretarial facilities admissible to a Leader of the Opposition. 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of 
procedure or detail. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, 
of a normal character. 
" 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to protnde for 'the salary and aUowGnCes of Leaders of Opposition in 
PartiG.ment 
(Shri Rat1if&d.Ta Verma, Minister of PartiGment4ry Af1o.ir •• ) 
, 