As INTRODUCED IN-lA£ -sABRA ON " . 
THE CONSTITUTION (FORTY -FOURTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1976 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Amendment of the Preamble. 
3. Insertion of new sub-heading after article 31. 
4. Amendment of article 31e. 
5. InsertiQIl of new article 31D. 
6. Insertion of new article 32A. 
7. Amendment of article 39. 
8. Insertion of new article 39A. 
9. Insertion of new article 43A. 
10. Insertion of new article 48A. 
11. Insertion of new Part IVA. 
12. Amendment of article 55. 
13. Amendment of article 74. 
14. Amendment of article 77. 
15. Amendment of article 81. 
16. Amendment of article 82. 
17. Amendment of article 83. 
18. Amendment of article 100. 
19. Amendment of article 102. 
20. Substitution of new article for article 103. 
21. Amendment of article 105. 
22. Amendment of article 118. 
23. Insertion of new article l31A. 
24. Insertion of new article 139A. 
25. Insertion of new article 144A. 
26. Amendment of article 145. 
~7. Substitution of new article for article 150. 
28. Amendment of article 166. 
29. Amendment of article 170. 
30. Amendment of article 172. 
31. Amendment of article 189. 
32. Amendment of article 191. 
33. Substitution of new article for article 192. 
34. Amendment of article 194. 
35. Amendment of article 208. 
36. Amendment of article 217. 
3'1. Amendment of article 225. 

CLAUSES 
.... II 
38. Substitution of new article for article .2:a8.. 
:a9. Insertion of new article 226A. 
-40. Amendment of article 227 .• 
'~. ·Ameadment of article 228. 
42. InsertioR -&£ new .article~A. 
43. lasertiea of new article 257 A. 
"' Amendment of article -IU. 
45. Amendment of article \H2. 
46. Insertion of new Part XIV A. 
47. Amendment of article 330. 
48. Amendment otf article 352. 
49. Amendment of article 353. 
50. Amendment of article 356. 
51. Amendment of article 357. 
52. Amendment of article 358. 
53. Amendment of article 359. 
M. Amendment of article 366. 
56. Amendment of article 368. 
56. Amendment of article 371F. 
57. Amendment of the Seventh Schedule. 
58. Special provisions as to pending petitions under article 228. 
59. Power of the President to remove difficulties. 
• . ' 

8111 No. tl of It7' 
-- ,. --THE C()NSTITUTlON (FORTY-FOURTH AMENDMENT~ BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the ConstitutiOn of Inelia. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the 
&public of India as follows:-
1. (1) 'This Act may be called the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amend-
ment) Act, 1976. 
5 (Z) It shall come into force on such d.te -as tIae 'C6Iltral Government 
may, by notification in the 0IItiel Gazette, -appoint and .cWferent dates 
may be apPOinted for dtftereht provisions of :this Act. 
Z. In the Preamble to the Constitution,-
(a) for the wor4s "SOVEREIGN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC", 
10 the words "SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULA-R DEMOCRATIC 
REPUBLIC" shall be substituted; and 
(b) for the words "unity_ of the Nation", the words "unity and 
integrity of the Nation" shall be substituted. 
3. After article 31 of. the Constitution, the fallowfllg sub-heading shall 
15 he inserted, n'p\~ly;-
~'Saving of -Cmqi'l ~tV8", 
Short 
title 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
the 
Preamble. 
Inser-
tion ot 
new lub_ 
badin. 
after 
article 
3~. 

Amend-
ment of 
article 
31C. 
Insertion 
of new 
article 
310. 
Saving of 
laws in 
respect of 
anti-na-
tional 
activities. 
4. In article 3lC of the Constitution, for the words. brackets, letters 
and figures "the J,lrinciples specified in clause (b) or clause (c) of 
article 39", the words and figures "all or any of the principles laid down 
in Part IV" shall be substituted. 
5. After article 3lC of the Constitution and before the heading "Right S 
to Constitu.rionnl Remedies", the following article shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'3lD. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no 
law providing for-
(a) the prevention or prohibition of anfl-national activities; 10 
or 
(b) the prevention of formation of, or the prohibition of, 
anti-national associations, 
shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconmstent 
with, or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by, IS 
article 14, article 19 or article 31. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitut;ion, Padiament 
shall have, and the Legislature of a State shall not have, power to 
make laws with respect to any of the matters referred to in sub-
c;lause (a) 9f sub-clause (b) of clause (1). 20 
(3) Any law with respect to any matter referrer1. to in sub-
clause (a) or'sub-cliU5e (b) of clause.(l) which Is in force immedi-
ately before the commencement of section 5 of the Constitution 
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1976, shall continue in force until 
altered or repealed or amended by Parliament. 2S 
(4) In this article,- ., 
(a) "association" means an association of persons; 
(b) "anti-national activity", in relation to an individual or 
association, means any action taken by such individual or 
associatiori- . 30 
(i) which is intended, or which supports any claim; to 
bring· about, on ~ny- ground whatsoever, the c~ssion of a 
part of the territor;y of India: or the s~ession Qf a part of 
the territory of India or which incite3. any. jJ:)dividua:l or 
association to bring about such cession or secession; . 35 
(ii) which disclaims, questions, threatens, disrupts or 
is intended to threaten or .disrupt the sovereignty and integ-
rity of India or the security of the State or the unity of. 
the nation; 
(iii) which is intended, or which is part of a scheme 40 
which is infended, to overthrow by force the Government as 
by law established: 
(iv) which is intended, or which is part of a scheme 
which is intended, to create internal disturbance or the dis-
ruption of public services; 
(v) which is intended. 0: whjch i'8 part of a scheme 
which is intended, to threaten. Qr disrupt ha:rmQny between 
, ' 
45 

S 
3 
different religious, racial, language or regional groups or 
castes or communities; 
(e) "Ianti-national association" means an associ at jon-
(i) which has for its object any anti-national activity; 
(H) which encourages or aids persons to undertake or en-
gage in any anti-national activity; 
(iii) the members whereof undertake or engage in any 
anti-national activity.'. 
6. After article 32 of the Constitution, the following article shall be lnser-
10 inserted, namely:- tion of newarti-
"32A. Notwithstanding anything in article 32, the Supreme CO.lrt 
shall not conSlider the constitutional validity of any State law in 
any proceedings under that article unless the constitutional validity 
of any Central law is al'8o in issue in such proceedings.". 
IS 7. In article 39 of the Constiturjon, for clause (1), the following 
clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"<f) that children are given opportUnities and facilities to deve-
lop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity 
and that childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and 
against moral ann material abandonment.". 
8. After article 39 of the Constitution, the following article shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"39A. The State shall secure that the operation of the legal sys-
tem promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in 
particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes 
or.in any other way, to ensure. that opportunities for securing justice 
are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other dis-
abilities.". 
9. After article 43 of the Constitution, the following article shall be 
30 inserted, namely:-
"43A. The State shall take steps, by suitable legislation or in any 
other way, to secure the participation of workers in the management 
of undertakings, establishments or other organisations engaged in 
any industry.". 
cle 32A. 
Validity 
of State 
laws 
not to 
be con-
sidered 
in pro-
ceediDga 
under 
article 
32. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
article 
39. 
Inser-
tion of 
new arti-
cle 39A. 
Equal 
justice 
and free 
legal aid. 
Inser-
tion of 
newarti-
de 43A. 
Partici-
pation of 
workers 
in manage_ 
ment Of 
indus-
trie •• 

Inser· 
tion of 
newarti-
cle 48A. 
Protec-
tion and 
improve· 
ment of 
environ_ 
ment and 
safeguard-
ing of 
forests 
and wild 
life. 
I .... 
tiOD of 
new Part 
IVA. 
Funda-
mental 
dUti ... 
Amend-
mentof 
article 
5~. 
4 
10. Mter article 48 of the Constitution, the following article shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"4BA. The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the 
environment and to aafeguard the rorests and wild life of the coun-
try.". S 
11. After Part IV of the Constitution, the follOWing Part shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"PART IVA 
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES 
51A. It shall be the duty of every citizen of India-
(4) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and 
institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem; 
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired 
our national struggle for freedotn; 
10 
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integ- IS 
rity of India; 
(d) to defend the country and render national service when 
calleod upon to do so; 
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brother-
hood amongst all the people of India transcending religious, ~ 
lingUistic and regional or sectional diversities; to renounce 
practices derogatory to the dignity of women; 
<f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite 
culture; 
(g) to protect and improve the natural environm~t includ- 25 
ing forests, lakes, rivel'S and wild Hie, and to have compassion 
for living creatures; 
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the 
spirit of inquiry and reform; 
(i) to safeguard pUblic property and to abjure violence; 30 
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual 
and collective activity, so that the nation constantly rises to 
higher levels of endeavour and achievement.". 
12. In article 55.of the Constitution, for the Explanltion, the following 
Explanation shall be substituted, namely: - 35 
'Explanation.-In this article, the expression "population" means 
the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which 
the relevant figures have been published: 
~ I 

S 
Provided that the reference in this Explanatiofl to the last pre· 
~eding census of which the relevant figures have been publishad 
shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the 
year 2000 have been publisbed, be construed as a reference to the 
3 1971 censUS.', 
1'3. In article '74 of the Constitution, for clause (1), t.he following 
clause ~hal1 be substituted, namely:-
II (1) 1'here shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minis-
ter at the head to aid and advise the President who shall, in the 
10 exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice.". 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
74. 
14. In article 77 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following Amenci-
clause shall be inserted, namely:- ment of 
article 
'1'1. 
"(.) No court or other authority shall be entitled to require the 
production of any rules made under clause (3) for the more con-
IS venient transaction of the business of the Government of India.". 
15. In article 81 I()f the Constitution, to clause (3). the following pro-
viso shall be added, namely: - . 
"Provided that the refoerence in this clause to the last preceding 
census of which the relevant figures have been published shall, until 
20 the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2000 
have been published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.". 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
81. 
18. In article 82 of the Constitution, after the proviso, the following Amend-
provia06 shall be inserted, namely: - ment of 
article 
82. 
"Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from 
25 such date as the PresideDt may by ·order specify ana uatilsuch read-
justmellt takes effect, any election to the House may be held on the 
basis of the territorial constituencies existing before such readjust-
ment: 
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census 
taken a£ter the year 2000 have been published. it shall not be neces-
sary to readjust the allocation of seats in th~ House .of .the Peopl.e 
to the States and the division of each State mto terrItorIal consti-
tuencies under this article.". 
17. (.1) In· article 83 of the Constitution, in clause (2), for" t~ word~ 
"6 " in the two places where they occur, the words SIX years 35 ve years . 
shall be substituted. 
Th endments made by sub-section (1) shall apply to the 
(2) f ehamp pI l'n existence on the date of coming into force of 
~ueeo te eo e 
thi. seotion. 
Amend· 
ment ·01 
article 
83. 

Amend_ 
ment Of 
article 
100. 
Amend_ 
ment Of 
article 
102. 
Substitu-
tion of 
newarti-
cle for 
article 
103. 
Decision 
on ques-
tions as 
to disquali-
fication. 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
105. 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
118. 
Inser_ 
tion of 
newarti-
cle ISlA. 
Exclu8ive 
jurisdic-
tion of 
the Sup-
reme 
Court in 
regard 
to ques-
tions aa 
to vali-
dity at 
law .. 
6 
18. In article 100 of the Constitution, clauses (3) and (4) shall bl 
omitted. 
19. In article 102 of the Constitution, for sub-clause (a) of clause (1) I 
the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(a) if he holds any such office o£ profit under the Government 5_ 
of India or the Government of any State as is declared by Parlia-
ment by law to disqualify its holder;". 
20. For article 103 of the Constitution, the follOWing· article shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"103. (1) If any question arises-
(a) as to whether a member of either House of Parliament 
has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentionea in 
clause (1) of article 102, or 
10 
(b) as to whether a person, found guilty of a corrupt prac-
tice at an election to a House of Parliament under any law made IS 
by Parliament, shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for 
being, a member of either House of Parliament. or of a House 
of the Legislature of a State, or as to the period for which he 
shall be so disqualified, or as to the removal of, or the reduction 
of the period of, such drsqualification, 
the question shall be referred for the decision of the President and 
his decision shall be final. 
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Presi-
dent shall consult the Election Commission and the Election Com-
mission may, for this purpose, make such inquiry as it thinks fit.". 
21. In article 105 of the Constitution, for clause (3), the following 
dause shall be substituted. namely:-
"(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of 
each House of Parliament, and of the members and th~ committees 
20 
2S 
of each House shall be such as may, from time to time, be evolved by 30 
such House of Parliament.". 
22. In article 118 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after the words 
"its procedure", the brackets and words .. (including the quorum to cons-
titute a meeting of the House)" shall be inserted. 
23. After article 131 of the Constitution, the following article shall be 
inserted, namely:- 3S 
"13lA. (1) NotWithstanding anything contained in any other 
provision 'of this Constitution, the Supreme Court shall, to the ex-
clusion of any other court, have jurisdiction to determine all ques-
tions relating to the constitutional validity of any Central law. 40 
(2) Where a High Court is satisfied-
(a) that a case pending before it or before a court sub-
ordinate to it involves questions as to the constitutional 
validity or any Central law or, as the case may be. ·of both 
Central and State laws; and 4S 

7 
(b) that the determination of such questions is necessary for 
the disposal of the case, 
the High Court shall refer the questions for the decision of the 
Supreme Court. 
5 (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of· clause (2), where, 
on an application made by the Attorney-General of India, the 
Supreme Court is satisfied,-
(a) that a case pending before a High Court or before a court 
'Subordinate to a High Court involves questions as to the consti-
10 tutional validity of any Central law or, as the case may be, of 
both Central and State· laws; and 
('b) that the determination of such questions is necessary for 
the disposal of the case, 
the Supreme Court may require the High Court to refer the ques-
IS tions to it for its decision. 
(4) When a reference is made under clause (2) or clause (3), 
the High Court shall stay all proceedings in respect of the case until 
the Supreme Court decides the questions so referred. 
(5) The Supreme Court shall, after giving the parties an op-
20 portunity of being heard, decide the questions so referred, and may-
(a) either dispose of the case itself; or 
(b) return the case to the High Court together with a copy 
of its judgment on such questions for disposal of the case in con-
formity with such judgment by the High Court or, as the case 
25 may be, the court subordinate to it.". 
35 
40 
45 
24. After article 139 of the Constitution, the following article shall be 
inlerted, namely:-
. 
"139A. (1) If, on an application made by the Attorney-General 
of India, the Supreme Court is satisfied that cases involving the same 
or substantially the same questions of law are pending before it and 
one or more High Courts or before two or more High Courts and that 
such questions are substantial questions of general importance, the 
Supreme Court may withdraw the case or cases pending before the 
High Court or the High Courts and dispose of all the cases itself. 
(2) The Supreme Court may, if it deems it expedient so to do 
for the ends of justice, transfer any case, appeal or other proceedings 
pending before any High Court to any other High Court.". 
25. Afteor article 144 of the Constitution, the following article shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"144A. (1) The minimum number of Judges of the Supreme Court 
who shall sit for the purpose of determining any quest;on as to the 
constitutional validity of any Central law or State law shall be seven. 
(2) A Central law or a State law shall not be declared. ~ be 
constitutionally invalid by the Supreme ~ourt unless a maJorIty of 
ot less than tW('f-thirds of t"te Judges !"itt'ng for the purpose of de-
~rmining th~ questIon as to the const1tuttonal validity of such law 
hold it to be CQnstit1ltiQnally fnvJllid.". 
Inser_ 
tion of 
newarti-
cle 139A • 
Transfer 
of cer-
tain 
calle8. 
Inser_ 
tion of 
newarti-
c)e 1'raA. 
Special 
provi-
sions al 
to die-
posalof 
questions 
relat_ 
ing to 
vaUdity 
of laws. 

) 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
145. 
Substitu-
tion Qf. 
newarti-
cle for 
article 
150. 
Form of 
accounts 
of the 
Union 
and of 
the 
States. 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
166. 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
170. 
8 
26. In article 145 of the Constitution,-
(a) in clause (1), after sub-clause (c), the following sub-clause 
shall be inserted. namely:-
II (cc) rules as to the proceedings in the court under articles 
131A and 139A;"; S 
r 
(b) in clause (2), for the words, brackets and figure "provisions 
of clause (3) ", the words, figures, letter and brackets "provisions of 
article 144A and of. clause (3)" shall be substituted; 
(c) in clause (3). for the words "The minimum number'" the 
words, figures and letter "Subject to the provisions of article 144A. 10 
the minimum number" shall be substituted. 
27. For article 150 of the Constitution, the following article shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"150. The accounts of the Union and of the States shall be kept in 
Fuch fonn as the Pi-esident may, after consultation with the Comp- I, 
troller and Auditor-General of India, prescribe.". 
28. In article 166 of the Constitution. after clause (3), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4) No court or other authority shall be entitled to require the 
production of any rules made under clause (3) for the more con- 20 
venient transaction of the business of the Government of the State.". 
29. In article 17~ of the Constitution,-
(a) for the Explanation, the follOWing Explanation shalE be subs-
tituted, namely:-
'Explanation.-In this clause, the expression "population" 2S 
means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census 
of which the relevant figures have been published: 
. , , 
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to t.he last 
preceding census of which the relevant figures have been pub-
lished shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken 30 
-- after the year 2000 have been published, be construed as a refer-
'} 
\ 
ence to the 1971 census.'; 
, (b) in clause (3), after the proviso, the following provisos shall 
" be inserted, namely:-, 
\ "Provided further that such readjustment shall take effecl 3S 
\ 
from such date as the President may, by order, specify and u.ntil 
such readjustment takes effect, any election to the Legialati.V8' 
Assembly may be held on the basis of the telTitQrial' constituen-
cies existing before such readjustment: 

9 
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first 
census taken after the year 2000 have been published, it shall not 
be necessary to readjust the total number of seats in the Legisla-
tive Assembly of each State· and the division of such State into 
5 territorial constituencies under this clause.". 
30. (1) In article 172 of the Constitution, in claUSe (1), fur the words 
"five years" in the two places where they occur, the words "six 
years" shall be substituted. 
(2) The amendments made by sub-section (1) shall apply to every 
10 Legislative Assembly in existence on the date of coming into force ot 
this section. 
31. In article 189 oi. the Constitution, clauses (3) and (4), shall be 
omitted. 
32. In article 191 of the Constitution, for sub-clause (a) of clause (1), 
15 the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(a) if he holds any such office of profit under the Government 
of India or the Government of any State specified in the First Sche-
dule as is declared by Parliament by law to disqualify its holder;". 
33. For article 192 of the Constitution, the following article shall be 
20 substituted, namely:-
25 
"192. (1) If any question arises-
(a) as to whether a member of a House of the Legislature 
of a State has become! subject to any of the disqualifications 
mentioned in clause (1) of article 191, or 
(b) as to whether a person found guilty of a corrupt practice 
at an election to a House of the Legislature of a State under any 
law made by Parliament shall be disqualified for being chosen 
as, and for being, a member of either House of Parliament or of 
a House of the Legislature of a State, or as to the period for> 
which he shall be so disqualified, or as to the removal of, or the 
reduction of the period of, such disqualification, 
the question shall be referred for the decision of the President and 
his decision shall be final. 
(2) Before giving any decision on any such ~uestion, the Presi-
dent shall consult the Election Commission and the Election Com-
3S mission may, for this purpose, make such inquiry as it thinks fit.". 
M. In article 194 of the Constitution, for clause (3), the following 
clau§e shall be substituted, namely:-
'c (3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of 
a House of the Legislature of a State, and of the members and the 
40 committees of a House of such Legislature shall be such as may from 
time to time be evolved by such House.". 
35 In article 208 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after the words 
".t ~roct!dure'" the brackets and words "(including the quorum to 
45 c~:stitute a meeting of the House)" shall be inserted. 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
172. 
Amend-
mentof 
article 
189. 
Amend-
mentol 
article 
191. 
Substi-
tution 
01 new 
article 
for arti-
cle 192. 
Deci-
sion on 
quea-
tionsas 
to di&-
quali-
fication. 
Amend-
mentol 
article 
194. 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
208. 

Amend-
ment of 
article 
217. 
·Amend;.. 
mental 
article 225. 
Su~ 
stituuoil 
Gfnew 
artklefot 
artk:le 226. 
Power of 
High 
Courts 
to issue 
certain 
writs. 
36. In article 217 CJf the Constitution, in clause (2),-
(a) in sub-clause (b), the word "or" shall be insertted at the enit; 
(b) after sub-clause (b), -the following sub-clause shall be in-
:serted, namely:-
"(c) is. in the opinion 'of the Pr.esident, a distinguished J 
.j-urist. ".; 
i(c) in the ExpulnOtion, in clause (a), .for the -w~ds '~aa ~la 
judicial office". the words "has held judidal oiRce or the :dl'ftce -of :tI 
;member of a tribunal or any tpost, under 'the 'Union or _ 'St •.. re-
quiring special knowledge of law" shall be substitutri. :l~ 
37. Ina~ticle 225 of the ConStituti0n, ih.e .provi~o shan ~ omitted. 
38. FOr article 226 of the 'Constitution, the follOwing article shall be 
substitu ted, tuUil'ei'~: ....... 
··2~. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 32 but subject to 
the provisions of article ISlA and article 226A, every Hilb Court J 5 
shall have power throughout the territories in relation to which it 
exercises jurisdiction to isSue to any person or authority, indUding 
in appropriate cases, any Government, within those territories direc-
tions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, 
.m4nci4mus, prohibition, quo warranto and ce'r'tiorari, or any of 2.:> 
them,-
(a) for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by 
the provisions of Part Ill; or 
(b) for the redress of any injury of a substantial nature by 
reason of the contravention of any other provision of this 25 
Constitution or any provision of any enactment or Ordinance or 
any order, rule, regulation, bye-law or other instrument made 
thereunder; or 
(c) for the redress of any injury by reason of any illegality 
in any proceedings by or before any authority under any provi- 30 
sion referred to in su.b-clause (b) where such illegality has result-
ed in substantial failure of justice. 
(2) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue directions, orders 
or writs to any Government, authority or person may also- be exercis-
ed by any High Court exefcising jurisdiction in relation to the 35 
territories within which the cause lof actio-n, wholly or in part, arises 
for the exe:rcise of such power, notwithstanding t1t«t the seat of 
such Govemment or authority or the residenoe of stU!b person is 
not within those territories. 
(3) No petition for the redress of ally injury re1erred to ia su.b- 10 
clause (b) or sub-clause (c) of clause (1) shall be eatertained if 
any other remedy for such redress is provided fM by or under any 
other law fo..r the time being in force. 
(4) No interim order (whether by way of injunction or .tay or 
in any other manner) shall be made on, or in any proceedingl relat-
ing to, a petition under clause (1) unless- 45 
(a) copies ·of such petition and of all documents in IUP-
port of the plea for such interim order are fUrnished to the party 

.. -
f 
s 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
35 
11 
against whom such petition is filed or proposed to be filed; and 
(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the 
matter. 
(5) The High Court may dispense with the requirements of 
flub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (4) and make an interim order 
IS an exceptional measure if it is satisfied for reasons to be recorded 
in writing that it is necessary so to do for preventing any 1088 being 
caused to the petitioner which cannot be adequately compensated 
in money but any such interim order shall, if it is not vacated earlier, 
cease to have effect on the expiry of a period of fourteen days from 
the date on which it is made unless the said requirements have been 
complied with before the expiry of that period and the High Court 
has continued the operation of the interim order. . 
(6) NotWithstanding anything in clause (4) or clause (5), no 
interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay or in any 
other manner) shall be made on, or in any proceedings relating to, a 
pet'ition under clause (1) where such order will have the effect of 
delaying any inquiry into a matter of public importance or any in-
vestigation or inquiry into an offence punishable with imprisonment 
or any action for the execution of any work or proj~ct of public 
utility, or the acquisiti,on of any property for such execution, by the 
Government or any corporation owned or controlled by the 
Government. 
(7) The power conferred on a High Court by this article shall 
not be in derogation of the power conferred on the Supreme Court 
by clause (2) of article 32.". 
at. After article 2%6 of the Constitution, the following article shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"226A. Notwithstanding anything in article 226, the High Court 
shall not consider the constitutional validity of any Central law in 
any proceedings under that- artiCle.". 
Inser· 
tion 
of new 
article 
228A. 
Vall· 
dity 
of Cen· 
tral 
lawl 
not 
to be 
consj· 
dered 
inproce· 
eding, 
under 
article 
226. 40. In article 227 of the Constitution,-
(a) for clause (1), the follOWing clause 
namely:-
Amend-
shall be substituted, ment el 
.. (1) Every High Court shall have saperintendence o\1er all 
courts subject to its appellate jurisdiction."; 
(b) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(5) Nothing in this' article shall ~e const~ed as giving to a 
High Court any jurisdiction to questl?R any ~Udgment of any 
inferior cOW't which is not otherwIse su.bJect to appeal or 
revision.". 
artic. 
227 . 

Amend-
ment 
Of 
article 
228. 
Inaer-
tion Of 
new 
article 
228A. 
Special 
provi-
sions 
uto 
dis-
posal 
of 
ques-
tions 
relatine 
to 
vali-
dity 
of 
laws. 
Inser-
tion of 
new 
article 
257A. 
AUla-
tance 
to 
States by' 
deploy-
ment 
Of armed 
forces or 
other 
forces of 
the J 
Union. 
....... - """), U'·';'rt .... - ""'......... ....~, ,- .... , ,.. 
1': . 
" 
I~ 
'1. In article 228 of the Constitution, for the words "it shall with· 
draw the case and may-", the words, figures and letter "it shall withdraw 
the case and, subject to the provisions of article 131A, may-" shall be 
substituted. 
42. After article 228 of the Constitution, the following article shall be 5 
inserted, namely:-
"228A. (1) No High Court shall have jurisdiction t.o declare any 
Central law to be constitutionally invalid. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of article 131A, the High Court 
may determine questions as to the constitutional validity of State 10 
laws. 
(3) The minimum number C1f Judges who shall sit f~ the pur-
pose of detennining any question as to the constitutional validity of 
any State law shall be five: 
Provided that where the High Court consists of less than five 15 
Judges, all the Judges of the High Court may sit and detennine such 
question . 
. (4) A State law shall not be declared to be constitutionally in-
valid by the High Court unless--
(a) where the High Court consists of five Judges or more, 20 
not less than two-thirds of the Judges sitting for the purpose of 
detennining the validity of such law, hold it to be constitution-
ally invalid; and 
(b) where the High Court c()!rl8ists of less than five Judges, 
all the Judges of the High Court hold it to be constitutionally 25 
invalid. 
(5) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstand-
ing anything contained in this Part. 
Explanatlion.-In computing the number of Judges of a High 
Court for the purposes of this article, a Judge who is disqualified 30 
by reason of personal or pecuniary bias shall be excluded.". 
43. After article 257 of the Constitution, the following article shall be 
tnserted, namely:-
"257A. (1) The Government of India may deploy any anned 
force of the Union or any other force 'Subject to the control of the 35 
Union for dealing with any grave situation of law and order in any 
State. 
(2) Any armed force or other force or any contingent or unit 
thereof deploy~ under clause (1) in any State shall act in accord-
ance with such directions as the Government of India may issue and 40 
shall not, save as otherwise provided in suc~ directions, be subject 
to the superintendence or control of the State Government or any 
officer or authority subordinate to the State Government. 

S 
10 
13 
(3) Parliament may, by law, specify the powers, functions, 
privileges and liabilities of the members of any force or any con~ 
tingent Or unit thereof deployed under clause (1) during the period 
of such deployment.". . 
44. In article 311 of the Constitution, in clause (2).-
(a) the words "and where it is proposed, after such inquiry, 
to! impose on him any such penalty, until he has been given a rea,. 
sonable opportunity of making representation on the penalty pro-
posed, but only on the basis of the evidence adduced during such 
inquiry" shall be omitted; 
(b) for the words "Provided that this clause shall not apply-", 
the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to 
impose upon him any such penalty, such penalty may be 1m-
IS posed on the basis of the evidence adduced during SUCil inquiry 
and it shall not be necessary to give such person any opportunity 
of making representation on the penalty proposed: 
Provided further that this clause shall not apply_no 
-45. In article 312 of the Constitution,-
(a) in clause (1) ,-
(i) for the word and figures "Part XI", the words and figures 
"Chapter VI of Part VI or Part XI" shall be substituted; 
(ii) after the wO'rds "all-India services", the brackets and 
words II (including an all-India judicial service)" shall be inserted: 
as (b) after clause (2), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(3) The all-India judicial service referred to in clause (1) 
shall not include any post inferior to that of a district judge as 
defined in article 236. 
30 (4) The law providing for the creation of the all-India judi-
cial service aforesaid may contain such provisions for the amend-
ment of Chapter VI of Part VI as may be necessary for giving 
effect to the provisions of that law and no such law shall be 
deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes 
3S of article 368.". 
Amend-
ment 
ot 
article 
·311. 
Amend-
mental 
article 
312. 
J./ 46. After Part XIV of the Constitution, the following Part shall be Inser-
V' inserted, namely: - tion of 
new 
Part 
'PART XIV A XIVA. 
TRmUNALS 
323A. (1) Parliament may, by law, provide for the adjudication 
or trial by admini~trative tribunals of disputes and complaints with 
respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed 
to public services and posts. in connection with the affairs of the 
Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the 
Adminis-
trative 
tribu-
nals. 

Tribu-
nals 
for 
other 
mattera. 
14 
tenitory of India or under the control of the GcMmunent of r ndie 
or of any corporation owned or controlled by the Goverwnent. 
(2) A law made under clause (I) may-
(a) provide for the establishment of an administrative 
.. tribunal for th~ Union and a separate administrative tribunal S 
for each State or for two or more States; 
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power 
to punish for contempt) "and authority which may be exercised 
by each of the said tribunals; 
(c) provide for the procedure (including provisions as to 10 
limitation and rules of evidence) to be followed by the said 
tribunals; 
(d) exclude the jurjsdietion of all courts, except the jurIs-
diction of the Supreme Court under article 136, with respect to 
the disputes or complaints refened to in clause (1); IS 
(e) provide for the transfer to each such administrative 
tribunal of any cases pending before any court or other authority 
immediately before the establishment of such tribunal as would 
have been within the jurisdiction of such tribunal if the ('auses 
of action on which such suits or proceedings are based had arisen 20 
after such establishment; 
(1) repeal or amend any other order made by the President 
under clause (3) of article 3710; 
(g) contain such supplemental, ineidental and consequential 
provisions (inc1whng provisions as to fee;,;) as Parliament may 15 
deem necessary for the eft'ective functioning of, and for the 
speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, 
such tribunals. 
(3) The provisions of this article shall have efteet notwithstand-
ing anything in any other provision of this Constitution or in any 30 
other law for the tim.e being in force. 
323B. (1) The appropriate Legislatu.re may, by law, provide for 
the adjudication or trial by tribunals of any disputes, complaints, or 
offences with respect to all or any of the matters specified. in clause 
(2) with respect to which such Legislature has power to make laws. 3S 
(2) The matters referred to in clause (1) are t8e following, 
namely:-
(a) levy, assessment, collection and enforcement of any tax; 
(b) foreign exchange, import and export across customs 
frontiers; 40 
(e) industrial and labour disputes; 
(d) land reforms by way of acquisition by the State of any 
estate as defined in article 3lA or of any rights th.;rein 01" the 

s 
10 
IS 
extinguishment or modification of any; such rights or by way of 
ceiling on agricultural land or in any other way; 
( e) ceiling Otll urban property; 
(f) elections to either House of Parliament or the House or 
either House of the Legislature of a State, but excluding the 
matters referred to in article 329 and article 329A; 
(g) production, procurement, supply and distribution of food-
stuffs (including edible oilseeds and oils) and such other goods 
as the President may, by public notification, declare to be essen-
tial goods for the pur~e of this article and control of prices ot 
such goods; 
(h) offences against laws with respect to any of the! matters 
specified in sub-clauses (a) to (g) and fees in respect of any of 
those matters; 
IS (i) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified 
in sub-clauses (a) to (Ii). 
(3) A law made under clause (1) may-
(a) provide for the establishment of a hierarchy of tribunals; 
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to 
20 punish for contempt) and authority which may be exercised by 
each of such tribunals; 
85 
45 
(c) provide for the procedure (including provisions as to 
limitation and rules of evidence) to be fotllowed by the said 
tribunals; 
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts except the juris-
diction of the S'upreme Court under article 136 with respect to all 
or any of the matters falling within the jurisdiction of the said 
tribunals; 
(e) provide for the transfer to any such tribunal of any 
cases pending before any court or any other authority immediate-
ly before the establishment of such tribunal as would have been 
within the jurisdiction of such tribunals if the causes of action on 
which such suits or proceedings are based had arisen after snch 
establishment; 
(f) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential 
provisions (including provisions as to! fees) as the appropriate 
Legislature may deem necessary for the efl'ective functioning of. 
and for the speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of 
the orders by, such tribunals. 
(4) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything in any other provisio,n of this Constitution or in any other 
law for the time being in force. 
ExpZanati.on.-In this article, "appropriate Legislature", in rela-
tion to any matter means Parliament or. as the case may be. a State_ 
Legislature competent to make laws with respect to such matter in 
accordance with the provisions"of. Part XI.'. 

16 
Amend- 41. In article 330 of the Constitution, the following Explanation shall be 
ment of inserted at the end, namely:-
article 330. 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
352. 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
353. 
Amend-
ment 
Of 
article 
358. 
Amend-
!Dent of 
article 357. 
'Explanation.-In this article and in article 332, the expression 
"population" means the population as ascertained at the last preced-
ingcensus of which the relevant figures have been published: 
Provided that the reference in this ExpZaTWItion to the last preced-
ing census of which the relevant figures have been published shall., 
until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2000 
have been published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.'. 
s 
a. In article 352 of the Constitution,- 10 
(0) in clause (1), after the w~ds "make a declaration to that 
effect", the following shall be inserted, namely:-
"in respect of the whole of India or of such part of the terri-
tory thereof as may be specified in the Proclamation"; 
(b) in clause (2), in sub-clause (a), after the word "revoked", IS 
the words "or varied" shall be inserted; 
(e) after clause (2), the follo,wing clause shall be insert.ed, 
namely:-
"(2A) Where a Proclamation issued under clause (1) is varied 
by a subsequent Proclamation, the provisions of clause (2) shall, 20 
so far as may be, apply in relation. to such subsequent Proclama-
tion as they apply in relation to a Proclamation issued under 
clause (1).". 
49. To article 353 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be 
added, namely: - 25 
"Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation 
only in any part of the territory of India,-
(i) the executive power of the Union to give directions under 
clause (a), and 
(ii) the power of Parliament to make laws under clause (b), 30 
shall also extend to any State other than a State in which Qt' in any 
part of which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation if and 
in so far as the security of India or any ~ of the territory thereof is 
threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the territory ot 
India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in ope!'ation.". 3' 
50, In article 356 of the Constitution, in clause (4), for the words "six 
months" wherever they occur, the words "one year" shall be substftuted. . . 
51. (1) In article 357 of the Constitution, for clause (2), the following 
clause shall be su6stituted, namely:-
"(2) Any law made in exercise of the power of the Legislature 40 
of the State by Parliament or the President or other authority re-
ferred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) which Parliament or the 
President or such other authority would not, but for the issue of a 
Proclamation under article 356, have been competent to make shall, 
after the Proclamation has ceased to operate, continue in force until 45 
altered or repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other 
authority.". ' 

(2) The amendment made by sub-section (1) shall apply to any law 
referred to in clause (2) of article 357 of the Constitution which is in 
force immediately before the coming into force of this section. 
:;2. To article 358 of the Constitution. the following proviso shall be 
5 added, namely:-
10 
15 
25 
30 
35 
"Provided that where a Pro,clamation of Emergency is in operation 
only in any part of the territory of India, any such laW' may be made. 
or any s~ch executive action may be taken, under this article in rela-
tion to or in any State or Union territory! specified in the First Sche-
dule in which or in any part of which the Proclamation of Emergency 
is not in operation, if. and in so far as the security of India or any part 
of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to 
the part of the ter.rit~ of India in which the Proclamation of Emer-
gency is in operation.". 
53. In article 359 of the Constitution,-
(a) to clause (lA), the following proviso shall be added, name-
ly:-
"Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency is in 
operation only in any part of the territory of India, any such law 
may be made, or any such executive action may be taken, under 
this article in relation to or in any State or Union territory speci-
fied in the First Schedule in which or in any part of which the 
Proclamation of Emergency is not in operation, if and in so far as 
the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is 
threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the terri-
tory of India in which the Prqclamation of Emergency is in opera-
tion."; 
(b) to clause (2). the following proviso shall be added, namely:-
"Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency! is in 
o~ation only in a part of the territory Off India, any such order 
shall not extend to any other part of the territory of India unless 
the President, being satisfied that the security of India or any part 
of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in re-
latiqn to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclama-
tion of Emergency is in operation, considers such extension to be 
necessary.". 
M. In article 366 of the Constitution,-
(a) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- , 
• (4A) "Centrallaw" means any law other than a State law; ; 
(b) after clause (26), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(26A) "State law" means-
(a) a State Act or an Act of the Legislature of a Union 
territory; 
(b) an Ordinance promulgated b! ,the Governor o.f a 
State under article 213 or by the Admimstrator of a Umon 
territory under article 239~; . 
(c) any provision with respect to a matter In the Sta~ 
List in a Central Act made before the commencement of this 
Constitution; . 
(d) any provision with respect to a matter In the State 
List or the Concurrent List in a Provincial Act; 
Amend-
ment ot 
article 
358, 
Amend-
ment 
of 
artlehlU9. 
Amend-
ment of 
article 
38t1 • 

Amend-
ment 
of 
article 
388. 
Am.oo-
ment of 
article 
8'11F. 
.Amend-
ment 
of 
the 
Seventh 
ScJ:te-
dule. 
I~ 
(e), any notification, order, scheme, rule, regulation ot 
bye-law or any other instrwnent having the fqrce of law made 
under any Act, Ordi.nance or provisions referred to in sub-
clause (a), sub-clause (b), sub-clause (c) or sub-clause (d); 
aM S 
(f) any other law (including any usage or custom hav-
ing the force of law) with respect to a matter in the State 
List:. 
55. In article 368 of the Constitution, af.ter clause (3), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4) NO! amendment of this Constitution (including the provisions 
10 
of Part nl) made or purporting to have ' been made under this article 
[whether before or after the commencement of section 55 of the Cons-
titution (Forty-fourth Aniendment) Act, 1976] shall be called in ques-
tion in any court eotcept upon the ground that it has nqt been made IS 
in accordance with the procedure laid down by this article.". 
51. In article 371F of the Constitution, in clause (c), for the words 
ufive years", the words "six years" shall be substituted and for the words 
"four years" in the two places where they occur, the words "five years'" 
.Jhall'be substituted. 20 
57. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,-
(a) in List I-Union List, after entry 2, the following entry shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"2A. Deployment of any armed force of the UniO\D or any 
other force subject to the control of the Union or any contingent 2S 
,or unit thereof in any State in aid of the civil power, pqwers, 
jurisdiction, privileges and liabilities of the members of such 
forces while on such deployment."; 
(b) in List II-State List,-
(i) in entry 1, for the words "the use of naval, military or air 30 
forces or any other armed forces of the Union", the words "the 
use of any naval, military or air force or any other armed forces 
of the Union, or of any other force subject to the contrqI of the 
Union or of any contingelrt or unit thereof' shall be substituted; 
(ii) for entry 2, the following entry shall be substituted, 3S 
namely:-
"2. Police (including railway and village police) subject 
to the provisions of entry 2A of List I."; 
(iji) in entry 3, the words "Administration of justice; consti. 
tution and organisation of all COiUrts, except the Supreme Court 40 
and the High Court;" shall be omitted; 
(iv) entries 11, 19, 20 ,and 29 shall be omitted; 
(v) in entry 55, the words "and advertisements broadcast by 
radio or television" shall be inserted at the end; 
(c) in List III-Concurrent List,- S' 
(i) after entry 11, the following entry shall be inserted, 4 
llamely:-
"11A. Administration of justice; constitution and orga-
nisation of all courts, except the SUpreme Court and the High 
Courts."; 
so 

.- 19 
(ii) after entry 17, the following entries shall be inser"tedt 
hamely:-
"17A. Forests. 
17B. Protection of wild animals and birds:"; 
5 (iii) after 'entry 20, the following entry shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"20A. Population control and family planning."; 
(.v) for entry 25, the following entry shall be substituted, 
namely:-
10 "25. Education, including technical education, medical 
education and universities, subject to the provisions of entries 
63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; vocational and technical training 
of labour ."; 
(v) after entry 33, the following entry shall be inserted, 
IS namely:-
"33A. Weights and measures except establishm~nt of 
standards." . 
58. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, every 
petition made under article 226 of the Constitution before the appointed 
20 day and pending before any High Court immediately before that day 
(such petitipn being referred to in ihis section as a pending petition) and 
any interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other 
manner) made on or in any proceedings relating to, such petition before 
that day shall be dealt with'in accordance with the provisions of article 
2S· 226 as substituted by section 38. 
(2)' In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provi-
sions of SUb-section (1), every pending petition belfore a High Court which 
would not have been admitted by the High Court under the provisions of 
article 226 as substituted by section 38 if such petition had been made after 
30 the appointed day, shall abate and any interim order (whether by way of 
injunction or stay or in any other manner) made on or in any proceed-
ings relating to, such petition shall stand vacated: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-sectiqn shall affect the right 
of the petitioner 'to seek relief under any; other law for the time being in 
force in respect of the matters to which such petition relates and in com-
35 puting the Period of limitation, if any, for seeking such relief, the period 
during which the proceedings relating to such petition were pending 
in the High Court shall be excluded. 
(3) Every interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay or in 
any other manner) which was made before the appointed. day, on or in 
40 any proceedings relating to, a pending petition [not being a pending 
petition which has abated under sub-section (2)], and which is in force 
on that day, shall, unless before the appointed day copies of such pend-
ing petition and of, documents in support of the plea for such interim 
5 order had been furnished to the party against whom such interim order 
4 was made and an opportunity had been given to such party to be heard 
in the matter, cease to have effect (if not vacated earlier) ,-
SO 
(a) on the expiry of a period of one month from the appointed 
day, if the copies of such pending petition and the documents in 
support of the plea for the interim order are not furnished to such 
party before the expiry of the said period of one month; or 
Special 
provi-
aions 
as 
to 
pendin, 
petitiona 
under 
article 
1l211. 

(b) on the expiry ~ a period at four months from the appointed 
day, if the copies referred to in clause (a) have been fumished: to such 
party within the period of one month ~erred to in thst clause but 
such party has not been given an opportunity to be heard in the matter 
before the expiry of the said period of f~ur months. 5 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),1 every in-
terim order (whether by way of injunction Jr stay or in any other 
" manner) which was made before the appointed day on or in any proceed-
ings relating to a pending petition [not being a pending petition which 
has abated under sub-section (2)]. and which is in force on that day, 10 
shall, if such order has the effect of delaying any inquiry into a matter 
Power 
of 
the 
Prell-
dent to 
remove 
diftleu1. 
ties. 
of public importance or any investigation or inquiry into an offence 
punishable with imprisonment or any action for the execution of any 
work or project of public utility, or the acquisition of any property for 
such execution, by the Government or any corporation owned or con- 1$ 
trolled by the Government, stand vacted. 
Explanatian.-In this section, "appointed day" means the date on which 
section 38 comes into force. . 
59. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the 
Constitution as amended by this Act (including any difficulty in relation 30 
to .the transition from the provisions of the Constitution as they stood im-
mediately before the date of the President's assent to this Act to! the pro-
visions of the Constitution as amended by this AC't),.the President may, by 
order, make such provisions. including any adaptation or modification of 
any provision 01. the Constitution, as appear to him to be necessary or ex- 2$ 
pedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years 
from the date of such assent. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as may be 
after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A Constitution to be living must be growing. If the impediments ~ 
the growth of the Constitution are not removed, the Constitution will 
suffer a virtual atrophy. The question of amending the Constitution for 
removing the difti~ulties which have arisen in achieving the objective of 
socio-economic revolution, which would end poverty and ignorance and 
disease and inequality of opportunity, has been engaging the active atten-
tion of Government and the public for some years now. 
2. The democratic institutions provided in the Constitution are basi-
cally sound and the path for progress does not lie in denigrating any of 
these institutions'. However, there could be no denial that these institu-
tions have been subjected to considerable stresses and strains and that 
vested interests have been trying to promote their selfish ends to the 
great detriment of public good. 
3. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Constitution to spell out ex-
pressly the high ideals of socialism, secularism and the integrity 01, ,the 
nation, to make the directive principles more comprehensive and give 
them precedence over those fundamental rights which have been allowed 
to be relied upon to frustrate socio-economic reforms for implementing 
the directive principles. It is also proposed to specify the fundamental 
duties of the citizens and make special provisions for dealing with anti-
national activities, whether by individuals or associations. 
4. Parliament and the State Legislatures embody the will of the 
people and the essence of democracy is that the will of the people should 
prevail. Even though article 368 of the Constitution is clear and cate-
goric with regard to the all inclusive nature of the amending power, it 
is considered necessary to put the matter beyond doubt. It is proposed 
to strengthen the presumption in favour of the constitutionality of legis-
lation enacted by Parliament and State Legislatures by providing for a 
requirement as to the minimum number of Judges for' determining ques-
tions as to the constitutionality of laws and for a special majority of not 
less than two-thirds for declaring any law to be constitutionally invalid. 
It is also proposed to take away the jurisdiction of High COurts with 
regard to determination of Constitutional validity of Central laws and 
confer exclusive jurisdiction in this behalf on the Supreme Court so a.! 
to avoid multiplicity of proceedings with regard to validity of the same 
Central law in dift'erent High Courts and the consequent possibility o~ 
the Central law being valid in one State and invalid in another State. 
5. To reduce the mounting arrears in High Courts and to secure the 
speedy disposal of service matters, revenue matters and certain other 
matters of 9pecial importance in the context of the socio-economic 
development and progress, it is considered expedient to provide for ad-
ministrative and other tribunals for dealing with such matters while 
preserving the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to such 
matt,ers under article 136 of the Constitution. It is also necessary to 
make certain modifications in the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts 
under article 226. 
21 

6. It is proposed to avail of the present opportunity to make certain 
other amendments which have become necessary in the light of the 
working of the Constitution. 
7. The various amendments proposed in the Bill have been explained 
in the notes on clauses. 
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; H. R. GOKHKLE. 
The 28th August, 1976. 

Notes on cla.uses 
Clause 2.-The concepts of sacularism, socialism and integrity of the 
Nation are implicit in the Constitution. These have been clearly spelt 
out in the amendments tOi the Preamble. ' 
Cla.u.se 4.-Article 31C, as presently worded, saves only laws giving 
effect to the directive principles specified in clause (b) and clause (c) 
of article 39 from attack on the ground of infringement of fundamental 
rights contained in articles 14, 19 and 31. The amendment seeks to widen 
the scope of the article so as to cover all the directive principles enume-
rated in Part IV. 
CZau.se 5.-This amendment provides for the making of a Parliament-
ary law to prevent or prohibit anti-national activities and to prevent or 
prohibit the formation of anti-national associations. The expressions 
'anti-national activities' and 'anti-national associations' have been defined 
in detail. The law made by virtue of this amendment shall not be deemed 
to be void on the ground that it takes away or abridges any of the funda-
mental rights conferred by articles 14, 191 and 31. 
Cla.use 6.-This clause seeks to insert a new article 32A to provide 
that the Supreme Court shall have no jurisdiction to decide the consti-
tutional validity of a S'tate law in any proceedings under article 32 unless 
the validity of a Central law is also in issue in such proceedings. The 
High Court will have no jurisdiction in such cases. 
Clauses 7 to 10·-Article 39 is being amended to emphasize the cons-
tructive role of the State with regard to children. 
New directives are being added in Part IV to provide for-
(1) free legal aid to economically backward classes; 
(2) participation of workers in the management of organisations 
engaged in any industry; 
(3) protection and improvement of environment and safeguard-
ing of forests and wild life. 
Olause H.-The Constitution does not contain any provisions specify-
ing the ·fundamental duties of the citizens. New Pari IV-A proposed in 
this clause enumerates these fundamental duties. 
Clau.se 13.-The President acts on the advice of the Council of Minis-
ters. It is being made explicit by this amendment that he shall be bound 
by such advice. I 
23 

24./ 
Ct.a.uses 14 and 28.-Artic1e 77 (3) provides for the framing of rules for 
the convenient transaction of Government business which rules are 
treated by the Government as confidential. However, as courts have 
been found 10 summon these rules for production, it is considered that 
this should be prevented. A new clause is, therefore, being added to 
provide that no court or authority shall compel their production. 
A similar provisiO\ll is being made in article 166. 
Cl4uses 12, 15, 16, 29 and 47.-ln the context of the intensiftca~ion of 
the femily planning programmes of the Government, it is considered that 
not only the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States 
and the total number of seats in Legislative Assemblies of the States but 
also the extent of parliamentary and assembly constituencies and the 
reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as deter-
mined on the basis of the 1971 census, should be frozen till the year 2001. 
It is accordingly proposed to amend the relevant articles, namely, articles 
81 and 82 relating to the Lok Sabha, article 170 relating to the Legislative 
Assemblies of States, article 55 relating to the manner of election of the 
President and articles 330 and 332 relating to reservation of seats for 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Lok Sabha and the Legis-
lative Assemblies of States. Provision is also being made to the effect 
that whenever after a census, delimitation is undertaken, such delimita-
tion is to take effect from the date to be specified by the President. 
l.l4uses 17, 30 and 56.-lt is proposed to change the duration of the Lok 
Sabha and the State Legislative Assemblies from five to six years. A 
consequential amendment is made in article 371F(c) relating to Sikkim 
Legislative Assembly. 
Clauses 18, 22, 31 and 35.-Presently under article 100 the quorum 
for constituting a meeting of either House of Parliament is one-tenth 
of the total number of members. This provision can only be altered by 
a Parliamentary law. The relevant provisions are proposed to be omitted 
from article 100 and power is being taken to do it by means of rules under 
article 118. Similar provisions are being made in relation to the State 
Legislatures by amending articles 189 and 208. 
Qla.uses 19 and 32.-Sub-clause (a) of clauC!e (1) of article 102 pro-
vides that a person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for 
being, a member of either House of Parliament if he holds an office of 
profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State, 
other than an office declared by Parliament by law not to disqualify its 
holder. The existing position has led to a great deal of uncertalntv. The 
sub-clause is sought to be amended to provide that a person shall be so 
disquaUfied if he holds any such office of proftt uncfer the Government 
of India or the Government of any State as is declared by Parliament 
by law to disqualify its holder. ' 
Similar proviSion is being made in article 1tl (1) (a) retatin~ to State 
Legislatures but the power to l'lpedfy the oftices will vest in Parliameont 
instead of in the State Legislature. 
Clauses 20 and 33.-The amendment proposed in clause 20 enlar~es 
the scope of article 103· The question as t,o whether a member h .. 

become subject to any disqualification mentioned in clause (1) of artic1e 
102 as also the question whether a person is disqualified for being chosen 
as a member of either House of Parliament, etc., on the ground of being 
found guilty of a corrupt practice, including the question as to the period 
qf disqualification or as to the removal or the reduction of the period of 
such disqualification, shall be decided by the President after consulting the 
Election Commission which is empowered to hold an inquiry in this be-
half. It is proposed to amend article 192 on similar lines. 
CLauses 21 and 34.-This clause seeks to amend clause (3) of article 
105 which provides that the powers, privileges and immunities of each 
House of Parliament and of its members and committees thereof shall 
be those of the House of Commons or of its members and committees 
until they are defined by a Parliamentary law. The amendment proposed 
is that the powers, privileges and immunities aforesaid of either House 
of Parliament and of the members and the committees thereof shall be 
evolved by such House from time to time. A similar modification is 
being made in clause (3) of article 194 which relates to State Legislatures. 
Clauses 23, 24 and 25.-Presently, the Constitutional validity of a 
Central law can be questioned ei1 her before the Supremt: Court or the 
High Court. This scheme is being altered as it is felt that if a number 
of High Courts give differing judgments as regards the validity of1 a 
Central law, the impll!lTIt'nultion r:f the Central law will become difficult. 
It is, therefore, proposed to invest the Supreme Court with exclusive 
jurisdiction as regards determination of the co,nstitutional validity of 
Central laws. Where a case involves constitutional validity of both a 
Central and a State law, the Supreme Court alone will have jurisdiction 
to determine the constitutional validity of such laws. Where cases in-
volving the same or .substantially the same questions of law of general 
importance are pending before the Supreme Court and one or more High 
Courts or before two or more High Courts the Attorney-General can 
move the Supreme Court to withdraw the cases pending before the 
High Court or High Courts to itself and dispose of the same. Further, 
the Supreme Court is being empowered to transfer cases from one High 
Court to another High Court if it is expedient for the ends o,f justice so 
to do. 
It is also being provided that the minimum number of Judges of the 
Supreme Court who shall sit for determining any question as to the cons-
titutional validity of a Central law or of a Central and a State law shall be 
not less than seven and that a Central or State law shall not be declared 
to be constitutionally invalid unless not less than two-thirds of the 
Judges hearing the case hold the same to be constitutional1y invalid. 
Clause 26.-This amendment makes some consequential changes in 
article 145 following the insertion of new articles 131A, 139A and 144A. 
Clause 27.-At present the Comptroller and Auditor-General has the 
power to! prescribe the form in which the accounts of the Union and 
of the States shall be maintained. Consequent on the decisi0101 of Govern-
ment 'to separate the accounts from audit, this power is being given. 
to the President, to be exercised after consUltation with the Comptroller 
by amending article 150. 

Clause 36.-This amendment relates to the qualifications to be fulfUled 
by a person for appointment as a High Court Judge. Sub-clause (b) of 
clause (2) of article 217 is be!ng amended to provide that a distinguished 
jurist is also qualified for appointment as a High Court Judge. This 
amendment also provides that hereafter the period spent by a person, 
after he became an advocate, as a member of a Tribunal or as the incum-
bent of any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge 
in law shall be taken into account for the purpose of computing the period 
during which such person has been an advocate. 
Clause 37.-This is a consequential amendment of article 225 following 
insertion of new article 323B which provides for the exclusion of the 
jurisdiction of the High Courts and the Supreme Court (except the 
purisdiction under article 136) and for the setting up of tribunals, in re~ 
peet of certain specified matters including matters concerning the re-
venue. 
Clauses 38 and 58.-Clause 3'3 seeks to amend article 226 to a signi-
ficant extent. While the High Courts continue to enjoy their power to 
enforce fundamental rights, they cannot hereafter exercise jurisdiction 
in every case where there is an invasion of a legal right which, so far, 
they have been doing by virtue of the jurrsdiction conferred by the 
expre5sion 'for any other purpose' which is being deleted now. Instead, 
the High Courts are being vested with a restricted jurisdiction. They can 
exercise jurisdiction in (a) cases where there is a contravention of a 
statutory provision causing substantial injury to the petitioner, and (b) 
cases' where there is an illegality resulting in substantial failure of jus-
tice. In either case, the petitioner has to satisfy the court that he has 
no other remedy. 
Provision is being made under clause 38 that the High Courts shall 
not issue an interim order ordinarily except upon notice to the other 
side and after giving the other side an opportunity to be heard An 
exception is made in cases where the loss or damage to the petitioner 
cannot be compensated in money. Notwithstanding this exception, the 
High Courts shall have no power to grant an interim order in any case 
where the effect of such order is to delay any inquiry into a matter of 
public importance or any investigation or inquiry into an offence punish-
able with imprisonment or any action for the execution of any workl 
project of public utility, etc. 
Provision is also being made in clause 58 to cover petitions pending 
in the High. Courts. 
Clauses 39 and 42.-These amendments seek to exclude from the 
jurisdiction of High Courts questions as to constitutional validity of 
Central laws and provide for the minimum number of Judges of a High 
Court who shall sit for ri.etermining any questions as to the constitu-
tional validity of a State law. The minimum number is fixed at five 
but where a High Court consists of less than five Judges, all the Judges 
o~ the ~igh Court sitting together can hear such questions. Any Judge 
dIsqualified by reason of pecuniary or personal bias has to be excluded 
in computing the number of· Judges of a High Court. Where the 
number of Judges hearing a question as to the constitutional validity Is 
not less than five, the decision as to constitutional invalidity shall be by 

!n 
a majority of not less than two-thirds and where the number of judges 
is less than five, the law in issue cannot be declared to be constitu-
tionally invalic1. unless all the Judges hold it to be constitutionally 
invalid. 
::;l.ause 40.-This clause seeks to amend article 227 to omit the refer-
ence to tribunals occurring in clause (1) of the article and make it clear 
that nothing in that article shall be construed as giving to a High Court 
any jurisdiction to question any judgment of any inferior court which 
is not otherwise subject to appeal or revision. 
Clause 41.-This amendment is consequential to the insertion of new 
article l3lA. 
Clause 43.-By this amendment a new article 257A is insertec\ to 
empower the Union to send any armed force or other force of the Union 
for dealing with any grave situation or law and order in any State. Such 
force shall act in accordance with the directions of the Central Govern-
ment and shall not be subject to the control of the State Government. 
Provision is also being made to empower Parliament to define the powers, 
functions and the liabilities of the members of such force. 
Clause 44.-This clause seeks to amend article 311 (2) denying the 
Government servant the opportunity to make a representation at the 
second stage of the inquiry against the penalty proposed to be imposed 
on him. , 
Clause 45.-This clause seeks to amend article 312 of the Constitution 
relating to all·India Services to provide for the cr·~ation of an all-India 
Judicial Service by a Parliamentary law. Such Service shall not include 
any post inferior to that of a district judge. 
Clause 46.- This clause seeks to insert a new Part XIV A, which 
consists of articles 323A and 323B. The former provides for the setting 
up of Administrative Tribunals by a Parliamentary law for detemtining 
disputes relating to the recruitment and conditions of service of Union 
Government servants and servants of the State inc1ucting the employees 
of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the 
control of the Government of India or of a corporation owned or control-
led by the Government. Such law will provide for the constitution of a 
tribunal for the Union and for a separate tribunal for each State or for 
two or more States and define the jurisdiction and powers of such tri-
bunals·1 
New article 323B provides for the creation of tribunals for the deter-
mination of disputes, complaints and offences respecting the various 
matters specified therein. 
CLauses 46, 49, 52 and 53.-At present, a Proclamation of Emergency 
cannot be made in respect of a part of the country. The amendments 
proposed in these clauses are for enabling the President to make a Pro-
clamation of Emergency in respect of a part of the country or, as the 
case may be, to restrict a Proclamation of Emergency made in respect 
of the country as a whole to a part of the country. 

28 
Clauses 50 and 51.-Under the existing article 356, a Proclamation 
approved by Parliament ceases to be in operation after a period of six 
months unless revoked earlier and can be renewed for a period of six 
months at a time ·but in no case beyond a total periQd of three 
years. The period of I>ix months is now being enlarged to one year. 
Clause (2) of article 357 is being substituted by a new clause to the effect 
that any law made by Parliament or the President or any other autho-
rity in, exercise of the powers of the State Legislature under article 356 
shall continue in force until alte~ed, repealed or amended by the com-
petent Legislature or other authority. 
Clause 54.-By this amendment, the expressions 'Central law' and 
'State law' are being defined. This has become necessary because of the 
division of jurisdiction between the Supreme Court anc\ the High Courts 
as regards the determination of the Constitutional validity of Central 
and State laws. 
Clause 55.-This clause seeks to amend article 368 to clarify the true 
scope of th'lt article. 
Clause 57.-The amendments made by this clause seek either to 
amend the existing entries in the lists of the Seventh Schedule or to 
transpose certain entries or subjects in certain entries from one List to 
another. The entries or subjects which have been transposed from List 
II to List III are (1) administration of justice, constitution and organi-
sation of all courts except the Supreme Court and the High Courts (2) 
education (3) weights and measures (4) forests and (5) protection of 
wild animals and birc\s. It is also proposeG that taxes on advertisements 
broadcast by radio or television should be excluded from the purview of 
tmtry 55 of the State Lis't. 
CLause 59.-This clause provides for the removal of difficulties. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to consti- Preamble. 
tute India into a SOVEREIGN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure 
to all its citizens: 
JUSTICE, social, economic and political; 
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, fait~ and worship; 
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; 
and to promote among them all 
FRATERNITY assurin'g the dignity of the individual and the unity of 
the Nation; 
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLy this twenty-sixth day of No-
vember, 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSEL-
VES THIS CONSTITUTION . 
.. • • • • .. 
31C. Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law giving 
effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principles speci-
fied in clause (b) or clause (c) of article 39 shall be deemed to be voici 
on the ground that it is 'inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges' 
any of the rights conferred by article 14, article 19 or article 31; and 
no law containing a declaration that it is for giving effect to such policy 
c;hall be called In questi'>n in any court on the ground that it does not 
give effect to such policy: 
Provided that where such law is made by the Legislature of a State, 
the provisions of this article shall not apply thereto unless such law, 
having been reserved for the consideration of the President, has receiv-
eci his assent. 
.. • • .. • • 
39. The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing-
• .. • • • • 
(f) that childhood and youth are protected against exploitation 
and against moral and material abandonment. 
.. .. .. .. .. 
55. (1) As far as practicable, there shall be uniformity in the scale 
of representation of the different States at the election of the President. 
(2) For the purpose of securing such uniformity among the States 
I inter se as well as parity between the States as a whole and the Union, 
the number of votes which each elected member of Par!iament and of 
29 
Saving of 
laws 
living 
effect 
to certain 
directive 
princi-
ples. 
Certain 
principles 
of policy 
to be fol-
lowed by 
the State . 
Manner of 
election of 
President. 

Council 
oI.Minil-
ters to 
aid and 
advise 
President. 
Composi-
tion of 
the House 
of the 
People. 
Readjust-
ment after 
each 
census. 
Duration 
of 
Houses of 
Parlia-
ment. 
30 
the Legislative Assembly of each State is entitled to cast at such elec-
tion shall be detennined in the following manner:-
(a) every electec\ member of the Legislative Assembly of a 
State shall have as many votes as there are multiples of one thous-
and in the quotient obtained by dividing the population of the State 
by the total number of the elected members of the Assembly; 
(b). if, after taking the said multiples of one thousand, the re-
mainder is not less than five hundred, then the vote of each member 
referred to in suh-clause (a) shall be further increased by one; 
(c) each elected member of either House of Parliament snaIl 
have such number of votes as may be obtained by dividing the total 
number of votes assigned to the members of the Legislative Assem-
blies of the States under sub-clauses (a) and (b) by the total num-
ber of the elected members of both Houses of Parliament, tractions 
exceeding one-half being counted as one and other fractions being 
disregarded. 
(3) The election of the President shall be held in accordance with the 
system of proportional representation by mean<; of the single transfer-
able vote and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot. 
Explanation.-In this article, the expression "population" means the 
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the rele-
vant figures have been published. 
. ... . ... ... ... 
.74. (1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister 
at the head to aid and advise the President in the exercise of his functions. 
... ... ... • ... • 
81. (1) ... ... ... • ... ... 
(3) In this article, the expression "population" means the population 
as ascertained as the last preceding census of which the relevant figure<; 
have been published. 
8%. Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of seats in the 
House of the People to the States and the division of each State into 
territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in 
such manner as Parliament may by law determine: 
Provined that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the 
House of the People until the dissolution of the then existing House. 
83. (1) ... ... ... ... ... 
(2) The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue 
for five years from the date appointed for its first meethl'g and no longer 
and the expiration of the said period of five years shall operate as a rUs-
solution of the House: 
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emer-
gency is in operation, be extended by Parliament by law for a period 
not exceeding one year at a time and not extending in any case beyond 
a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate . 
... ... • ... ... • 

31 
tOO. (1) • • • • • • 
. (3) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the quorum to con-
stItute a meeting of either House of Parliament shall be one-tenth of the 
total number of members of the House. 
. (4) If at any time during a meeting of a House there is no quorum, 
l~ shall be the duty of the Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, 
elther to adjourn the House or to suspend the meetin'g until there is a 
quorum. 
• • • • • * .102. (1) A person 'shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for 
belOg, a member of either House of Parliament-
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of 
India or the Government of any State, other than an office declared 
by Parliament by law not to disqualify its holder; 
• • • • • 
103. (1) If any question arises as to Whether a member of either 
House of Parliament has become subject to any of the disqualifications 
mentioned in clause (1) of article 102, the question shall be reft:!rred for 
the decision of the Presirlent and his decision shall be final. 
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question. the President 
shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act accord-
ing to such opinion . 
• * * * • 
105. (1) * * • • * 
(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of each 
House of Parliament, and of the members and the committees of each 
House, 'Shall be such as may from time to time be defined by Parlia-
ment by law, and, until so defined, shall be those of the House of Com-
mons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its members and 
committees, at the commencement of this Constitution. 
* • * • • 
118. (1) Each House of Parliament may make rules for regulating, 
subject to the provisions of this Constitution, its procedure and the con-
duct of its business. 
• • • • • 
Voting in 
Houses, 
power of 
Houses 
to act 
notWith-
standing 
vacancies 
and 
quorum . 
DisquaJi-
fications 
for 
member. 
ship. 
Decision 
on 
questions 
a8 to 
disqualifi. 
cations of 
members. 
Powers, 
privileges, 
etc., of the 
Houses of 
Parliament 
and of the 
members 
and com-
mittees 
thereof. 
Rules of 
procedure. 
140. (1) Subject to the provlslons of any law made by Parliament, Rules of 
the Supreme Court may from time to time, with the approval of the Pre- Court, etc. 
sident, make rules for regulating generally the practice and procedure 
of the Court including-
• .. .~---. • * 
(2) Subject to the provisions of clause (3), rules made under this 
article may fix the minimum number of Juliges who are to sit for any 
purpose. and may provide for the powers of single Judges and Division 
Courts. ~- --•. - .. ....., 
(3) The minimum number of Judges who are to sit for the purpose 
of deciding any case involving a substantial question of law as to the in-
terpretation of this Constitution or for the purpose of hearing any 
reference under article 143 shall be five: 
Provided that, where the Court hearin~ an appeal under any of the 
provisions of this Chapter other than article 132 consists of less than five 
Judges and in the course of the hearin~ of the .appeal the Court is .satis-
fied that the appeal involves a substantIal questIon of law as to the lOter-
pretation of this Constitution the determination of which is necessary 
for the disposal of the appeal. such Court shan. refer the question for 

Power of 
Comp-
troller 
and 
Auditor-
General to 
give 
directions 
as to 
accounts. 
Composi-
tion 
of the 
Legislative 
Assem-
blies. 
Duration 
of State 
Legisla-
tures. 
Voting in 
Houses, 
power of 
Houses 
to act 
notwith-
standing 
vacancies 
and 
quorum. 
32 
opinion to a Court constituted as required by this clause for the purpose 
of decirling any case involving such a question and shall on receipt of the 
opinion dispose of the appeal in conformity with such opinion . 
• * * • • 
150. The accounts of the Union and of the States shall be kept in such 
form as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India may, with the 
approval W the President, prescribe. 
• • • • * 
170. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 333, the Legislative Assem-
bly of each State shall consist of not more than five hundred, and not less 
than sixty, members chosen by direct election from territorial constitu-
encies in the State. 
(2) For the purposes of clause (1) each State shall be divided into 
territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the 
population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it 
shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State. 
Erplanation.-In this clause, the expression "population" means the 
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the rele-
vant figures have been published. 
'(3) Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats in 
the Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of each State 
into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and 
in such manner as Parliament may by law determine: 
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the 
Legislative Assembly until the dissolutiOll'l of the then existing Assembly. 
• • • • * 
172. (1) Every Legislative Assembly of every State, unless sooner dis-
solved, shall continue for five years from the daie appointed for its first 
meeting and no longer and the expiration of the said period of five years 
shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly: 
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency 
is in operation, be extended by Parliameat by law fQJ a period! Bot exceed-
ir..g one year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of 
six months after the PrOIClamation has ceased to operate. 
• • 
189. (1) • • • * • • • • • 
(3) Until the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, the 
quorum to constitute a meeting of a House of the Legislature of a State 
shall be ten members or one-tenth of the total number of members of the 
House, whichever is greater. 
(4) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly or the 
Legislative Council of a State there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of 
the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the 
Hquse or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum . 
• • • • .' 

33 
• < 
.I- • tJC91. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for 
pemg, a :member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a 
State-
, (a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India 
~ . 
Disquailll .. 
cations 
or the Government of any State specified in the First Schedule, Qther., 
than an office declared by the Legislature of the State by law not to 
t:lisq~ify its holder; 
for 
member:' 
ship. 
• • • • • 
192. (1) If any qu~stion arises as to whether a member of a House of 
ihe Legislature of a State has become subject to any of the disqualifiea:. 
!ierls mentioned in clause (1) of article 191, the question shall be referred 
for the decision of the Governor and his decision shall be final. 
(2) Before giving any decision on any such questiol".., the Governor 
shall obtain the opinion of the Election COjmmission and shall act according 
to such opinion. 
• • 
1M. (1) • • • • • • • • 
(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of a House 
of the Legislature of a State, and 0If the members and the committees of a 
House of such Legislature, shall be such as may from time to .time be 
defined by the Legislature by law, and, until so defined, shall be those of 
the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingtiom, and 
of its members and committees, at the cOjrrlmencement of this Constitution. 
• • • • • 
208. (1) A House of the Legislature of a State may make rules for 
regulating, !Ubject to the provisions of this ConstitutiQIl, its procedure 
and the conduct of its business. 
• • • • • 
217. (1) • • • • • (2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a 
High Court unless he is a citizen of India and-
(a) has for at least ten years held a judicial office in the territory 
at India; or 
(b) has for at least ten years been an advocate of a High Court 
or of two or more such Courts in succession. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause-
(a) in computing the period during which a person has been an 
advocate of a High Court, there shall be included any period during 
which the person has held judicial offi.ce after he became an advocate; 
(b) in computing the period during which a person has held 
judicial office in the territqry of India or been an advocate of a High 
Court, there shall be included anY' period before the commencement 
of this Constitution during which he has held judicial office in any 
area which was comprised before the fifteenth day of August, 1947, 
within India as defined by the Government of India Act, 1935, or has 
been an advocate of any Hi,gh CQurt in any :mch area, af: the case 
may be. 
• • • • • 
Deci~on 
on 
questions 
as to 
disqualifi-
cations of 
members. 
Powers, 
Privile-
ges, etc., 
of the 
Houses 
of Lei,'is-
latures 
and of 
the 
members 
and com-
mittees 
thereof. 
Rules of 
procedure. 
Appoint_ 
ment and 
conditions 
of the 
office of a 
Judge of a 
High 
Court. 
, , 
Z25. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the provisions 
of any law of the appropriate Legislature made by virtue of powers con-
Jurisdic_ 
tion of 

~xiSting 
High 
tourts. 
Power of 
High 
Court. 
to issUe 
certain 
writs. 
, ,,:1 ._ 1 J.I 
Power of 
superin-
tendence 
over 
all courts 
by the 
High 
Court. 
Transfer 
of certain 
cases to 
High 
Court. 
Dismissal, 
rernovalor 
reduction 
in rank 
ot per-
sons 
employe! 
in civil 
capacities 
34 
. . 
ferred qn that Legislature by this Constitution, the jurisdiction of, and 
the law administered in, any existing High Court, and the respective 
powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the administration of justice in: 
the Court, including any power to make rules of Court and to regulatel 
the sittings of the Court and Qf members thereof sitting alone or iIt 
Di\>'ision Courts, shall be the same as immediately before the commence';' 
ment of this Constitution: 
Provided that any restriction to which the exercise of original jurig.. 
diction by any of the High Courts with respect to! any matter concerning 
the revenue or concerning any act ordered Or done in the collection 
thereof was subject immediately before the cdmmencement of this cOnsti-
tution shall no lqnger apply to the exercise of such jUrisdiction. 
221. (1) Notwithstanding anything in artiCle 32, every High Court sluill 
have power; throughout the territories in rel1ltion to which it exerciseS 
jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate 
cases any GQvernment, within those territories directions, orders or writs, 
including writs in, the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, 
quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement of any of 
the rights conferred by Part III and for any other purpose. 
(lA) The power co.nferred by clause (1) to issue directions, orders or 
writs to any Government, authority or person may also be exercised by 
any High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the territories within 
which! the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises for the exercise of 
such power, nqtwithstanding that the seat of such Government or autho-
rity or the residence of such person is not within those tenitories. 
(2) The power conferred on a High Court by clause (1) or clause (lA) 
shall not be in derogation of the power co.nferred on the Supreme Court 
by clause (2) of article 32. 
227. (1) Every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts 
and tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises 
jurisdiction. 
• • • • • 
228. If the High Court is satisfied that a case pending in a court sub-
OII'dinate to it involves a substantial question of law as to the interpreta-
tion of this Constitution the determination of which is necessary for the 
disposal of the case, it shall withdraw the case and may-
(a) either dispose of the case itseU, or 
(b) determine the said question of law and return the case to the 
court' from which the case has been so withdrawn together with a 
copy af its judgment on such question, and the said court shall on 
receipt thereof, proceed to dispose of the case in comformity with 
such judgment. 
• • • • • • 
311. (1) • • • • • 
(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismis:aed or removed or 
reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed 
of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard in respect of those charges and where it is proposed, after such 
inquiry, to impose on him any such penalty, until he has been given a 

35 
teasoriable opportunity of making representation on the penalty pro-
posed, but only on the basis of the evidenc(' adduced during such 
inquiry: 
Provided that this clause shall not apply-
(4) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank 
on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a cri-
ininal cliarge; or 
(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a 
person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason to 
be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not rea'Son;bly 
practicable to hold such inquiry; or 
(c) where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, 
is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State it is not 
expedient to hold such inquiry. 
* * * * • 
under 
the 
Union 
or a 
State. 
312. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Part XI, if the Council of All-India 
States has declared by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds service •. 
o! the Members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in 
the national interest so to do, Parliament may by law provide for the 
creation of one or more all-India services common to the Union and 
the States, and, subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, regulate 
the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to 
any such service. 
* * * * * 
3lJO. (1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for-
(a) the Scheduled Castes; 
(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes-
(i) in the tribal areas of Assam; 
(ii) in Nagaland; 
(iii) in Meghalaya; 
(iv) in Arunachal Pradesh; and 
(v) in Mizoram; and 
(c) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam. 
(2) The number of seats reserved in any State or Union territory 
for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall 
bear as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of 
sea~ allotted to that State or Union territory in the House of the People 
as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or Union territory 
or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State or Union territory or part of the 
State or Union territory, as the case may be, in respect of which seats 
are so reserved, bears to the total population of the State or Union 
terri tory. 
(3) Notwithstancting anything contained in clause (2), the n~ber 
of seats reserved in the House of the People for the Scheduled Tribes 
. th autonomous districts of Assam shall bear to the total number of 
:ats eallotted to that State a proportion not less than the population of 
Reserva-
tion of 
sea.ts for 
Scheduled 
Castes 
and 
Scheduled 
Tribes 
in the 
House of 
the 
People. 

, . I 
Proclama-
tion of 
Emeraenq. 
EtJeet of 
Proclama-
tion of 
Emer-
gency. 
Provisions 
in case 
of failure 
of consti-
tutional 
machinery 
in States. 
,.j 
36 
the Scheduled Tribes in the said autonomous districts bears to the tot,n 
population of the SUite . 
• • • • 
352. (1) If the President is Satisfied that" grave emergency existS 
whereby the security of India or of any ,part of the territory thereof 
is threatened, whether by war or external aggression or internal dis-
turbance, he may, by Proclamation, make a declaration to that effect. 
(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1)-
(a) may be revoked by a subsequent Proclamation! 
iIr • • 
Provided that if any such Proclamation is issued at a time when the 
Mouse of the People has been dissolved or the dissolution of the House 
of the People takes place during the period of two months referred to 
in sub-clause (c), and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has 
been passed by the Council of States, but no resolution with respect 
to such Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People before 
the expiration of that period, the Proclamation shall, cease to operate 
at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of 
the People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration 
of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclamation 
has been also passed by the House of the People . 
• • • • • 
353. While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, then-
(a) notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the execu-
tive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of directions to 
any State as to the manner in' which the executive power thereof 
is to be exercised; 
(b) the power of Parliament to make laws with r~t to any 
matter shall include power to make laws conferring powers and 
imposing duties, or authorising the conferring of powers and the 
imposition of duties, upon the Union or officers and authorities of 
the Union as respects that matter, notwithstanding that it is one 
which is not enumerated in the Union List 
• • • • • 
356. (1) • • • • • 
(4) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to ope-
rate on the expiration of a period of six months from the date of the 
passing of the second of the resolutions approving the Proclamation 
under clause (3): 
Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the conti-
nuance in force of such a Proclamation i'S passed by both Houses of 
Parliament, the Proclamation shall, unless revoked, continue in force 
for a further period of six months from the date on which under this 
clause it would otherwise have ceased to operate, but no such Procla-
mation shall in any case remain in force for more than three years: 
Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People 
takes place during any such period of six months and a resolution 

--- -- i .... 1'.) 
f '''\' 
37 
;. .... 
approving the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed 
by the Council of States, but no resolution with respect to the conti-
nuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the House of 
the People during the said period, the Proclamation shall cease to 
operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the 
House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the 
expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the 
continuance in force of the Proclamation has been also passed by the 
House of the People . 
• * • * * 
351. (1) * • • • • 
(2) Any law made in exercise Oif the power of the Legislature of the 
State by Parliament or the President or other authority referred to in 
su1rclause (a) of clause (1) which Parliament or the President or such 
other authority would not, but for the issue of a Proclamation 
under article 356, have been competent to make shall, to the extent 
of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of a period 
of one year after the Proclamation has ceased to operate e"(cept as 
respects things done or omitted to be done before the expiration of the 
'Said period, unless the provisions which shall so cease to have effect 
are sooner repealed or re-enacted with or without modification by Act 
of the appropriate Legislature. 
358. While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, nothing in 
article 19 shall restrict the power of the State as defined in Part III to 
make any law or to take any executive action which tile State would 
but for the provisions contained in that Part be competent to make or 
to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent of the incompetency, 
cease to have effect as soon as the Proclamation ceases to operate, 
except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so 
ceases to have effect. 
359. (1) • • • • • 
(lA) While an order made under clause (1) mentionin~ any of the 
rights conferred by Part III is in operation, nothing in that Part confer-
ring those rights shall restrict the power of the State as defined in the 
~aid Part to make any law or to take any executive action which the 
State would but for the provisions contained in that Part be competent 
to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent of the 
incompetency, cease to have effect as soon as the order aforesaid ceases 
to operate, except as respect's things done or omitted to be done before 
the law so ceases to have effect. 
(2) An order made as aforesaid may extend to the whole or any part 
of the territory of India. 
• * * * * 
371F. Notwithstanding anything in this Consltitution,-
• • • • • 
(c) in the case of the Assembly deemed to be the Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Sikkim under clause (b), the references to 
the period of five years in clause (1) of article 172 shan be construed 
as references to a period of four' years and the said period of four 
years shall be deemed to commence from the appointed day; 
• • • • • • 
Exercise 
of legis-
lative 
powers un-
der Procla-
mation 
issued 
under 
article 
356. 
Suspen-
sion of 
provisions 
of article 
19 during 
emergen-
cies. 
Suspension 
of the 
enforce_ 
ment of 
the rights 
conferred 
by Part In 
during 
emergen_ 
cies, 
Special 
provisions 
with res-
pect to 
the State 
of Sikkim. 

• • 
SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
[Article 246] 
List I-Union List 
• 
List II-State List 
• • 
1. Public order (but not including the use of naval, military or air 
forces or any other armed forces of the Union in aid of the civil power). 
2. Police, including railway and village police. 
3. Administration of justice; constitution and organisation of all 
courts, except the Supreme Court and the High Court; offtcers and 
servants of the High Court; procedure in rent and revenue courts; fees 
taken in all courts except the Supreme Court. 
• • • • • 
11. Education including universities, subject to the prov.isions of en· 
tries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I and entry 25 of List III. 
• • • • • 
19. Forests. 
20. Protection of wild animals ann. birds. 
• • • • • 
29. Weights and measures except establishment of standards. 
* * * • • 
55. Taxes on advertisements other than advertisements pubUshed in 
the newspapers. 
• • * * • 
List Ill-COncurrent List 
• • • • • 
25. Vocational and technical training of labour . 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Consti~ution of India. 
(Shri H. R. Gokhale, MmiBter of Law, JU8tice and Company Aff4iTS.) 