8UI No. 91 01 195' 
THE TERRITORIAL COUNCILS 
BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 

Bm No. 91 of 1956. 
~_, ___ ....... __ • __________ .. r_l_dd"_M ____ '''.'''.'.11_ ......... ___ _ WI .1 ..... .• , .. ,,"'_ ..... d __ 
LOK SABRA 
CORRIGE~mA 
to 
THE TERRITORL'!.L COUNCIIS BILL, 1956 
(As introduced in 10k Sabha) 
1. Page 5, in the marginal heading to clause 19,-
for "Penalty" read "Fin2lity" 
2. Page 20, line 14,-
for "rules" read "bye-laws" 
3. Page 21, line 3,-
for "to these provisions" read 
"the provisions of thiSAct ll 
4. Page 23, line 2,-
ill "section 63" ~ "section 64" 
NEJ,.r DELHI, 
The 14th December, 1956. 
ai't1cletot-mt:lftna4· .......... ,.,. !!I3~,lif'",.,~... '," '. '",' .... ".. .._" 
of the owner of such place notwithstanding 1fa~' '. 
no common regulation for the concourse of buyers and sellers 
and whether or not any control il exerciaed over the business of, 

Bill No. 91 of 1956. 
THE TERRITORIAL COUNCILS BILL, 1956 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of Territorial Councils in certain 
Union territories. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Territorial Councils Act, 1956. Short tide 
(2) It extends to the Union territories of ,Himachal Pradesh, ~~e= 
Manipur and Tripura. ment. 
(3) It shall come into force in each of the Union territories on 
such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
100ftlcial Gazette, appoint; and difterent dates may be appointed for 
different Union territories. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.-
(1) "Administrator" means the Administrator of a Union 
territory; 
15 (2) "article" means an article of the Constitution; 
(3) "building" includes a house, out-house, stable, latrine, 
urinal, shed. hut, wall (other than boundary wall) and any other 
structure, whether of masonry, bricks, wood, mud or other 
material but does not include any portable or t~mporary shelter; 
:ao (4) "constituency" means a territorial Council constituency 
provided by order made under section 4 for the purpose of 
. elections to the Territorial Council; 
(5) "market" includes any place where persons assemble for 
the sale of. or for the purpose of exposing for sale, meat, fish, 
11 fruit, vegetables, animals intended for human food or any other 
articles of human food' whatsoever with or without the consent 
of the owner of such place notwithstanding that there may be 
no common regulation for the concourse of buyers and sellers 
and whether or not any control is exercised over the business of. 

CoBltitution 
of Terri-
torial Coun~ 
cUI and 
their com· 
poaidoQ. 
Delimitation 
of CODltitu· 
eDCiea. 
Power to 
alter or 
ImeI1d deli 
mitationor-
cIc:n. 
2 
or the persons frequenting, the market by the owner of the place 
or by any other persons; 
(6) "01B.cial Gazette" means tb:e Gazette of the Union 
territory concerned; 
(7) "person" does not include a body of persons; S 
(8) "Territorial Council" means a Territorial Council 
constituted under this Act; 
(9) "Union territory" means any of the Union territories of . 
Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura; 
(10) "vehicle" includes a carriage, cart, van, dray, truck, 10 
hand-cart, bicycle, tri-cycle, motor vehicle and every wheeled 
conveyance which is used or is capable of being used on a street. 
CHAPTER n 
CoNSTITtTt'ION OP TEurroRIAL COUNCIL! 
3. (1) For each Union territory there shall be a Territorial~' 
Council as from such date as the Administrator may, by notiftoation 
in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint in this behalf. 
(2) The total number of seats in the Territorial Council tG be 
ftlled by persons chosen by direct election on the basis of adult 
suffrage from territorial constituencies shall be forty in the cue of ao 
the Territorial Councll of Himachal Pradesh aDd thirty in the cue 
of the Territorial Council of Manipur or of Tripura: 
Provided that of the total number of such seats in the Territorial 
Council of Himachal Pradesh twelve seats shall be reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes. aJ 
(3) The Central Government may nominate not more than four 
persons to be members of any Territorial Council. 
4. The Central Government shall, by order, determine-
(a) the constituencies into which a Union territory shall be 
divided for the purpose of election of members to the Territorial 30 
Council of ,that territory; 
(b) the extent of each constituency; 
(c) the number of Seats allotted to each constituency; and 
(d) the number of seats, if any, reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes in each constituency in tpe Union territory of Himachal 33. 
Pradesh. 
5. The Central Government may, from time to time, by order, 
alter or amend any order made under section 4. 

• 
"S.A person shall not 'be qualified to be chosen 88 a member of a Qualiftc:adona 
Territorial Council of a Union territory unless he 'is an elector for t':~:-
811.y Territorial Council constituency. in that territory and, in the 
case of a seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes is also a member 
5 of those castes. 
7. A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as a member I?ilqualiftc:a-
of a Territorial Couhcil if he Is for the time beingdisquaUfied for :=b~P. 
'being chosen as a member of either House of Parliament. 
8. (1) The persons entitled to vote at elections of members of 8 Electors IDd 
'10 Territorial Council shall be the persons entitled, by virtue of the ~~ 
provisions of the Constitution and the Representation of the People 
43 of 19;0 Act, 1950, to be registered as voters at elections to the House of the 
People. 
(2) So much of the electoral roll for any Parliamentary con-
15 stituency for the time being in force as relates to the areas 
comprised within a constituency formed under section 4 shall be 
deemed to be the electoral roll for that constituency for the purposes 
of this Act . 
•. (1) EVery person whose name is, for the time being, entered Riaht to yote. 
~ in the electoral roll of a constituency shall be entitled to vote at the 
election of a member of the Territorial Council from that constituency. • 
(2) Every person shall give one vote and no more to anyone 
candidate at an election but in plural member constituencies every 
elector shall have as many votes as there are members to be elected. 
:as 10 .. Theeledion of members of a Territorial Council shall be held Election of 
in accordance with rules made under section 20, on such date or Memben. 
dates as the Administrator may, by notification in the Oftlclal Guette, 
direct: 
Pro'Vided that a casual vacancy shall be filled as soon as maybe 
30 after the occurrence of the vacancy: 
Provided further that no election shall be held to fill up a casual 
vaca·ncy occurring within four months prior to the holding 'of a 
aeneral election under this section. 
11. The names of all persons elected or nominated to be members NotlftctdoD 
3ft of a Territorial Council shall be published by the Administrator in 0elf ~uIb of 
.7 ecttODI. 
the Official Gazette. 
. . 
12. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the tenn of Tenn of 
oftice of a member of a Territorial Council shall be five years and .~~~. 
shall commen~e from the date of the notification of his election 
4- or nomination under section 11 or from the date on which the 

Disputes u 
to elections. 
Relief that 
maybe 
GIaimed by 
petitioner. 
Grounds on 
which an 
election 
may be 
ca11cdin 
question. 
• 
'Vacancy in which he is elected or nominated has occurred, which:-
ever date is later: 
Provided that the Central Government may, when satisfied that 
it is necessary in order to avoid administrative difficulty, extend 
the term ot office of all the elected members of a Council by such 5 
period, ,not exceeding one year, as it thinks fit. 
(2) The term of office of a member elected to fill a casual vacancy 
shall commence from the date of election and shall continue so long 
only a3 the member in whose place he is elected would have been 
entitled to hold office if the vacancy had not occurred. 10 
13. (1) No election of a member shall be called in question except· 
by an election petition presented to the court of the District Judge 
having jurisdiction in the area in whiCh the constituency concerned 
is situated, within thirty days from the date of the notification of 
tne result of the election. 15 
(2) An election petition calling in question any such election may 
be presented on one or more of the grounds specified in section 15 
by any candidate at such election or by any elector of the constitu-
ency. 
(3) A petitioner shall join as respondents to his petition kllthe 20 
candidates at the election. 
(4) An election petition-
(a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts 
on which the petitioner relies; 
(~) shall, with sufficient particulars, set forth the ground or 25 
grounds on which the election is called in question; and 
(c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the 
manner laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for the s of 1908 
verification of pleadings. 
14. A petitioner may, in addition to claiming a declaration that 30 
the election of all or any of the returned candidates is void, claim 
a further declaration that he himself or any other candidate has 
been duly elected. 
15. The election of a returned candidate may be called in ques-
tion on anyone or more of the following grounds, namely:- 35 
(a) that on the date of his election the returned candidate 
was not qualified to be elected, or was disqualified for being 
elected, as a member under this Act; or 
(b), that the .,nomination paper of any candidafl at the 
election has been improperly rejected; or 40 
(c) that the result of the election has been materially affect-
ed by the improper acceptance of a nomination paper or by the 
improper acceptance Or refusal of a vote or by any other cause! 

$oft,ol 
16. The procedure provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 Procedure to 
in regard to suits shall be followed by the court of the District Judge, ~ ~~ 
as far as it can be made applicable, in the trial and disposal of an trtet Judte· 
election petition under this Act. 
S 1'7. (1) At the conclusion of the trial of an election petition, the Decltion!>f 
court of the District Judge shall make an order- ~~.ittr1ct 
(a) dismissing the election petition; or 
(b) declaring the election of all or any of the returned candi-
dates to be void; or 
10 (c) declaring the election of all or any of the returned 
candidates to be void and the petitioner or any other candidate 
to have been duly elected. 
(2) If any person who has filed an election petition has, in addition 
to calling in question the election of the returned candidate, claimed 
IS a declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly 
elected and the court of the District Judge is of opinion-
(a) that in fact the petitioner or such other candidate 
received a majority of the valid votes, or 
(b) that but for the votes obtained by the returned candidate 
20 the petitioner or such other candidate would have obtained a 
majority of the valid votes, the Court of the District Judge shall 
after declaring the election of the returned candidate to be void 
declare the petitioner or such other candidate, as the case may 
be, to have been duly elected. 
2S 18. If during the trial' of an election petition it appears that there Procedure 
is equality of. votes between any candidates at the election and that ~~ 0!r 
the addition of a vote would entitle any of those candidates to be vote •• 
declared elected, then the court of the District Judge shall decide 
between them by lot and proceed as if the one on whom the lot falls 
30 had received an additional vote. 
19. (1) An order of the court of the District Judge on an election Penalty of 
pttition shall be final and conclusive. decision •. 
(2) An election of a member not called in question in ac~ordance 
with the foregoing proviSions shall be deemed to be a good and 
3S valid election. 
20. The Central Government may make rules to regulate all or Power to 
any of the following matters for the purpose of the holding of elec- =~ 
tions of members under this Act, namely:- the election of memben. 
(a) the manner of the splitting up of electoral rolls for 
40 Parliamentary constituencies into parts for the purpose of consti-
tuting' one or more of such parts into the electoral roll for a 

Incorpora-
tion of 
Territorial 
Councils. 
Chairman 
and Vice-
Chairman. 
Oath or 
affirmation 
by mem-
bers. 
6 
constituency; and the officer or authority by whom such splitting 
up is to be carried out; .. 
(b) the drawing up of the programme of' election; 
(c) the appointment of returning officers, presiding and 
polling officers for election; 
(d) the nomination of candidate3 and the scrutiny of such 
nominations; 
(e) the deposits to be made by candidates and the time and 
manner of making such deposits; 
(I) the withdrawal of candidatures; 
(g) the appointment of 'agents of candidates; 
(h) the time and manner of, holding elections; 
(i) the general procedure at the elections inc1udin:;! the time, 
place and hours of poll and the method by which votes shall be 
10 
cast; IS 
(11 the fee to be paid on an election petition; 
(k) any other matter relating to elections or election dis-
putes in respect of which the Central Government deems it 
necessary to make rules under this section or in respect of which 
this Act makes no provision or makes insufficient provision and 20 
provision is, in the opinion of the Central Government. neces-
sary. 
21. A Tertitorial Council shall, by the name of the Union Territory 
for which it is constituted, be a body corporate and shall have per-
petual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold 25 
and dispose of property, and to contract, and may by the said name 
sue and be sued. 
22. (1) A Territorial Council shall, as soon as may be, choose two 
members of the Council to be respectively Chairman and Vice-
Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of Chairman or Vice- 30 
IChairman becomes vacant, the Council shall choose another member 
to be Chairman or Vice-Chairman, as the case may be: 
Provided that the Central Government may nominate the first 
Chairman who shall hold office for a period not exceeding -three 
~~ ~ 
(2) The Chairman of the Council shall be a whole-time function-
ary and will be entitled to such salary or allowances as may be 
fixed by the Central Government. 
23. Every member of a Territorial Council shall, before taking 
his seat, make and subscribe at a meeting of the Council, an oath 40 
or aftlrmation in the prescribed form. 

7 
24. (1) No person shall be a member both of Parliament and of Vacation of 
the Territorial Council of a Union territory, and if a person is choHn seats. 
a member both of Parliament and of such Council, then at the 
expiration of 14 days from the date of publication in the Gazette of 
5 India or An the o~cial Gazette, whichever is later, that he has been 
so choser!, that person's seat in the Territorial Council shall become 
vacant, unless he has previously resigned his seat in the Parliament. 
(2) If a member of the Territorial Council of a Union territory-
(a) becomes subject to any disqualification mentioned in 
10 section 7, or 
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to 
the Chairman, 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
(3) If during six successive months, a member of a Territorial 
15 Council is, without permission of the Council, absent from all meet-
ings thereof, the Council may declare his seat vacant. 
(4) If any question arises as to whether a member has become 
subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 7, it shall 
be referred to the District Judge having jurisdiction in the area in 
20 which the constituency concerned is situated, and his decision shall 
be final. 
25. Members of a Territorial Council shall be entitled to receive Salaries and 
such salaries or allowances, if any, as may be determined by the ~o:~bcrs. 
Central Government. 
25 . 26. Every person shall be liable for the loss, waste or misappro- Liability of 
priation of any money or other property belonging to a Territorial members. 
Council, if such loss, waste or misappropriation is a direct con-
sequence of his neglect 0' misconduct while a member of the 
Territorial Council and a suit for compensation may be instituted 
30 against him by the Council with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, or by the Administrator with the previoUs sanction 
of the Central Government. 
27. Every member of a Territorial Council shall be deemed to be Members to 
a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal : g:e:~:lic 
3S Cocle. servants. 
CHAPTER TIl 
FUNCTIONS OF TERRITORIAL COUNCn.S 
.28. Subject to such exceptions and conditions as the Central t::r=~of 
Government may make and impose, the following matters shall be Councils. 

8 
under the control and administration of a Territorial Council, 
namely:-
(i) the maintenance and management of such property, 
movable and immovable, and institutions, as may be transferred 
to that Council; 5 
(ii) the construction, repair and maintenance of such of the 
roads, bridges, channels, buildings and tanks as may be trans-
ferred to the Council; 
(iii) the planting and preservati6n of trees and avenues; 
(iv) the regulation and prohibition of the driving, riding or 10 
leading of animals or vehicles of any particular kind or the 
driving of carts and carriages exceeding a prescribed weight 
along any road under its jurisdiction; 
(v) the construction and maintenance of rope-ways, tram-
ways, and other means of transport with the previous sanction 15 
of the Central Government; 
(vi) the establishment, maintenance and management of 
primary and secondary schools and the construction and repair 
of all buildings connected with these institutions; training of 
teachers and establishment of scholarships; 20 
(vii) the establishment and maintenance of pounds, includ-
ing such functions under the Cattle Trespass Act, 1871, as may 
be transferred to the Council; 
,(viii) the establishment, mainten~nce and management of 
hospitals and. dispensaries, asylums and poorhouses, other than 25 
those managed by the Central Government; 
(u) the establishment, maintenance and management of 
markets and fairs, rest-houses and encamping grounds and the 
construction, repair and maintenan~e of all buildings connected 
with these institutions; 30 
(x) the regulation and control of inns and innkeepers; 
(xi) the supply, storage and prevention from pollution of 
water for drinking, cooking and bathing purposes; 
(xii) the construction, repair and maintenance of embank-
ments, and the supply, storage and control of water for agricul- 35 
I tural purposes; 
(xiii) the preservation and reclamation of soil and the 
drainage of swamps; 
(xiv) the preservation, protection and improvem~nt of 
live-stock and prevention of animal diseases, and veterinary 40 
training and practice; 

9' 
(xv) prevention of cruelty to animals; 
(xvi) public health and sanitation; 
(xvii) registration of births, marriages, and deaths; 
(xviii) fairs and agricultural and industrial exhibitions, 
S and the establishment and maintenance of model farms; 
(xix) the management of such ferries as may be entrusted 
to the charge of the Council; 
(xx) the initiation, inspection and control of relief works; 
(xxi) the superintendence and control of panchayats and the 
10 making of grants to them; 
(xxii) any other local works or measures likely to promote 
the health, comfort, convenience and interests of the public or 
the agricultural or industrial prosperity of the territory; and 
(xxiii) any other matters which the Central Government 
IS may declare to be fit and proper matters to be taken under the 
control and administration of the Council. 
CHAPTER IV 
PROcEDURE AND STAFF OF TERRITORIAL COUNCILS 
29. A Territorial Council shall meet for the conduct of business ~~'!.~. of 
20 at least once in every two months and shall, with the previous 
approval of the Administrator, make its rules of business with res-
pect to the summoning, notice, place, conduct and adjournment of 
such meetings, and generally with respect to the mode of transacting 
and managing the business of the Council as it may think fit, subject 
2S to the following conditions-
35 
(i) the Chairman or, in his absence, the Vice-Chairman, may 
convene a meeting whenever he thinks fit and shall, upon a 
requisition made in writing by not less than one-fifth of the 
members of the Council, convene a meeting within a period of 
one month from the date of receipt of such requisition; 
(ii) the day, time and place of the meeting shall be fixed by 
the Chairman; 
(iii) every meeting shall be open to the public, unless a 
majority of the members present thereat decide by a resolution 
that any inquiry or deliberation pending before the Council is 
such as should be held in private; 
(iv) if at any time during a meeting it is brought to 
the notice of the Chairman that the number of members present 
inclusive of the Chairman falls short of one-fifth of the whole 
number of members, the Chairman shall adjourn the meeting to 

10 
some other day, ftxiDg.such time and place for the same as he 
shall think convenient, and: the buB:iness which remains undis-
posed of at s.uch meeting shall be disposed of. at the adjourned 
meeting, or if the latter meeting should again be adjourned, at 
any subsequent adjourned meeting whether there is a quorum S 
present thereat or not; 
(v) at least seven clear days' notice shall ordinarily be 
given of every meeting, other than an adjourned meeting, but .in 
cue of UJ'Iency any such meeting may be called upon a notice of 
not lea than three clear days; of adjourned meetings such pre- 10 
vious notice shall be given as shall be practicable; 
(vi~ no buiiness shall be transacted at any meeting other 
than the bll5inesi specified in the notice or supplementary notice; 
(Wi) the minutes of the proceedings of the Council shall be 
dr.awn up foreaeb meetmg, shall be signed by the Chairman and 15 
shall at all reaaonabl.e times be open to inspection at the office 
of the Council by any member free of charge. and by any other 
person on payment of a fee of eight annas; 
(viii) a member shall not vote or take part in the dis(!ussion 
of any matter before a meeting or ask any question concerning zo 
any matter in which he has directly or indirectly, by himself or 
by his partner, any share or interest or in which he is profession-
ally interested on behalf of a client, principal or other person; 
Explanation: For the purpose of this clause a member shall 
not be deemed to have any share or interest in a contract or z5 
employment by reason only of his having any share or interest 
In-
(a) any lease, sale or purchase of land or any agreement 
for the same; or 
(b) any agreement for the loan of money or any security 30 
for the payment of money only; or 
(c) any newspaper in which any advertisement relating 
to the affairs of the Territorial Council is inserted; or 
(d) any joint stock company which shall contract with 
or be employed by the Territorial Council; or 
(e) the occalional sale to the Council to a value not 
3S 
exceeding in anyone official year two thousand rupees, of ; 
any article in which he regularly trades. 
(i,r) a declaration by, the Chairman that a proposition has 
been caNted and any entry to that effect in the minute-book 40 
shall, uniesl a poll· is' demanded at the time of such declaration 
by not 1 ... than four members, be conclusive evidence of'the 

11 
fact, without proof of the number of votes given for or against 
the proposition; and 
(x) when a poll is taken, the vote of each member present 
and voting upon the proposition shall be taken by. tellers 
appointed by the Chairman and the names of the members voting 
respectively for or against the proposition shan be recorded in 
the minute-book. 
30. (1) The Administrator may attend, and if he so desires, Right of 
address, any meeting of the Territorial Council. ~~n;:::d 
and address 
10 (2) When the Administrator attends any such meeting, he shall meetings of 
preside over the same. ~i~ 
31. A Territorial Council may, from time to time, appoint out of Committees. 
its own body such and so many committees for the efficient discharge 
of its duties, as may be necessary. 
1532. (1) For every Territorial Council there shall be a chief Oflicen and 
executive officer who shall be .appointed by the Administrator. sta1f. 
(2) If a resolution for the removal ,of the chiefexecutiveoftlcer' 
is passed at a meeting of the Territorial Council by a majorifiY of 
not less than three-fourths of the members present and voting, the 
20 Administrator shall remove him forthwith. 
(3) ~e appointment of the principal. 'officers in charge of 
engineering, health services and education shall be made by the 
Council with the approval of the Administrator . 
. (4) The 'Council shall, in addition, .appoint such &td as .may be 
25 DeC8SUry for the proper and ·eliciant execution· of Us duties .and 
make regulatioJ'ls lfor their CODdWOIlS .of service. 
'(5) 'l'he power of appointing ofticers 'amI staft(whether 
temporary or permanent) shall be exercised in accordanee with the 
rilles framed for the purpose: 
30 . . Provided that no person shall be appointec:tto· a post -the minimum 
~thly salary (exclusive ofallowallCes.) ·for which is Its, 300 per 
mensem or more except after consultation with the Union Public 
Service Commission in accordance with the rules. 
: '(6) The conditions of service applicah1eto·a .penon immediately 
35 Defore his appointment to a post under'a Territorial CouIM!Uilhall 
", not be varied to his disadvantage except with the prevfous approval 
. -. of the Central Government. , 
, . (7) Every officer or member of sd of a Territorial Council 
shall be deemed to be a public servant within the me~ of section 
40 21-Dfthe Indian Penal Code. 

Powers of 
taXation. 
Income from 
property. 
Levy of fees. 
-. 12 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCE OF TERRITORIAL COUNCILS AND VESTING OF PROPERTY 
33 ... Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, a Territorial Council may 
levy either or both of the following taxes, namely- S 
(i) taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments; 
and 
(ii) tolls on bridges constructed or maintained at the cost 
of the Territorial Council: 
Provided that if, immediately before the commencement of this 10 
Act, a tax on professions, trades, callings or employments was being 
lawfully levied by any local authority, that tax may continue to be 
levied by that authority at the same or a lower rate: 
Provided further that no toll shall be levied on any bridge the 
cost or estimated cost of which is not more than five lakhs of rupees. IS 
34. Income from property owned by or assigned to the Territorial 
Council shall accrue wholly. to that Council. 
35. A Territorial Council may fix and levy-
(a) school fees; and 
(b) fees for the use of, or benefits derived from any of the 20 
works done or services rendered under clauses (viii), (lZ), (ri), 
(riD, (xv), (xvi), (xviii), (xix) and (xxii) of section 28. 
Payment by 36. The Central Government may pay to a Territorial Councll Central Government. sums equivalent to the proceeds of the following taxes attrlbutahle 
to the area 01' areas within the jurisdiction of -that Coundl- 2S 
(a) the net proceeds of the entertainment tax, InclutUnr 
any theatre or show tax; 
(b) such percentage of the net proceeds of land revenue not 
exceeding ten as may be prescribed by the Central Government; 
(c) the net proceeds of the taxes levied on motor vehlele11 30 
(d) the net proceeds of the taxes levied under any law 
which may be in force for the taxation of passengers and Irooda 
or fares and freights and the net proceeds of any terminal to 
on goods dr p8flfJ8ll&'er8 carried by road, railways, inland water-
~~M~. ~ 
Explanation.-Tbe expression 'net proceeds' shall mean the 
proceeds of the taxes after deduding such charges as may be 
certified by the Central Govemment as incurred on account of 
colleetion, and in the case of the taxes mentioned in clause (c) 

13 
shall also be undentood as excludine the proceecla of such fees 
as may be collected for services rendered bJ the Central Gov-
enment. 
37. The Central Government may, subject to such conditious, if Granu. 
S any, as it may impose, make such erant or crania to the Territorial 
Council as it thinks fit. 
38. (1) A Territorial Council may; resolve, at a meeting specially =un:: 
convened for the purpose to propose the imposition of any of the lUes. poIIDS 
taxes mentioned in 3ection 33. 
JO (2) When a resolution has been passed, the Council shall publish 
a notice in the official Gazette defining the class of persons or 
description of property proposed to be taxed, the amount or rate 
of the tax to be imposed and the system of assessment to be adopted. , 
(3) Any person directly or indirectly affected by the proposed 
15 tax and objecting to it may, within thirty days from the publication 
of the notice, send his objections in writing to the Council and the 
Council shall, at a specially convened meeting, take all such objections 
into consideration. 
(4) 1£ no objection is sent within the said period of thirty days, 
20 or if the objections received are deemed insufficient, the Council 
may submit through the Administrator its proposals to the Central 
Government, with the objections, if any, and its decision thereon. 
(5) The Central Government may then sanction the proposals, 
or refuse to sanction them, or return them for further consideration. 
2,'; (6) When the proposals in respect of a tax have been sanctioned, 
the Central Government shall notify its imposition in the ofticial 
Gazette and specify a date not later than three months from the date 
of notification on which the tax shall come into force. 
39. The Central Government rna)'\, by notification in the official Reduction or 
30 Gazette, and a Territorial Council may, with the previous approval abolition Qf 
of the ,Central Government, by a resolution passed at a meeting tax. 
specially convened for the purpose, abolish or reduce any tax imposed 
under section 33. 
40. All taxes, and fees and all, arrears of such taxes, rates or fees, Recovery of 
3S may be recovered as if they were arrears of land revenue. ~I and. .ces. 
41. A Territorial Council may, by notification in the official ASleliment 
Gazette determine the person by whom any tax, or fee shall be ~d cofllec-, tlOD 0 taxe. 
assessed and collected, and make rules for the assessment and and feel. 
collection of such tax, or fee, and direct in what manner persons 
40 employed in the assessment or collection shall be remunerated. 

Appeals. 
14 
•. (1) In matters connected with the assessment and collection 
of. any tax, rate or fee an appeal shall lie from the order of any 
person authorised to make assessment or collections to such person 
as the Administrator may appoint or deSignate for the purpose. 
(2)· An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be presented within S 
thirty days from the date of the order. 
(3) The order passed on the appeal shall be final 
1BIUlmettts' 43. A Territorial Council may, by notification in the official 
~f tuel'aJ1d Gazette, prescribe by what instalments and at what times any tax 
~ea. 
or fee shall be payable. 10 
Power to . 44. A Territorial Council may, with the previous approval of the 
=~~m Central Government, by notification in the official Gazette, remit or 
reduce any tax or fee or exempt any persons or class of persons 
or any description of property, wholly or in any part, from liability 
to any tax or fee and cancel any such remission, reduction or IS 
exemption. 
Jlecovery of 45. (1) Save as provided by section 40 all moneys claimable by 
~le :I. a Territorial Council may be recovered on application to a Magistrate 
the Coun • having jurisdiction in the area where the person from whom the 
Borrowin, 
Powers. 
CoUaCil 
Fund. 
money is claimable may, for th~ time being, be resident, by the 20 
distress and sale of any movable property within the limits of his 
jurisdiction belonging to such person and the cost of such proceedings 
shall be recoverable in the same manner as the said moneys. 
(2) .(\n application for recovery of money shall be in writing and 
shall be signed by an officer authorised in this behalf by order of 2S 
the Chairman. 
46. A Territorial Council may with the previous approval of the 
Central Government borrow on the security: of any property' belonging 
to the council such sums as may be necessary for any of the purposes 
of this Adt. 30 
n. All moneys r'eceivecf by or on behalf of the Territarial 
Council under the provisions of this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force shall be credited to a fund, which s1:a11 be called 
the "Council Fund" and which shall be held by the Territorial 
Council in trust for the purposes of this Act. 3J 
CllItociy apd 48. (1) The Council Fund shall be kept in the Government 
inveatment of Council treasury or in the bank to which the Government treasury business 
FUIld~ has been made over. 
(2) In places where there is no such treasury or bank, the Council 
Fund may be kept with a banker, or person acting as a banker, who 40 
hal given such security for the safe c~ody and repayment em 

lS 
eI_aDO·at the ftlltd so ke-pt as the Administrator may in each case 
think suftlcient. 
(3) Subject to such rules as the Central Government may make 
in this behalf, the Territorial Council may from time to time, 
., with the previous sanction of the Administrator, invest any portion 
of the Council Fund in securities of the Central Government or invest 
it in such other securities or place it in such other manner as the 
Administrator may approve in this behalf, and, with the previous 
sanction of the Administrator, may vary such investment for any 
10 other investment or investments of like nature. 
(4) The income accruing from the securities or other investments 
and the proceeds of the sale of the same shall be credited to the 
Council Fund. 
49. Subject to any order of the Central Government, all property Pro&:fo/ 
IS of the nature specified below and situated in the Union territory ¥:rrito~ 
shan vest in and belong to the Territorial Council, and shall with aU CollllCil. 
other property which may become vested in the Council, be under 
its direction, management, and control and shall be held and applied 
for the purposes of this Act-
2(? (a) aU publie buildings constructed or maintained out of 
the Council Fund; 
(b) all public roads which have been constructed or are 
maintained out of the Council Fund, and the stones and other 
materials thereof, and also all trees, erections, materials, imple-
35 . ments and things provided fol'''such r.oads; 
(c) all land or other property transferred to the Territorial 
Council by the Central Government, or by gift, sale or otherwise 
for public purposes. 
50. (1) A Territorial Council shall appoint a finance committee The Budpt" 
30 consisting of such number of members as may be prescribed by rules 
made under section 54. 
(2) A Territorial Council shall, on or before a prescribed day in 
each year, hold a meeting at which the finance committee shall sub-
mit an estimate of: the income and expenditure of the Council for the 
35 next financial year, in such form as the Central Government may 
. prescribe. 
(J) 'Fhe· Tel'l'itorial Council shall consider the estimate, and may 
provisionally approve of it with or without modification. 
(4) The Council shaU, OD or before a prescribed day, cause copies 
40 of the estimate, 81 provisionally approved by it, to be sent to the 
. AdmilUstratol'. 

16 
(5) The Administrator maY,on or before a preSCJ'ibed day, return 
the estimate to the Council for amendment on the ground that it 
fails to make adequate provision for-
(i) the maintenance of such minimum balance as may be 
prescribed, or 5 
(ii) the appropriation of any sum allotted to the Council by 
the Central Government for the purpose for which it was allot-
ted, or 
(iii) the repayment of loans or any other expenditure for 
which the Council is legally liable, or 10 
(iv) any expenditure proposed in the budget, or 
(v) the continuance in future years of any recurring 
expenditure proposed in the budget. 
(6) When a budget is returned under sub-section (5), the Council 
shall consider the proposed amendments, take a decision thereon, and IS 
report the same to the Administrator. 
(7) The budget estimate finally adopted by the Council shall be 
the budget of the Territorial Council. 
(8) Any subsequent alteration in the budget, or reappropriation 
or transfer of provision within the estimate, shall be made with the 30 
approval of the Council and shall be reported to the Administrator. 
Ac:couuts 51. Accounts of receipt and expenditure of a Territorial Council 
CoDtrOl 
shall be prepared, inspected and audited in such manner as the 
Central Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India, direct. 25 
CHAPTER VI 
CONTROL 
52. (1) It shall be the duty of the Chairman of a Territorial 
Council to furnish to the Administrator a copy of the proceedings 
of the meetings of the Council and such other information as he may 30 
require. 
(2) The Administrator shall have the power to give to the Terri-
torial Council all such directions as he may consider necessary in 
respect of subjects, curricula, text-books and standards of teaching 
in schools vested wholly or partly in the Council and in schools 3$ 
wholly or partly maintained by grants payable from ihe Council 
Fund, and the Council shall comply 'with such directions. 
(3) The Administrator may, by order and for reasons to be 
recorded suspend the execution of any resolution or' order of the 
Territorial Council, or prohibit the doing of any act which is about 40 

"1'7 
to be done, or is being done, in pursuance of or under cover of any 
provision of the law relating to the constitution or functions of the 
Territorial Council, if in his opinion, the resolution, order or act is in 
excess of the powers conferred by law, or the execution of the resolu-
5 tion or order, or the doing of the act, is likely to lead to a breach of 
the peace, or to cause annoyance or injury to the public or to any 
class or body of persons: 
Provided that the Council may, within fifteen days of the date of 
the order of the Administrator, offer such explanation as it deems fit 
10 in relation to the execution of the resolution or order which has been 
suspended or the doing of the act which has been prohibited. 
(4) When the Administrator makes any order as aforesaid, he 
shall furnish forthwith a copy of it to the Central Government with 
a statement of the reasons for making it and forward in due course 
15 to that Government the explanation, if any, offered by the Council 
and that Government may, thereupon confirm, modify or rescind the 
order of the Administrator. 
53. (1) The Central Government may, on recei!>t of a report from Power to 
the Administrator or otherwise, by order, supersede a Territorial T=~~ 
20 Council on being satisfted that the Council is not competent to per- Council. 
form or persistently makes default in the performance of its duties, 
or exceeds or abuses its powers. 
(2) When an order is made under sub-section (1) above, the 
Central Government may make such incidental and consequential 
2S provisions as may appear to be necessary or expedient for carrying 
out the functions of the Territorial Council. 
(3) As soon as may be after supersession of a Territorial Council 
'under sub-section (1), and in any case within a period of one year 
from the date of such supersession, the Administrator with the pre-
30 vious approval of the Central Government shall, by one or more 
notifications published in the oftlcial Gazette, call upon the constitu-
encies to elect members in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act and the rules arid orders thereunder before such date or dates 
as may be specifted in the notification or notiftcations. 
35 CHAPTER VII 
RULES AND BYE-LAWS 
54. (1) The Central Government may after previous publication Power oflhe 
'make by notification in the oftlcial Gazette rules for the purpose of 8:':!n . ent 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. trul0 make ea. 

Power to 
mW bye-
laws. 
-18 
(2):- ,particlUar -and without :pJttjudiee 10 the generality of the 
_qoiDg powers, &IlCh :rules 'mq-
(i) regulate the conduct of bUSiness of a'Territorial 'Council, 
including the appointment of Committees; 
(ii) prescribe the fannin which the budget estimate is to be S 
prepared and the dates for the various st~ges of its completion; 
(iii) determine the language in which business will be 
, transacted; 
(iv) regulate the powers of a Territorial Council to transfer 
property; 10 
(v) regulate the power of a Territorial Council to contract 
'and do 'otbertbiftwl necessary for the purpose of its constitution 
and the mode 'ofeftCutingcontracts; 
(vi) regulate the employment, payment, suspension and 
removal of ofticers and servants of a Territorial Council; IS 
(vii) protect the terms and conditions of service of the 
government servants transferred to a Territorial Council; 
'(""ii) t»retICI'M»e the wnw,foorr.tMemeots, registers, estiJQates 
iand ,accO\1Ids ,and l"egulate the keepiftg, cheoldngand publication 
of neb 8ceot.lntS, andt8emanner·of periodical audit; 200 
(iX) regulate the submission for approval of plans, desigDs, 
speciftcations and estimates of work; 
,(z) .pr.escrJbe tbeexieDt and the nature of superintendence 
and eontrol of paBebayats;and 
(d) -pFOYidefor ,the ,guidance'of a Territorial Council when 2<5 
suits and other proueediDgs ape imencled to be or :have been 
instituted by ,or againat it in civil courts. 
~3) ,AU rulea made UDder this -Act shall, as 'lOon as maybe after 
.tdaey are made, 'De laid ,Jar DDt lesathan thirty -days before ,both 
HOUiesof ,Parliamentaad8ball ,be subs1ect to such modifications as 30 
Parliament may make duriDg 'the ,..,.ion m which they are so laid ' 
fltthe session immediately fallawing . 
•. (1) Subject to theprM'isiODSCIIf tbia laet-aad, of the YUles made 
thereunder, a 'Territorial COtmen maymalae byeJ}aw8 :to provide for 
all or any of the following matters in the Union territory or in any 3S 
part thereof, namely:-
«(I) the maintenance and management of schools and grant 
of stipends and scholarsbtps; , 
(b) control and admlmstrat10n of dispensaries, hospitals and 
asylums, their construction ana .repairs, ~e supply of medicines 40 
and the measures to be taken during Ole prevalence of disease; 

tt: 
(c) the proteetioR from~ peUtrtion· of such tanks; springs, 
w.ells or parts of rivers, Iiltreams; channels -or water-eourses 81: a.! , 
set apart for drinking- or< culinary purposes;' 
(d) the prohibition of the obstruction of any' streams, 
-channels and drains- under the oontro1! at a Temtorial C01Ulcil 
or the remoql .oft aDy' obstruction; 
(e) the maintenance of' private baars and'melas in, a sani-
tary condition; 
(f> the establishment and maintenance of hotels and inns, 
10 the destruction of unclaimed and diseased dogs and noxious 
animals, the holding of fairs and exhibitions, the relief of distress, 
and the carrying out of any other work likely to promote the 
health, comftn1:and' convenience of'the public; 
(g) the regulation of traffic on roads over which the publ1c 
IS have a right of way; 
(h) the registration of births,deaths and marriages; 
(i) any other matter which is necessary for carrying out all 
or any of the proviBiou· of this· Act and the rules. made there-
under. 
20 (2) A bye-law made under sub-seclion (1) shall not have effeet 
until it has been confirmed by the Central Government and published 
in sum manner as that Government may direct. 
(3) The Central Government in confirming a bye-law may make 
any change therein W'hich &ppe8I1il to it to be necessary. 
as 56. (1) In makir.g any rule, the Central Government and in r~ty for 
making any bye-law, a Territorial Council may direct that a breach ~f~~~Dt 
of the same shall be punished with fine which may extend to one bye-law.. 
hundred rupees, and, in the case of a continuing breach, with a 
further fine which may extend to ten rupees for every day during 
30 which the breach is continued after the offender has been convicted 
of such breach. 
(2) In defa.W.t. of payment of any fine, the defaulter shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for .a term which may extend to 
fifteen da)'s. 
CHAPTER VllI 
SURPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS , 
57. Prosecution for any offence under this Act may be irmtitv1eci Pmaccution •. 
by any person authorised by name or oftiee by the Chairman in this 
behaH. ' 

Penalty for 
obstruction. 
Payment of 
compenaa-
tion. 
Power to 
compound 
offencea. 
Acquisition 
of Cand. 
Penalty on 
member, 
officer or 
servant, 
being in-
terested I 
iD contractS 
made with 
the Council. 
58. A person wilfully obstructing a Territorial Council, or any 
officer or servant of the Council, or any person authorised by the 
Council, in the exercise of its powers, shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to fifty rupees. 
59. A Territorial Council may pay comper~ation out of its fund S 
to any person sustaining damage by reason of· the exercise of any of 
the powers vested in the Council, or its officers and staff and 
shall pay such compensation when the damage was caused by the 
negligence of the Council~ its officers or staff and the person 
sustaining the damage wa~ not himself in default in the matter in 10 
respect of which the power was exercised. 
60. (1) A Territorial Council or with its authorisation its Chair-
man, Vice-Chairman, or Chief Executive Officer may, subject to the 
rules made by the Council for the purpose, accept from any person 
against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed IS 
an offence under the Act or any rule or bye-law made thereunder, 
a sum of money by way of compensation for such offences. 
(2) On payment of such sum of money the suspected person if in 
custody shall be discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken 
against him in regard to the offence or alleged offence so compounded 20 
(3) Sums paid by way of compensation under the foregoing 
provisions shall be credited to the funds of the Council. 
(4) The authorisation wider sub-section (1) to accept composi-
tion for alleged offences may be given 'by the Council either generally 
in regard to all offences against this Act Or the rules or bye-laws 25 
made thereunder or particularly or.ly in regard to a specified offence 
or offences and may be withdrawn at any time. 
91. Where any land is required for the use of a Territorial Council, 
the Central Government may, at the request of the Council, proceed 
to acquire it under the provisions of the law relating to acquisition 30 
of land for the time being in force and, on the payment by the 
Council of the compensation awarded under the law, and of the 
charges incurred by the Government in connection with the proceed-
ings, the land shall vest in the Council. 
62. If any member t officer or' other employee of a Territorial ~ 
Council enters into any contract mage with the Council, he shall be 
deemed to have committed an offence under section 168 . of the 
Indian Penal Code. 

21 
63. The Cer,tral Government may, by order, do anything which R~mova~ of 
appears to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing difficulues. 
any difficulties which may arise in giving effect to these provisions. 
64. (1) As from the date of establishment of the Territorial Abolition of 
S Council for the Union terri tory of Himachal Pradesh, all Zilla ~ha":~iaan~d 
Panchayats constituted under the Himachal Pradesh Panchayat Raj conaedmquentiaJ amen ents 
Act. 1952 shall stand abolished: in the Hima-
chal Pradesh 
Panchayat 
Provided that- Raj Act. 
1952. 
(a) all funds and properties vested in any such Zilla 
10 Panchayat shall on its abolition be deemed to be vested in the 
Territorial Council; 
(b) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all con-
tracts entered into, and all matters and things engaged to be 
done, by, with or for any such Zilla Panchayat shall on its aboli-
IS tion be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged 
to be done by, with or for the Territorial Council; 
(c) all taxes, fees and Sums of money due to any such Zilla 
Panchayat shall on its abolition be deemed to be due to the 
Territorial Council; 
~ (d) all suits, prosecutions and other legal proceedings insti-
tuted or which might, but for the abolition of any such Zilla 
Panchayat, have been instituted by or aiainst such Panchayat 
under the Himachal Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act, 1952, may on 
its abolition be continued or instituted by or against the Terri-
25 torial Council. 
(2) The amendments directed in the Schedule shall be made in 
the Himachal Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act, 1952. 
65. In the Representation of the People Act. 1950- Amendment 
(a) in section 27-A, for sub-sections (3), (4) and (5). the 
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) The electoral college for the Union territory of 
,Delhi shall consist of the persons who immediately before 
the first day of November. 1956. were members of the 
Legislative Assembly of the State of Delhi. 
of Act 43 
of 1950. 

22 
(4) The electoral college for each of the Union terri-
tories of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura shall 
consist of the members of the territorial Council constituted 
for that territory under the Territorial Councils Act, 1956.".; 
(b) in the Fifth Schedule, in the second column, for the S 
figures "41", the figures "40" shall be substituted. 
Amet1dmcDt 66. Section 13 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
of Act 43 of shall be omitted 1951. 

THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 63) 
AMENDMENTS IN THE HIMACHAL PRADESH PANCHAYAT RAJ ACT, 1952, 
CONSEQUENTIAL ON THE ABOLITION OF ZILLA PANCHAYATS. 
S Section 2.-ln sub-section (1)-
(i) in clauses (e) and (w), for "Tehsil Panchayat or Zilla 
Panchayat", substitute "or Tehsil Panchayat"; 
(ii) omit clause (cc). 
Section 4.-For "Tehsil Panchayat and Zilla Panchayat", substitute 
10 "and Tehsil Panchayat". 
Section 17.-ln clause (g), omit "and Zilla Panchayat" and for 
"them" substitute "it". 
Section 21.-ln sub-section (2), omit "and Zilla Panchayat". 
Section 22.-0mit "and the Zilla Panchayat". 
IS Section 30.-ln sub-section (1), omit "Zilla Panchayat" occurring 
in the first place and for "Tehsil Panchayat or Zilla Panchayat", 
substitute "or Tehsil Panchayat". 
Section 34.-Omit "a Zilla Panchayat". 
Section 36.-ln clause (h) of sub-section (2), omit "Zilla 
20 Panchayat". 
Section 38.-Omit "a Zilla Panchayat" and for "Tehsil Panchayat 
or Zilla Panchayat" occurring in two places, substitute "or Tehail 
Panchayat". 
Section 39.-ln sub-section (2), omit the proviso. 
2$ Section 99.-Omit "and a Zilla Panchayat" and "and Zilla". 
Section 100.-Omit "or a Zilla Panchayat". 
Section 102.-Omit. 
Section 103.-(i) In sub-section (1), omit "and the Deputy 
Commissioner as the President of the Zilla Panchayat t,; 
30 (ii) In sub-section (2), omit "or the Deputy Commissioner" and 
"or the Zilla Panchayat, as the case may be". 
3$ 
Section 104.-0mit "or the Zilla Panchayat" and "or Zilla 
Panchaypt, as the case may be". 
Section 105.-Omit "or the Zilla Panchayat". 
Section 106.-(i) Omit sub-section (2); 
23 

(ii) In sub-section (3), omit "or Zilla Panchayat" and "or the 
Deputy Commissioner, as the case may be". 
Section 110.-Omit. 
Section 111.-0mit. 
Section 112.-Omit. 
Section 113.-Omit "or the Zilla Panchayat" and "or the Zilla 
Fund, as the case may be". 
Section 114.-Omit "or the Zilla Panchayat" and "or the Zilla 
Panchayat, as the case may be". 
Section 116.-0mit. 
Section 117.-Omit. 
Section 118.- (i) In clause (a), omit "Zilla Panchayat" occurring 
in two places; 
(ii) In clause (b), omit "Zilla Panchayat"; 
10 
(iii) In clause (c), omit "a Zilla Panchayat" and "Zilla Panchayat"; IS 
(iv) In clause (d), omit "Zilla Panchayat" occurring in two 
places; 
(v) In clause (e), for "Tehsil Panchayat or Zilla Panchayat", 
substitute "or Tehsil Panchayat"; 
(vi) In clause (f), omit "Zilla Panchayat" occurring in two places. 20 
Section 119.-In sub-sections (1), (2) and (3), omit "Zilla 
Panchayat". 
Section 122.-Omit "or a Zilla Panchayat". 
Section 123.-In sub-section (2), for "Tehsil Panchayat or Zilla 
Panchayat", substitute "or Tehsil Panchayat". 25 
Section 125.-In clause (a), for "Tehsil Panchayat or Zilla 
Panchayat", substitute "or Tehsil Panchayat". 
Section 127.-In sub-section (1), for "Tehsil Panchayat or a Zilla 
Panchayat", substitute "or Tehsil Panchayat". 
Section 129.-In sub-section (1), for "Tehsil Panchayat or Zilla 30 
Panchayat" occurring in two places, substitute "or Tehsil Panchayat". 
Section 130.-In sub-section (1), omit "or Zilla Panchayat" 
occurring in the first place and for "Tehsil Panchayat or Zilla 
Panchayat", substitute "or Tehsil Panchayat". 
Section 13l-In sub-section (1), for "a Tehsil Panchayat or a 35 
Zilla Panchayat", Bubstitute "or a Tehsn Panchayat" and omit "or 
Zilla Panchayat". 
Section 135.-In sub-section (2), in clauses (ii) , (iii) and (vii), 
omit "Zilla Pan~hayat". 
SectiBn 138.-0mit clause (b). ,,0 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
On September 4, 1956, the Minister of Home Affairs stated in 
Lok Sabha that it was ,intended to set up a Municipal Corporation 
for Delhi and territorial councils or bodies, with necessary modifi-
cations, for Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura. The territorial 
bodies, it was stated, would be elected on the basis of adult franchise 
and would be in charge of local affairs in the same manner as the 
Corporation would be in charge of such affairs in Delhi. The 
Minister of Home Affairs' further stated that these bodies would 
serve as electoral colleges for elections to the Rajya Sabha. This 
statement was made after considering the opinion expressed in the 
Joint Select Committee on the Constitution (Ninth) Amendment 
Bill in favour of the establishment in Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, 
Manipur and Tripura of elected bodies to deal with matters of local 
concern. 
2. The Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of territorial 
councils in the Union territories of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and 
Tripura on the lines of the statement made by the Minister of Home 
Affairs in the Lok Sabha. 
GOVIND BALLABH PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 13th December, 1956. 
"25 • 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 86 of the Bill provides that sums equi~alent to the net 
proceeds of the taxes levied· under the Passengers and Goods Taxa-
tion Act, the taxes levied on motor vehicles, the entertainment tax 
and· also an amount not exceeding ten per cent. of the net proceeds 
of land revenue may be paid to the Territorial Councils frotn out of 
the Consolidated Fund of India. At the existing level of revenue, 
these paymehts are expected to amount to approximately . Rs. 11 
lakhs in the case of Himachal Pradesh, Rs. 5 lakhs In the case of 
Manipur and Rs. 2· 5 lakhs in the case of Tripura. In addition, clause 
37 provides that the Central Govemment may make such grants to 
the Councils as it ~ay think fit. 
2. It is not possible at this stage to estimate the amount, if any, 
of the grants which may have to be made from Central revenues 
under clause 37 . 
• 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Claules 20 al\d 54 of the BiU empower the Central Government 
to make'rules. The matter's in r~~~ of which such rules may be 
made have been specified in those clauses. Clause 20 provides for 
the making of rules relating to the drawing up of the election 
programme, appointment of election oftlcers, scrutiny of nominations 
and o~er similar matters of detaU relating to the election of 
members. 
Clause 54 deals with the normal rule-making powers of the 
Government for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The ~atters 
specified in this clause are matters of detail and procedure which 
it is difficult and ,cumbersome to provide for in the Act itself. 
In clause 55, the Terr:torial Council has been empowered to make 
bye-laws consistent with the provisions of the Act and the rules 
made thereunder in regard to the matters specified in that clause. 
Moreover, the bye-laws are subject to confirmation by the Central 
Government. It is usual to give such powers to authorities and 
bodies like the Territorial Councll. 
The provisions of the Bill regarding delegated legislatioll are of 
the normal type. 

Constitution 
of eJeotoral 
colleps for 
the fIlHnll: of 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE Ac~ 1950 
(43 OF 19505 ' 
• • • • 
PART IVA 
MANNER OF FILLING SEATS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES TO 
BE FILLED BY REPRESENTATIVES OF UNION TERRITORIES. 
27A. (1). 
• • • • 
~ th:f (3) The electoral college first constituted under this Act for 
States allot- Manipur or Tripura shall be reconstituted by a fresh election every 
~re~t~~ time when there is a general election held in that Union territory 
for the purpose of election of members to the House of the People 
and on every such reconstitution the electoral college for that 
territory functioning immediately before such reconstitutionsball be 
deemed to be dissolved and the electoral college so reconstituted 
shall be the electoral college for that territory for the purposes of 
this Act. 
(4) Any casual vacancy in the seat of a member of an electoral 
college. for Manipur or Tripura shall be filled by election held in 
the constituency concerned in the manner in which the election of' 
that member to such seat was held. 
(5) The electoral college for each of the Union territories C?f Delhi 
and Himachal Pradesh shall consist of the persons who immediately 
before the 1st day of November, 1956, were members of the Ll!gislative 
Assembly of the State of Delhi or Himachal Pradesh as the case 
may be. 
• • • • 

THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
[See sections 27A(2), 27D & 27C] 
NUMBER OF MEMBERS OF ELECTORAL COLLEGES 
Name of Union territory Number of 
members 
• • • • 
2. Himachal Pradesh 41 
• • • • 
EXTRACT nOM TIll REPusDTA'l'ION or TIll PIoPLI ACT, 1901 
(0 or 19S1) 
• • • • 
la. For the purpose of reconstituting th(! electoral colleg(! for th~ Notiftc!ad~ 
Union territory of Manipur or Tripura, the President shall, by ~i:CC::Sb­
notification published in the Gazette of India, call upon all electoral ~ofr.1 col-_ .... 8 or ccr-
college constituencies in that territory to elect members in accordance lain Union 
with the provisions of this Act and of the rules and orders made Territories. 
thereunder: 
Provided that every such notification shall be issued at the same 
time as a notification calling upon the Parliamentary constituencies 
in the State to elect members for the ·purpose of constituting a new 
House of the People is issued. , 
• • • • 
29 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of Territorial Councils in certain 
Union territories. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (i) and (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the mtroduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Govind BaJlabh Pant, 
Minister for Home Affairs) 