As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

7 2 DEC 1999

Bill_No. 91 of 1999

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
By
Suet Basupes AcHARIA, M.P.
A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as

This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1999, Short title.

2. In article 311 of the Constitution, — ‘Amendment of

article 311.


2
(a) in clause (2), in the second proviso, —

(@ for sub-clause (९७), the following sub-clause shall be |
namely:—
“*(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person
to reduce him in rank is saiistha that for reasons, which are to be speci
शाप Stapgiated by evidence and to be recorded by that authority in writi
~* “and also intimated 10 the person concerned, it is not reasonably practical
to hold such inquiry.";

(if) sub-clause (0) shall be omitted; and
(6) clause (3) shall be omitted.


STATEMENT OF OB!ECTS AND REASONS

provisions of article 311 have been unreasonably used several times by the
ucracy 10 unjustifiably punish the employees for many reasons. This provision is
‘used t0 punish those employees who are not in the good books of their senior
. The employees who are involved in association activities are branded as political
and are punished under these provisions without giving them any opportunity
their poiut of view or 10 argue their case. The provisions of fundamental
enshrined in the Constitution are being violated in as much as the aggrieved
are not given a chance to defend themselves. Rules of natural justice and fair
ire that the employees must have a chance to know as to why they are being
and also they should be given a chance to explain their position and also to
the documents and evidence, if any, in their favour. Senior officer should not be
with powers to dismiss employees without holding aa inquiry. The procedure
Jing holding inquiry should be dispensed with only in exceptional cases and that

the officer who was conducting inquiry has recorded in writing that it is not
able to hold an inquiry.

Itis, therefore, proposed to amend article 311 of the Constitution suitably with a
10 protecting the interests of employees.

New Deua, BASUDEB ACHARIA
ber 25, 1999.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE ConsTITUTION OF INDIA
+ * * *
311. (4) No person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or an all-In

service or a civil service of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State sh
be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointe

(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in
except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges:

Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon him any
such penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced duris
such inquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such person any opportunity of m
representation on the penalty proposed:

Provided further that this clause shall not apply—

(@) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the gr
of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or

(0) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or t
reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that auth:
in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or

(०) where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is satisfied
in the interest of the security of the State it is not expedient to hold such inqui

(3) Ti, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question arises whether it is
reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry’as is referred to in clause (2), the decision
thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove such person or to reduce him
in rank shall be final.

* * “a



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
Jurther to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P.)

+ MGIP(PLU)MAND—1724LS—18.11.1999.