he

As mytropucep in Lox SaBHa

Ayres

Bill No. 94 of 1992

AIR CORPORATIONS (TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS AND
REPEAL) BILL, 1992 |

A As

BILL apn Ts

to provide for the transfer and vesting of the undertakings of Indian
Airlines and Air India respectively to and in the companies formed
and registered as Indian Airlines Limited and Air India Limited and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto and also fo
Tepeal the Air Corporations Act, 1953.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the  Re-
public of India as follows:—

4, (1) This Act may be called the Air Corporations (Transfer of Under-
takings and Repeal) Act, 1992.

(2) It shall come into foree on such date as the Central Government
' may, by notification in the Oificial Gazette, appoint, and different dates
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act,

2, In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(०) “appointed day” means such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint under section 3;

(b) “company” means “Indian Airlines Limited” or “Air India
Limited” formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956;

(०0) “corporations” means “Indian Airlines” and “Air India”
established under section 3 of the Air Corporations Act, 1953 (here-
inafter referred to as the principal Act) and “corporation” means
either of the corporations.

Short title
and com-
mence-
ment.

Defini-
tions.


JS

2
Under- 3. On such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
takings Official Gazette, appoint. there shall be transferred to, and vest in—
Ff corpo-
eee (6) Indian Airlines Limited, the undertaking of Indian Airlines:
vest in and
companies.

{L) Air Inciia Limited. the undertaking of Air India.

aan 4. (0) The undertaking of 2 corporation which is transferred to, a

effect of which vests in, a company under section 3 shall be deemed to include
vesting of assets rights, Powers, authorities and opivileges and all properties, mova-
tees in 4 and immovable, real or personal, 0
Gece or reservation, present or contingent, of whatever nature and wheresoever
panies. situcte, including iands, works, workshops, aircraft, cash balances, capital,

reserves, reserve funds, investments, tenancies, leases and book debts an

side India, all books of account and documents relating thereto and shall
also be deemed to include all borrowings, liabilites and obligations of

whatever kind then subsisting of that corporation in relation to its under-
taking.

(2) All contracts and working arrangements subsisting immediately
before the appointed day and affecting a corporation shall, in so far as
they relate to the undertaking of that corporaion, cease to have effect or
to be enforceable against that corperation and shall be of as full force and
effect against or in favour of the company in which the undertaking has
vested by virtue of this Act and enforceable as fully and effectually as ,
if, instead of the ecrporation, the company had been named therein or
had been a party thereto, 5

(3) Any proceeding or cause of action pending or existing immediately
before the appointed day by or against a corporation in relation to its
undertaking may, as from that day, be continued and enforced by or x
*gainst the company in which it has vested by virtue of this Act, as it
might have been enforced by ov zgainst that corporation if this Act had
not been passed, and shal] cease to be enforceable by or against that

corporation.

Licences, 5. With effect from the appointed day, all licences, permits, quotas and
fegner ” eXemptions, granted to a corporation in connection with the affairs and 9
कक business of that corporation under any law for the time being in force,
eave shall be deemed to have been granted to the company in which, the under-
been taking of that corporation hag vested.

granted

to com-

panies, 6. (1) Where any exemption from, or any assessment with respect to,
Tax any tax has been granted or made or any benefit by way of set off or carry
exemption sorward, 2s the case may be, of any unabsorbed depreciation or invest-
< Pee 77 कक त other allowance or loss has been extended or is ayail-
continue able to 8 corporation under the Income-tax Act, 1961, such exemption, |.
to have assessmen! or benefit shall continue to have effect in relation to the ८.
effect,

“ 45
company in which the undertaking of that corporation has vested,

(2) Where ‘any payment made by a corporation is exempt from
deduction of the tax at source under any provision of the Income-tax


3

Act, 1961, the exemption from tax will continue to be available as if the
provisions of the said Act made applicable to the corporation were opera-
tive in relation to the company in which the undertaking of that corpora-
tion’ has been vested.

5 (3) The transfer and vesting of the undertaking or any part thereof in
terms of section 3 shall not be construed as a transfer within the meaning
of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the purposes of capital gains.

7. Any guarantee given for or in favour of a corporation with respect

to any loan or 1९883 finance shall continue to be operative in relation to

10 the company in which the undertaking of that corporation has vested by
virtue of this Act.

8. (1) Every officer or other employee of a corporation (except a Direc-
tor of the Board, Chairman, Managing Director or any other person
entitled to manage the whole or 2 substantial part of the business and

15 affairs of the corporation) serving in its employment immediately before
the appointed day shall, in so far as such officer or other employee is
employed in conhecticn with the undertaking which has vested in a com-
pany by virtue of this Act become, as from the appointed day an officer
or other employee, as the case may be, of the company in which the
‘undertaking has vested and shail hold his office or service therein by the
same tenure, at the same remuaeration, upon the same terms and condi-
tions, with the same obligations and with the same rights and privileges
as to leave, passage, insurance, superannuation scheme, provident fund,
other funds, retirement, pension, gratuity and other benefits as he would
have held under that corporation if its undertaking had not
vested in. the company and shali continue to do so as an officer or other
employee, as the case may be, of the company or until the expiry of a
period of six months from the appointed day if such officer or other
employee opts not to be the officer or other employee of the company,
within such period.

(2) Where an officer or other employee of a corporation opts under
sub-section (1) not to be in the employment or service of the company
in which the undertaking of that corporation has vested, such officer or
other employee shall be deemed to haye resigned,

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of
the services of any cfficer or other employee of a corporation to a com-
pany shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation
“under this Act or under any other iaw for the time being in force and no
such claim shall be entertained by zeny court, tribunal or other authority:

(4) The officers and other employees who have retired before the
pointed day from the service of a corporation and are entitled to any
nefits, rights or privileges shall be entitled to receive the same benefits.
rights or privileges from the company in which the undertaking of that

(5) The trusts of the Provident Fund or Pilots Group Insurance and
uperannuation Scheme of the corporation and any other bodies created
for the welfare of officers or employees would continue to discharge their
netions in the new company as was being done hitherto in the corpo-
tion. Tax exemption granted to Provident Fund or Pilots Group In-
e and Superannuation Scheme would continue to be applied to
new company,

Guarantee
to be
‘operative.

employees
of cor
porations,


1 of 1956.

Power
ot cs
Central
Goyern-
ment to
give
directions,
Power

to

remove
difficulties,

Repeal
of

Act 27 of
1953 and
corpora-
tions to
cease to
exist.

4

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the |
panies Act, 1956 or in any other law for the time being in force or in 0
regulations, of a corporation, no Director of the Board, Chairman, रे
ing Director or any other person entitled to manage the whole or a sub-
stantial part of the business and affairs of that corporation shall be entit-
led to any compensation against that corporation or against the company,
as the case may be, for the, loss of office or for the Premature termina-

tion of any contract of management entered into by him with that
corporation.

9. The Central Government may give to a company directions as to
the exercise and performance by that company of its functions, and that
company shall be bound to give effeet to any such directions.

10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official

Gazette, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the
ditficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a
period of two years from the coming into force of this Act.

(2) Every order made under sub-sgction (1) shall be laid before each
House of Parliament. =

90
11... 6) The Air Corporations Act, 1953 is hereby repealed. 5

(2) The corporations shall, with the repeal of the Air Corporations
‘Act, 1953, cease to exist.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

| the fast developing international air-transport industry, mobilisa-
tion of progressively larger funds becomes necessary for all airlines. To
meet their growth requirements, Indian Airlines and Air India, both
‘constituted under the Air Corporations Act, 1953 need to tap the capital
market for equity funds rather than depend solely on budgetary support
from the Government as envisaged under the Act. As a part of the libera-
lisation set in motion under the new economic policy, private sector
investment has also been permitted in the air transport sector. It
has, therefore, been found necessary to repeal this Act.

2. The salient features of the Bill are:—
(a) Repeal of the Air Corporations Act, 1953 (27 of 1953);

(0) Undertakings of Corporations to vest in two proposed com-
panies namely, Air India Limited and Indian Airlines Limited. This
would involve transfer of assets and liabilities of the two corpora-
tons to the two proposed companies;

(c) All licences, permits, quotas and exemptions to be deemed
to have been granted to the proposed companies;

(d) The tax exemptions or penefits available to the corporations
to continue, to have effect in relation to the proposed companies;

(e) Guarantees given for or in favour of the Corporation to any
Joan or lease finance to continue to be operative;

(f) Every officer or other employee of the Corporations would
become, as from the appointed date, an officer or other employee, as

the case may be, in which the undertakings, have vested, with the
same terms and conditions of service, ete. with option to resign;
(g) Power of Central Government to give directions to the
[

companies.

3, The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Dent; MADHAVRAO SCINDIA,

‘The 27% April, 1992.

ae


LOK SABHA

a
BILL

to provide for the transfer and yesting of the undertakings of Indian Airlines
and Air India respectively to and in the companies formed and registered —
as Indian Airlines Limited and Air India Limited and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto and also to repeal the Air Corporations
Act, 1953.

(Shri Madhav Rao Scindia,
Minister of Civil Aviation
and Tourism)