WK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE TAXATION LAWS (AMENDMElJT), BILL, 1978 
CTo be/As introduced in Lok SabhaJ 
1. Page 3, line 5,-
omit "for" -
2. Page 3, line 7,-
for ''both'' ~ "(both" 
3. Page 3, lines 7 and 8,-
''Prope rtie s " read 
-
4. Page 3, line 23,-
.fQ!' hand" ~ Itor" 
NEW DELHI; 
M?l 12 1~~8 VaJ..salffia, 1900 (Saka) 
'lpropertie s) " 

1 5 MAY 1918 
r--"'-·· BIll No. t1 of 1."8 
THE TAXATION LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Iru:ome-tax Act, 1961 I1nd the Wealth-tax Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Repub114 
of India as follows:-
1. (7) This Act may be called the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, Short titM 
1878. and eom-mence_ 
(2) It. shalJ. come into force on the 1st day of April, 1979. ment. 
Amend-2. In the Income-tax Act, 1961,- ment 
(a) in Chapter III, after section 13. the following section shall be of Act a 
inserted, namely: _ of 1961. 
'13A. Any income of a political party which is chargeable 
under the head "Interest on securities". "Income from house pro-
perty" or "Income frbm other sources" or any income by way of 
voluntary contributions received by a political party from any 
person shall not be included in the total income of the previous 
year of such political party: 
Provided that-
(a) such political party keeps and maintains such books 
of account and other documents as would enable the Income-
tax Officer to properly deduce its income therefrom; 
(b) in respect of each such voluntary contribution in 
excess of ten thol,1sanci rupees, such political party keeps and 
Special 
provision 
relating to 
incomes at 
polltical 
parties. 

Amend_ 
mentot 
Act 27 
of 1957. 
..... " .... ... .: ' .,. 
. ,. 
2 
maintains a record of such contribution and the name and 
address of the person who has made such contribution' and , 
(c) the accounts of such political party are audited by an 
accountant as defined in the ].;xplanatian below sij.b-section 
(2) of section 288. S 
Explnnation.-For the purposes of this section, "political 
party" means an association or body of individual citizens of India 
registered with the Election Commission of India as a political 
party under paragraph 3 of the Election Symbols (Reservation and 
Allotment) Order, 196fl and includes a political party deemed to 10 
be registered with that Commission under the proviso to sub-
paragraph (2) of that paragraph.'; 
(b) in section 37,-
(i) after rub-section (2A), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: - IS 
h(2B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(1), no allowance shall be made in respect of expenditure 
incurred by an asse~see on advertisement in any souvenir. 
brochure, tract, pamphlet or the like published by a political 
party."~ 2.0 
(in in sub-section (3A) (as directed to be inserted by section 
8 of the Finance Act, 1978),-
(nfor the words, brackets and figure "the provisions of 
sub-section (.'1)", the words, brackets, figures and let<,er lithe 
provisions of sub-section (2B) or 5U:b-section (.'1)" shall 1:.e 2S 
substituted; 
(3) in the Explanation, in clause (0), for the words, 
. brackets and figurf' "under sub-section (3)", the words, 
brackets, figures and letter "under sub-section (2B), or sub-
section (3). or both" !>hall be substituted; 30 
(c) in section 139, after sub-secti.on (4A), the following sub-section 
~al1 be inserted. namely:-
"(4B) The chief executive officer (whether such chief execu-· 
tive officer is known as Secretary or by any other designation) of 
every, political party shall. if the total income in respect of whleh 3S 
the polit.ical party is assessable (the total income for this purpose 
being computed under this Act without giving effect to the pro-
visions of sect.ion 13A.) exceeds the maximum amount which is not 
chargeable to income-tax, furnish a return of such income of the 
previous year in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed 40 
manner and s'!tttng forth such other particulars as may be pres-
cribed and all the provisions of this Act, shall, so far as may be, 
apply as if it were a return required to be furnished under sub-
section (1).". 
3. In the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, in section 45, after clause (h), the fol- 45 
lowing clause and Explanation shall be inserted, namely:-
'(i) any political party, 
c 
E~1U1tion.-Fof the purposes of clause (i~, "political party" 
:ihall .baYe the meaning assigned to it in th~ . Explanation to section 
'13A of,theJllcome-tax Aet.', So ';.~ 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Politi~al parties are essential in any democratic set-up. The taxation 
of their imcome, however, reduces their disposable funds thereby adversely 
affecting their capaeity to finance their activities from legitimate sources 
of income. It is, therefore, proPGsed to provide for exemption from income. 
tax in ~spect of specitJed categories of income derived by political parties, 
namely, income fro>m investments both in movable and immovable proo-
perties and income by way of voluntary contributions. 'Mle proposed. 
exemption will be available only in the case of political pat'~whiCh are 
registered or deemed to be r~gistered with the Election Commission of 
India under the Election Symbols (ReSt'rvation and Allotment) Order, 
1968. The exemption will not be allowed unless the political part.y m&in-
tains proper books of account; records the name and address of every 
person Who has made a voluntary contribution of more than ten thousand 
rupees at a time: and the accounts of the political party are audited by a 
chartered accountant or other qualified accountant. 
2. Payments made for advertisements in souvenirs, brochures and the 
like published by political parties are not made on considerations of com-
mercial expediency, but are in the nature of disguised donations made 
with the twin objective of circumventing the ban on company donations 
and for securing their deduction in the computation of taxable prOfits. It 
is. therefore. proposed to provide that expenditure incurred by a tax-payer 
for purposes of advertisement in any souvenir, brochure and the like 
published by a political party will not be allowed as a deduction in com-
puting the taxable profits. 
3. One of the principal objects of wealth-tax is to reduce disparities 
in personal incomes and wealth. As this consideration does not apply 
in the case of political parties, it is proposed to exempt them from the 
levy o.f wea1th-tax. •. __ 
4. This Bill accordingly seeks to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961 and 
the Wealth-Tax Act 1957 main1v with a view to achieving the aforesaid '. . .. .,. , objects. 
NEW DELIU; H. M. PATEL. 
The 12th May, 1978. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (c) of clause 2 of the Bill proposes to insert a new sub-
lection (4Bt) in section 139 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 which requires the 
chief executive officer of a politi('al party to furnish a return of income in 
such form and verified in such manner and setting forth such particulars 
as may be prescribed by rules made under the said Act. As the matters 
in respect of which rules may be made under this provision pertain to 
matters of detaiil. or procedure, the delegation ot legislative power is ot a 
nOrJllal character. 
'. 

• 
37. (1) • 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM TilE INCOME-TAX ACT. 1961 
(43 OF 1961) 
• • • 
• • 
• 
• 
(3.4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) but with-
out prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (3), where the aggregate 
expenditure incurred by an assessee on advertisement, publicity and sales 
promotion in India exceeds forty thousand rupees, so much of such aggre-
gate expenditure as is equal to an amount calculated as provided here-
under shall not be allowed as a deduction, namely:-
(1,) where such aggregate expenditure does 10 per cent. of the ad-
not exceed i per cent. of the turnover or, as the jusb!d. expenditure; 
case may be, gross receipts of the business or 
profession 
(ii) where such aggregate expenditure 12~ per cent. of the ad-
exceeds! per cent. but does not exceed i per justed expenditure; 
cent. of the turnover or, as the case may be, 
gross receipts of the busine!>s or profession 
(iii) where such aggregate expenditure 15 per cent. of the ad-
exceeds t per cent. of the turnuver or, as the justed expenditure. 
case may be, gross receipts of the business or 
profession 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,-
(a) "adjusted expenditure" means the aggregate expenditure 
incurred by the assessee on advertisement, publicity and sales promo-
tion in India as reduced by SO much of such expenditure as is not 
allowed under sub-section (1) and as further reduced by so much of 
such expenditure as is not allowed under sub-section (3); 
(b) "turnover" and "gross receipts" mean turnover or gross re-
ceipts, as the case may be, as reduced by any discount or rebate 
allowed by the assessee. 
• 
• 
• • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE WEALTH-TAX Acr, 1957 
(27 OF 1957) 
• • • 
• 
• 
ueneral 
~. No ·t.ax shall be levied under this Act in respect of the net wealth Act notte 
of- apply In 
certain 
• • • • cases. 
(h) any company incorporated outside India which h~· no place 
of business in India. ar 
• • • • 
~~, , " , , 
/ ' , j , 
-" 

A 
BILL 
further to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Wealth-tax Act, 1857. 
($h'l'i H. M. Patel, Minilter of pjftMC') 