As INTRODUCED ~ LoK SABRA ON 
31 AUG '70 
• 
Bill No. 91 of 1970. 
THE PREVENTION OF INSULTS TO NATIONAL 
HONOUR BILL, 1970 
A 
BILL 
to prevent insults to national honour. 
. ' 
I 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year 'of the Republic 
of IJJdia as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Insults to 
Honour Act, 1970. 
S (2) It extends to the whole of India. 
National Short 
title and 
exteut. 
Z. Whoever in any public place or in any other place within public Insult to 
view burns, mutilates, defa~ es, defiles, disfigures, destroys, tramples upon Indian 
or otherwise brings into contempt (whether by words, either spoken or ~atiOnal 
written, or by acts) the Indian National :nag or the Constitution of India Co~s:~:-
10 or any part thereof, shall be punisheJ with imprisonment for a term tlon of 
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. India. 
Explanation I.-Comments expressing disapprobation or criticism of 
the Constitution or of the Indian National Flag or of any 
measures of the Government with a view to obtain an amendment 
IS of the Constitution of India or an alteration of the Indian National Flag 
by lawful means, without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, con-
tempt or disaffection towards the Government, do not constitute an 
offence under this sectil"l~. 

Preven-
tion of 
singing 
of Indian 
National 
Anthem. 
etc. 
2 
.,~ 2.-The txp!esaJon IIIncUan National Flag" includes aD1. 
picture, paintillg, drawing or photograph, or other visible representattOJl 
of the Indian Nations! Flag, or of any part or parts thereot, made oJ any 
su~tnc~, ~r reprrted on any substance. 
Explanation 3.-The expression "public place" means any 'place in- S 
tended for use by, or accessi·ble to, the public and includes any public 
conv~yance. 
• 
3. Whoever intentionally prevents the singing of the Indian National 
Anthem or causes disturbance ~o any assembly engaged in such singing 
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 10 
three years, or with fine, or with both. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Casea involving deliberate disrespect to the National Flag, the Na-
tional Anthem and the Constitution have come to notice in the recent 
past. Some of these incidents were discussed in both Houses of Parlia-
ment and Members expressed great anxiety about the disrespect shown 
to the national symbols. Government were urged to prevent the recur-
rence of such incidents. Disrespect to the National Flag, the Constitu-
tion or the National Anthem is not punishable under the existing law. 
Public acts of insult to these symbols of the sovereignty and the inte-
grity of the nation must ,be prevented. Hence the Bill The scope of 
the law is restricted to overt acts of insult to, and attacks on, the national 
symbols by burning, trampling, defiling or mutilating in public. It is 
not intended to prohibit honest and bona 'fld,6 criticism of the symbols, 
and exprees provision to this eflect has been made in the Bill. 
Nzw Dam:; K. C. PANT. 
'l'he 14tJi. Ju14/. 1970. 
3 

LOK SABHA 
A. 
BILL 
to prevent insults to national honour. 
(Shri Krishna Chandra Pant, 
Minister of State £n the 
Minisl? of Home Affairs, 
and Mmister of State, De-
partments of Electromcs and 
Scientific and lndustn·at Re-
search). 