BUI No. 91 of IfS8. @ 
THE INDiAN MEI)ICAL COUNC1L 
(AMENDME~T) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED rN LOK SABHA) 

SUI No. ,I of 1958 
THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956. 
BE it. enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Indian Medical Council (Amend- Short dtlc. 
ment) Act, 1958. 
5 2. For section 34 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, the Substitution 
1'0 
IS 
20 
25 
fol1owing section shall be substituted and shall be deemed always ti~n~:. ~~~~ 
to have been substituted, namely:- cion 34. 
"34. (J) The Indian Medical Council Act, 1933, is hereby Repeal of 
repealed. Act 27 of 
1933· 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, until 
the Council is constituted in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act,-
(a) the Medical Council of India as constituted immedia-
tely before the commencer.lent of this Act under the Indian 
Medical Council Act, 1933 (hereinafter referred to as the said 
Medical Council) shall be deemed to be the Council consti-
tuted under this Act and may exercise any of the powers 
conferred or perform any of the duties imposed on the 
Council; and any vacancy occurring in the said Medical 
Council may be filled up in such manner as the Central 
Government may think fit; and 
(b) the Executive Committee and other Committees of 
the said Medical Council as constituted immediately before 
the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the 
Executive Committee and other Committees constituted 
under this Act .... 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Before the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956), can 
be brought into operation, it is necessary that action is taken by 
the States (more particularly the reorganised States) to get the 
State Medical Registers prepared as the Medical Council to be 
constituted under the Central Act will consist, among others, of 
members elected from among themselves by persons enrolled on 
the State Registers. Action in this behalf has been or is being 
taken by the State Governments; but this is bound to take some 
more time. In the meantime, it has been represented to the Gov-
ernment that unless the Act is brought into force, persons possessing. 
certain licentiate qualificetions and persons who are citizens of India 
possessing certain foreign medical qualifications, which are not recog-
nised under the existing Act, will not be eligible for enrolment on the 
State Medical Registers. In the circumstances, Government con-
sider that the Act should be brought into force without further 
delay. 
As soon as the new Act is brought into force, the existing 
Council will cease to function as there is no provision for continu-
ing the existing Council, and some time will necessarily have to 
elapse,' before a new Council can be constituted under the 1956 
Act. As it is desirable that there should be continuity in the exis-
tence of the Medical Council, it is proposed to provide for the conti-
nuance of the existing Council after the commencement of the new 
Act until the new Council is constituted. The Bill gives effect to this 
object. 
D. P. KARMARKAI\, 
NEW DELHI; 
The 13th August, 1958. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM TUJ:; INDIAN MIlDICAL COUNCIL ACT, 1956 
(102 OF 1956) 
* • • • • • 
34. The Indian Medical Council· Act, 1933, is hereby repealed. 
• • • • 
Repeal 
gfAct 
~7 of 1933 . 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956. 
(Shri D. P. Karmarkar, 
Minister of Health) 