THE ACQUIRED TERRITORIES 
(MERGER) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
• 

BW No. ,lor 1960 
~IlIE ACQUIRED TERRITORIES (MERGER) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the merger into the States of Assam, Punjab and West 
Bengal of certain territories acquired in pursuance of the agree. 
ments entered into between the Governments of India and 
Pakistan and fOT matter& connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, Shert title. 
1960. 
5 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwi~e require5,-
(a) "acquired territories" mean so much of the territories 
comprised in the Indo-Pakistan agreements and referred to in the 
First Schedule as are demarcated for the purpose of being 
acquired by India in pursuance of the said agreements; 
10 (b) "appointed day" means such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint for 
the merger of the acquired territories under section 3, after 
Clausing the territories to be so acquired demarcated for the pur-
pose, and different dates may be appointed for the merger of such 
IS territories into different States; 
(c) "assembly constituency", "council constituency" and 
"parliamentary constituency" have the same meanings as in the 
43 of 1950. Representation of the People Act, 1950; 
54 M of Law-I. .. 
efl.nitio • 

J 
Mert'er of 
acqwred 
territories. 
Amendmeat 
ofthe First 
Schedule to 
tbe Consti-
tution. 
2 
(d) "Indo-Pakistan agreements" mean the Agreements 
dated the 10th day of September, 1958, the 23rd day of October, 
1959 and the 11th day of January, 1960 entered into between the 
Governments of India and Pakistan, the relevant extracts of 
which are set out in the Second Schedule; S 
(e) "law" includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, 
order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrumont 
having the force of law in the whole or in any part of the 
acquired territory; 
(f) "sitting member", in relation to either House of Parlia- 10 
ment or of the Legislature of a State, means a person who, 
immediately before the appointed day, is a member of that House; 
(g) "State concerned", in relation to the acquired territories . 
referred to in Part I, Part II and Part III of the First Schedule. 
means, respectively, the State of Assam, the State of Punjab and IS 
the State of West Bengal; and "State Government concerned" 
shall be construed accordingly; 
(h) "Union purposes" mean the purposes of Government 
relatable to any of the matters mentioned in List I of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. 20 
3. (1) As from the appointed day, the acquired territories refer-
red to in Part I, Part II and Part III of the First Schedule shall, 
respectively, be included in, and form part of, the States of Assam, 
Punjab and West Bengal. 
(2) As from the apoointed. day, the State Government concernpd 2S 
shall, by order in the Official Gazette, provide for the administration 
of the acquired territories included in that State by including them 
or any part of them in such di~trjct, sub-division, police station or 
other administrative unit as may be specified in the order. 
4. As from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the 30 
Constitution,-
• 
(a) in the para~raph relatin~ to the territories of the State 
of Assam, after the words "the Assam Tribal Areas", the words, 
figures and brackets "and the territories referred to in Part I of 
the First Schedule to the Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 3~ 
19tO" shall be inserted; 

5 
10 
3 
(b) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State 
of Punjab, after the words and figures "the States Reorganisa-
tion Act, 1956", the words, figures and brackets "and the terri-
tories referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to the Acquired 
Territories (Merger) Act, 1960" shall be inserted; 
(c) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State 
of West Bt>ngal, after the words, brackets and figures "the Bihar 
IQIld West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1958", the words, 
figures and brackets "and the territories referred to in Part III 
of the First Schedule to the Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 
1960" shall be inserted. 
5. As from the appointed day,- Constructiea 
(a) any reference in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and ~! :i-:'ca 
Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956.- c~nstituCll-
Clet. 
15 (i) to the State of Assam or Punjab or West Bengal, 
30 
35 
sOOll be construed as including that part of the acquired 
territory which is included in that State; 
(ii) to any district. sub-division, police station or other 
administrative unit, shall be construed as including that 
part of tho> acquired territory, if any, which is included in 
that district, sub-division, police station or other administra-
tive unit, by order made under sub-section (2) of section 3; 
(b) any reference in the Delimitation of Council Constituen-
cies (Punjab) Order, 1951-
(i) to the State of Punjab, shall be construed as includ-
ing that part of the acquired territory which is included in 
that State; 
(ii) to any district, shall be construed as includin~ that 
part of the acquired territory. if any, which is included in 
that district, by order made under sub-section (2) of 
section 3; 
(c) any reference in the Delimitation of Council Constitu-
encies (West Bengal) Order, 1951-
(i) to the State of West Bengal, shall be construed at! 
including that part of the acquired territory which is includ-
ed in that State; 
(ii) to any division or district, shall be construed at! 
including the acquired territory, if any, which is included in 
that division or district by order J1lI8de under sub-section (2) 
of section 3 .. 

Provision a~ 
to sitting 
members 
4 
6. (1) Every sitting member of the House of People representing 
any parliamentary constituency the extent of which has been altered 
by virtue of the provisions of this Act shall, notwithstanding such 
alteration, be deemed to have been elected as from the appointed 
day to that House by that constituency as so altered. 
(2) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Assam or Punjab or West Bengal representing any assembly 
constituency the extent of which has bEen altered by virtue of the 
provisions of this Act shall, notwithstanding such alteration, be deem-
ed to have been elected as from the appointe4 day to the said Legis- 10 
lative Assembly by that constitue-ncy as so altered. 
(3) Every sitting member of the Legislative Council of Punjab 
or West Bengal representing any council constituency the extent of 
which has been altered by virtu~ of the provisions of this Act, shall, 
notwithstanding such alteration, be deemed to have been elected as IS 
from the appointed. dey to the said Legislative Council by that 
constituency as so altered. 
ProperlY and 7. (1) All property and assets within the acquired territories 
lSsetS. which, immediately befare the appointed day, are vested in Pakistan 
or in the Province of East Pakistan or the Province of West Pakis- 20 
tan shall, as from that day,-
(a) where such property and assets are relatable to Union 
purposes, vest in the Union; 
(b) in any other case, vest in the State concerned in which 
the acquired territories 'are included. 25 
(2) A certificate of the C(mtral Government signed by a Secre-
tary to that Government shall be conclusive as to whether the pur-
poses for which any property or assets are held, immediately b"fore 
the appointed day, are Union purposes. 
Appropriation 8. (1) As from the appointed day, any Act passed by the Legis- 30 
of moneys lature of the State of Assam or Punjab or West Bengal before that for expendi-ture in day for the appropriation of any moneys out of the Consolidated 
acquire.f Fund of that State to meet any expenditure in respect of any part of te .. rito~ies. 
the financial year 1960-61, sOOll have effect also in relation to the 
acquired territories included in that State and it shall be lawful for 35 
the State Government concerned to spend any amount in respect of 
thos::, territories out of the amount authorised by such Act to be 
expenditure for any service in that State. 

s 
(2) The Governor of the State concerned may, after the appointed 
day, authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
that State as he deems necessary for any purpose or service in the 
acquired territories included in that State for a period of not more 
S than three months beginning with the appointed day pending the 
sanction of such expenditure by the Legislature of thot State. 
9, All laws in force in the acquired territories immediately before Extension of 
the appointed day shall, as from that day, cease to be in force in laws. 
those territories and all laws in force generally in the State con-
10 cerned in which the ocquired territories are included shall, as from 
that day, extend to, or as the case may be, come into force in. those 
territories: 
Provided that anything done or any action taken before the 
appointed day under any law in force in the acquired territories 
IS shall be deemed to have been done or taken, as from the appointed 
day, under the corresponding .... aw extended to, and in force in, those 
territories. 
10. The State Government concerned, as respects tne acquired Po\\er :0 
territories included in that State, may, by notification in the Official nham~ ~u-fi t orltles or 
20 Gazette, specify the authority, officer or person who, on or after the exerci~ing 
appointed day, shall be competent to exercise such functions, exer- sfuntatctutpry . Ions. 
cisable under any law in force on that day in those territories, as 
may be mentioned in that notification and such law shall have effect 
accordingly. i 
2S 11. (1) If any difficulty arises in relation to the transition from Power to 
any corresponding law to any law which by virtue of section 9 shall, r~move, 
f th ' t ddt d . f . h difficulties. as rom e appom e ay, ex en to, or come mto orce m,' t e 
acquired territories, the Central Government may, by order notified 
in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as appear to it to be 
30 necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 
(2) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act (otherwise than in relation to the transition from any 
corresponding law) or in connection with the administration of the 
acquired territories as a part of the State in which they are included, 
35 the State Government concerned may, by order in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the purposes of 
this Act, as appear ,to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty. 
(3) No power under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be 
40 exercised by the Central Government or, as the case may be, the 
State Government after the expiry of three years from the appointed 
day. i 

, , 
(4) Any order made under ilub-section (1) or lub-section (2) 
may be 10 made al to be retrospective to any date not earlier than 
the appointed day. 
I 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sections 2(a), 2 (g), 3 a.nd 4] 
PART I 
• 
The acquired territory in relation to item (7) of paragraph 2 
of the Aireement dated the 10th day of September, 1958. 
PART II 
s 
The acquired territory in relation to item (ii) and item (iii) of 10 
paraeraph 1 of the Agreement dated the 11th day of January, 1960. 
PART III 
The acquired territory in relation to item (5) and item (10) of 
paragraph 2 of the Agreement dated the 10th day of September, 1958 
and paraaraph 4 of the Agreement dated the 23rd day of October, IS 
1951t l 
. THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (d)] 
1. ExTltACTI nOM THI! NOTE CONTAINING THE AGREEMENT DATED TIlE 
10TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 1958. 
• • • • • . 
2. A. a result of the discussions, the followine agreement. were 
arrived at:-\ I 
• • • • • 
(I) ~ PGTgGfUJ.l-KhUlna.} B d d' t 24 P __ ft r .- oun ary lSpU es. I 
GTgal~e"ore 
30 
It is agreed that the mean of the two respective claima 
of India and Pakistan should be adopted, taking the river 
as a guide, as far as possible, in the case of the latter dispute. 
(Ichhamati river). I I 30 
• • • • • 
(7) Piyain and Surma river regions to be demarcated in 
accordance with the relevant notifications, cadastral survey map. 

s 
10 
1 
and, If necessary, record of rights. Whatever the result of this 
demarcation might be, the nationals of both the Governments 
to have the facility of navigation on both these rivers. 
• • • • • 
(10) Exchange of old Cooch Behar enclaves in Pakistan and 
Pakistan enclaves in India without claim to compensation for 
extra area going to Pakistan, is agreed to. 
• • 
Signed. (M. S. A. BAIG) 
Foreign Secretary, 
Ministry of Foreign Affair. and 
Commonwealth Relatiom, 
Government of Pakistan. 
NEW DELHI, SEPTEMBER 10, 1958. 
• • • 
Signed. (M. J. DESAI) 
Commonwealth Seet'etary. 
Ministry of External Affairs, 
Government of India. 
15 2. ExTRACTS FROM THE AGREEMENT ENTITLED "AGREED DECISIONS AND 
PROCEDURl!'.S TO END DISPUTES AND INCIDENTS ALONG THE INDO-EAST 
PAKISTAN BORDER AREAS", DATED THE 23RD DAY OJ' 0cT0BBB, 1959. 
• • • • • 
4. West Bengal-East Pakistan Boundary 
20 Over 1,200 miles of this boundary have already been demar-
cated. As regards the boundary between West Bengal and East 
Pakistan in the areas of Mahananda, Burung IlDd Karatoa rivers, 
it was agreed that demarcation w II be made in accordance with 
the latest cadastral survey maps supported by relevant noti1l-
~s eations and record of I'1ahta. 
• • 
(Sci.) (J. G. KHARAS) 
Acting Foreign Secretary, 
Miniltry of Foreign Affairs & 
Com.monwealth Relations, 
Karachi. 
NEW Dam, 
October 23, 1959. 
M M of Law-2. 
• • 
(Sd.) (M. J. DESAI) 
Commonwealth Secretary, 
Ministry of External Affairs, 
N~ Delhi. 

8 
3. EXTRACTS FROM THE AGREEMENT ENTITLED «AGREED DECISIONS AND PRO-
CEDUBES TO END DISPlJTES AND INCIDENTS ALONG THE INDO-WEST 
PAKISTAN BORDER AREAS", DATED THE 11TH DAY oF' JANUARY, 1960. 
• • • • • 
"I. West Pakistan-Punjab border.-Of the total of 325 miles of the S 
border in this sector, demarcation has been completed along about 
252 miles. About 73 miles of the border has not yet been demarcated 
due to differences between the Governments of India and Pa~stan 
regarding interpretation of the decision and Award of the Punjab 
Boundary Commission presented by Sir Cyril Radcliffe as Chairman 10 
of the Commission. These differences have been settled along the 
lines given below in a spirit of accommodation: 
• • • • • 
(ii) Chak Ladheke (Amritsar-Lahore border) .-The Govern-
ments of India and Pakistan agree that the delineation of the IS 
boundary will be as shown in the map of the Kasur Tehsil by 
Sir Cyril Radcliffe and Chak Ladheke will in consequence fall 
within the territorial jurisdiction of the Government of India. 
(iii) Ferozepur (Lahore-Ferozepurborder) .-The Govern~ 
ments of India and Pakistan agree that the West Pakistan-Punjab 20 
(India) boundary in this region is along the district boundaries of 
these districts and not along the actual course of the river Sutlej. 
• • 
(Sd.) M. J. DESAI, 
Commonwealth Secretary. 
Ministry of External Affairs, 
Government of India. 
NEW DELHI; 
January 11. 1960. 
• • • 
(Sd.) J. G. KHARAS, 
Joint Secretary, 25 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
Commonwealth RelatiOns, 
Government of Pakistan. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Agreements between the Governments of India and Pakistan 
dated 10th September, 1958, 23rd October, 1959, and 11th January, 
1960, settled certain boundary disputes between the GoV'ernmenta of 
India and Pakistan relating, inter aZia, to the borders of the States 
of Assam, Punjab and West Bengal. 
According to these agreements, certain territories are to be 
transferred to India from Pakistan after demarcation. The Bill 
seeks to provide for the merger into the States of Assam, Punjab 
and West Bengal the territories acquired in pursuance of these agree-
ments and makes the necessary supplemental and incidental provi-
sions relating to representation in Parliament and in the State 
Legislatures, the vesting of property and assets and other mattera . ... _ .. _. 
As required by the proviso to article 8 of tbe Constitur,ion, this 
Bil! was referred by the President to the Leais1atures of the States 
of Assam, PUlljab and West Bengal for expressina their views there' 
on within a stated period and the peripd so specified or aHowed bas 
expired. 
NEW DELHI; JAWAIIARLAL NEHRU. 
The 16M Deoember, 1960. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill may involve some expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India on account of demarcation of boundaries between 
India and Pakistan. The demarcation, however, will be carried out 
by the existing officers of the Government. The amount of such 
expenditure is not likely to be substantiaJ and it is not possible to 
give any exact figure of the amount involved at this stage. 
10 

• 
• 
NtJfM 
2. Assam. 
• 
11. Punjab. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION 01' INDIA 
• 
• 
• 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
[Articles 1 and f) 
I. THE STATES 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The territories Which Immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution were com-
prised in the Province of Assam, the Khasi States 
and the Assam Tribal Areas, but excluding the 
territories specified in tpe Schedule t6 the Assam 
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1951. 
• • • • 
The territories specifted in section 11 of the States 
Reorganisation Act. 1956. 
• • • • 
14. West Bengal. The territories which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution were either 
comprised in the Province of West Bengal or 
were being administered as if they fbrmed part 
of that Province and the territory of Cbander-
nagore as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of 
the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954 and also 
the territories specified in sub-section (1) of 
section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer 
of Territories) Act, 1956. . 
• • • • • 
n 

LOK SABRA 
A 
Bll..L 
to provide for the merger into the States of AsslIll, Punjab 
and West Bengal of certain territories acquired in pursu-
ance of thi~ agreements entered into b~twecn the Govern-
ments of India and Pakistan and for matters connected 
therewith. 
The President has, in . pursuance of article 3 and clause 
(3) of article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommendl.!d 
to Lok Sabha the introduction and consideration of 
the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(ShriJarDaharlal Nehru, Minister of External Affairs.) 