Bill No. 91 of 1962 
THE WAREHOUSING CORPORATIONS 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABliA 
ON 3RD SBPTEMBER, I962) 
fI AkLlAMfNl UWtArt I 
No .............................. _ 
D~t.e •• ~LlL!:.1;;;-

THE WAREHOUSING ORPORATIONS BILL, 196z 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PurJMIN'ARY 
1. Short title. extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions 
CHAPTER n 
TIm CIlN'TBAL W AURO'OSING CoRPORATIOK 
3. The Central Warehousing Corporation. 
4. Share capital and shareholders. 
5. Shares to be guaranteed by Central Government and to be 
trust or approved securities. 
6. Management of Central Warehousing Corporation. 
7. Directors. 
8. Disqualiflcaticn for office of Director of the Central Warehous-
ing Corporation. 
9. Removal of directors from ofB.ce. 
10. Appointment of officers, etc., and their conditions of service. 
11. Functions of Central Warehousing Corporation. 
12. Executive Committee. 
13. Meetings of the Corporation. 
14. Grants Illnd loans by the Central Government. 
15. Corporation to maintain two funds. 
16. Warehousing Fund. 
17. General Fund. 
CHAPTER m 
STATE W ARZHO'OSIN'G CORPORATIOn 
18. State Warehousing Corporations. 
19. Share capital and shareholders. 
1649(B) LS-l. 
( i ) 

(ii) 
CLAUSES 
30. ~~ •• ment of a S1IB.te Warehousing Corporation. 
21. Disqualification for membership of the Board of the Corpora-
tum. ' 
22. Removal of directors from office. 
23. Appointment of offiCers, etc., and their conditions of service. 
24. Functions of the State Warehouaing Corporation. 
25. Executive Commi1tee. 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE. AcCOUNTS AND AtJDIT 
26. Submission of programme Of· ll'C'tivities and financial estt-
matea. 
27. Borrowing powers of Warehousing Corporation. 
28. Deposit account. 
29. Investment of funds. 
30. Disposal of proftts. 
31. AccowIts ad audit of WaNhousiftl C()Z'}>oraUGn. 
CHAPl'ERV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
32. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate ada aDd proceediDgs of 
Warehousin2 Corporations. 
33. Delegation. 
34. Voting rights of shareholders. 
35. Disputes between Central Warehousing Corporation and 
State Warehousing Corporation. 
36. Declaration of ftdeUty and secrecy. . , 
37. Indemnity of Directors. 
38. Offences. 
39. Provisions relating to income-tax and super-tax. 
40. Winding up of Warehousing Corporations. 
41. Power to make rUies. 
42. Power of Warehousing Corporations to· make replatiot'll. 
43. Repeal and savings. 
THE SCHEDULE 

Bill No. ,lOr I,M 
THE WAREHOUSING CORPORATIONS BILL, 19N 
(As IN'l'RODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
Bn.L 
to provide Jor the incorpOTation and regulation of corporations fOf' 
the PUrpoBe of 'Warehousing of agricu.Ztural produce and certaift 
oeM commodities tmd fOT matters connected therewith. 
BE.it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PULDLINAllY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Warehousing Corporations Short titlet 
kt, 1962. extent aall CommCDc:e-
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu mente 
and Kaihmir. 
(8) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 'Govern-
10 lIlent may. by notification in the Official Gazette, appoll'lt. 
IS 
z. &1 this Act. unless the context otherwise requires,"";' 
(a) "agricultural produce" means any of the following 
classes of commodities, namely:-
(i) foodstU1fs, including edible oil-seeds; 
(ii) cattle fodder, including oil--cakes and other con-
eantrates; 
(iii) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginner, and 
cottoD aeec:lj 
lM9(B) LS-2. 
DcllnltlODI. 

(i,,) raw jute; and 
~ t, (,,) vegetable oils; 
i. 
(b) "appropriate Government" means in relation to the 
Ce:Iitral W &rehousing Corporation, ;the Central Government, 
and in relation to a State Warehousing Corporation, the State S 
Government; 
(c) "Central Warehousing Corporation" means the Central 
Warehousing Corporation established under section 3; 
(d) "c(H)})erative society" means a society registered or 
deemed to be registered under the Co-operative Societies Act,10 
1912. or under any other law with respect to co-operative soc1. :& of 1912-
ties for the time being in force in any State, which is engaged 
in the processing, marketing, storage. e:x:port or import of aan-
c:ultural produce or any notified commodity or in insurance 
business and includes a co-operative land mortgage bank; IS 
(e) "notified commodity" means any commodity (other than 
agricultural produce) which the Central Government may. by 
notification in the Ofticial Gazette, declare to be a notified com-
modity for the purposes of this Act, being a commodity with res-
pect to which Parliament has power to make laws by virtue of 20 
entry 33 in List III in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 
(g) "recognised association" means an association which is 
for the time being recognised by the Central Government under 2$ 
leCtion 6 of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952; 14 ol195a. 
(h) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India con-
stituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; :& of 1934. 
(i) "scheduled bank" means a bank for the time being in-
cluded in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of Indla 30 
Act, 1934; ! :& of 1934. 
(;) "State Bank" means the State Bank of India constituted 
under the State Bank of India Act, 1955; 23 of I",. 
(k) "State Warehousing Corporation" meana a Warehous-
ing Corporation for a State established or deemed to be estab- 3' 
1Iabecl UDder thiJ Act; 

5 
I 
(I) ·'Warehouslng Corporation" means a Warehousil:Ja ec. 
poration established or deemed to be establilhed under thia Act; 
aDd 
(m) "year" means the financial year. 
CHAPTER II 
THE CENTRAL WAREHOUSING CORPORATION 
S. (1) With eftect frOom sueh date as the Central Government ~ = 
may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, specify in this behalf, c:;,.-. 
the Central Government shall establish a Corporation by the name ~ . 
10 of the Central Warehousing Corporation which shall be a body cor-
porate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power 
to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and may, 
by the said name, sue and be sued. 
(2) The head-office of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall 
I~ be at New Delhi. 
'- (1) The authorised share capital of the Central Warehousing =.ad 
Corporation shall be twenty crores of rupees divided into two hund- ~ 
red thousand shares of the face value of one thousand rupees eaeli; 
aany shares remaining to be issued may be issued, with the sanction 
20 of the Central Government from time to time, as and when the Cen-
tral Warehousing Corporation may deem fit. 
(2) The Central Government shall subscribe for forty per cent. 
of the sbare capital issued at any time and the remaining sixty per 
cent. of the share capital may be subscribed for, within sucb period 
2S and in neb proportion as may be specifted by the Central Govena-
ment, by the following institutions, namely:-
(4) the State Bank; 
(b) other scheduled banks; 
(e) co-operative societies; 
30 (d) insurance companies, investment trusts and other flnan-
cial institutions; 
(e) recognised associations and companies dealing in agri-
cultural produce or any notified commodity. 
(3) If any portion of the sixty per cent. of the share capital re-
35 ferred to in sub-section (2) remains unallotted. it may be nbs-
cribed for by the Central Government and the State Bank in such 
proportion as may be agreed upon between them and in default of 
sueb agreement, as may be determined by the Central Government. 
(4) The shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall 
40 not be transferable except to the Central Government, the State 
./ 

- .-.... 
Bank, any scheduled bank, any inlUl'ance company. any investment 
1Irust or other financial institution or any co-.oper.atln socletIY or IllY 
recognised association or company dealing in agricultural pl'Clllace or 
any notified commodity, in accordance with the regulations made by 
the Central Warehousing Corporation under this Act. S 
SIwea ::0 5. (1) The shares of the Central Warehousin, Corporation shall 
~tral he JUaranteed hy the Central Goverament as to the repayment of 
~~eat the prineipai and the payment of the annual dividend at such mini-
!rUt or mum rate as may be fixed by the Central Government, by Botlflea-
=- tien published in the Offieial Gazette, at the time of the issue of, tile 10 
shares. ~ , ,-"" I ·'Y!""! 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the AA:tB mentlGaed 
in this sub-section, the shares of the Central Warehoutin.r ~ 
tto,n shall be deemed to be included am()n~ the seeuritifl1l enumen- :a of Ilia. 
'hd in .section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act. 1_. and' al80· to be IS of 
approved securities for the purpose of the Insuranoe Alct. 1t38- aad 4 1931. 
the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 10 of 194,. 
~ •. (1) The Reneral superintendence and mana~ment of.. 
Wuehouaina affairs and business of the Central Warehousin~ Corporation shalt 
~ora- ve&t in a board of directors who, with the assistance of an .eeu~ 20 
t!ve Committee and a managing director, may erercise all the. 
'POwers and discharge all the functions which may be e:llerelled: or 
discharged by the Central Warehousing Corporation under. this Act. 
(2') The board of directors shall act on busiBess prfDeit)-
h8vtng regard to public interest and shall be- .rutded by s1I011 in. 25 
1:ructions on questions of policy as may be Jtfven to tftl!ftl lty the 
Central Government. 
(3) If any doubt arises as to whether a QUestion fs or is not a 
Question of policy. the decision of the Central Govemmem shall bp 
ftnaL I I ., 30 
Dtnaton. ". (11 '1'tie board of directors referred to in section 6 shan 
eonsist of the following, namely:-
(a) six directors to be nominated by the Central Gov-
ernment; 
(b) one dire~tor to be nominated by the National Co.-opem- 35 
tive Development Corporation established under the Nat1cmal 
Ce-G~tive Development Corporation Act, 1962: 
(c) fme director to be nomiDBted by the State BaRk; 
(d) cme director to be elected by otner scheduled b..p; 
(e) one director to be elected by co-operative sodeti ... : 40 

(1) one director to be elected by insurance companie$. bwest-
ment trusts and other financial institutions, recognised associa-
tions and companies dealing in agicultural produce Of npijJled 
commodities; 
(g) a managing director, appointed by the Central Goy-ern-
ment in consultation with the directors referred to in clauses (a, 
to (f): 
Provided that the three directors to be elected under clauses (d), 
'8'~ and (f) may, for the first constitution of the board of directors. 
10 be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as 110 give 
representation to each class of institutions (whether they have become 
shareholders of the Corporation or not) referred to in those cbluses, 
but a director so nominated shall hold office only until he is re-
placed by a director elected as provided in that clause. and the 
IS c&eetor so elected shall hold office only for so long as the director 
replaced would have held office had he not been replaced. 
(2) The directors referred to in clauses (d), (e) and (f) of sub-
section (1) shall be elected in the prescribed manner. 
(3) If, within the period prescribed in this behalf, or within such 
ao further period as· the Central Government may allow, the institutions 
referred to in clause (d) or c1euse (e) or clause (I) of sub .. sectian (1) 
fail to elect a director, the Central Government Ulay nominate a 
director to ftll the vacancy. 
(4) The board of directoxs shall have a Chairman and. a. Vice-
2S Chairman who shall be appointed by the Central Govemm.em from 
among the directors. 
30 
(5) The managing director shall-
(a.) exercise such powers and perform such duties as the 
board of directors or the Central Warehousing Corporation may 
entrust or delegate to him; and 
(bl receive such salary and allowances as the Centnl Ware-
laousing Corporation may, with the wpproval of the Ceatral 
Govel'Dmel'lt, fix. 
(6) The directors of the Central Warehousing Corporation other 
than the managing director shall be entitled to receive by way of 
3S reuumeration such sums as the Central Warehousing Corporation 
may, with the approval of the Central Government, flx: 

Provided that no oftlcial director shall be entitled to receive any 
remuneration other than the allowances, if any, admissible to him 
under the rules regulating his conditions ot service. 
(7) The term of office of, and the manner of filling casual 
vaeancies among, the directors shall be such as may be prescribed. 5 
~~ca- 8. A person shan be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, 
oIlc:e of a director of the Central Warehousing Corporatio~ 
director of 
~=:!I (i) if he is found to be a lunatic or becomes of unsound. mind; 
CorporatioD. or 
aeaovalof 
dlNcton 
froID otIlce. 
(ii) if he is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent or 10 
has suspended payment of his debts or has compounded with 
his creditors; or 
(iii) if he is or has been convicted of any offence involving 
moral turpitude and sentenced in respect thereof to imprison-
ment for not less than six months, unless a period of five years has IS 
elapsed from the date of expiry of the sentence; or 
(iv) if he has been removed or dismissed from the service of 
Government or a Corporation owned and controlled by the Gov-
ernment; or 
(v) except in the case of the managing director, if he is a 20 
salaried official of the Central Warehousing Corporation or any 
State Warehousing Corporation; or 
(vi) if he is personally interested in any subsisting contract 
made with, or in any work being done for the Central Ware-
housing Corporation except as a shareholder (other than a 25 
dJrector) in any public company as defined in the Companies 
Act, 1956: I or ItS6. 
Provided that where any such person is a shareholder, he shall 
cUsclose to the Central Warehousing Corporation. the nature and 
extent ~f shares held by him in such company. 30 
t. (1) The Central Government may, at any time in consulta-
tion with the Central Warehousing Corporation, remove the 
managing director from office after giving him a reasonable oppor-
tunity of showing cause against the proposed removal. 
(2) The board of directors may remove from ofBce any director who- , I ., " .. -::'-: . .:r.O":'-r~ 3S 
(4) Is or has become subject to any of the dlsquallftcatlou 
mentioned in section 8; or 

, 
(b) is absent without leave of the board of directota tal 
more than three consecutive meetings of the board without 
cause sufficient in the opinion of the board, to exonerate his 
absence. 
5 10. (1) The Central Warehousing Corporation may appoint such AppoInt-
otBcers and other employees as it considers necessary for the em- :ant of 
dent perf~rmance of its functiona. 1D4~:C-' 
CODdldaalot 
(2) Every person employed by the Central Warehousini Cor- service. 
poration under this Ad shall be subject to such conditions of service 
10 and shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be determined 
by regulations made by the Corporation under this Act. 
11. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Warehousing Puncdonl of 
Corporation may- ~.=!u.m. 
(a) acquire and build godowns and warehouses at such CozporadoD. 
IS suitable places in India as it thinks fit; 
(b) run warehouses for the storage of agricultural produce, 
seeds, manures, fertilizers, agricultural implements and notified 
commodities offered by individuals, co-operative societies and 
other institutions; 
20 (c) arrange facilities for the transport of agricultural 
produce, seedS, manures, fertilizers, agricultural implements and 
notified commodities to and from warehouses; 
(d) subscribe to the share capital of a State Warehousin& 
Corporation; 
25 (e) act as agent of the Government for the purposes of the 
p.!1I"chase, sale, storage and distribution of agricultural produce, 
seeds, manures, fertilizers, airicu1tural implements and notiftecl 
commodities; and 
(1) carry out such other functions as may be prescribed. 
30 12. (1) There shall be an Executive Committee of the Central BacudW 
Warehousing Corporation which shall consist of- ~ 
35 
(q.) the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman of the board of 
d1reetors; 
(b) the managing director; and 
(c) two other directors chosen by the Corporation in the 
prescr:tbed manner. 

~ 
poradaa. 
Ii 
(2) The Chairman and the Vice.chair.man ,of the board of ciil'ee-
tors shall be the Chairman and the Vice-Chairmaa retQMlCti~ or 
the Executive Committee. 
(3) Subject to the general control, direction and superintendence 
'of 'the boud of directors, the Executive Committee shall be com- 5 
petent to deal with any matter within the competence of the 
-Central Warehousing Corporation. 
u. (1) The anmual genel:al meeting of 1M Central W&r.eboallmJ 
Corpo:ration (hereinafter referred to as the ,al1llual geural .meet-
ing) shall be held every year either at its head-oifice or at ~ 10 
other office of the Corporation within six mont.hs of the close of the 
financial year, and any other general meeting may be convened by 
the board of directors at Wly other time. 
(2) The shareholders present at the annual general meeting 
shall be entitled to discuss the annual accounts, the report of the 15 
board of directors on the working of the Corporation during the year 
under report, as well as the auditors' report on the annual balance-
sheet and accounts . 
. {3' T.he board of directors of the Central Warehoosing Corporation 
slaall,.on .therequisition of one-third of the number ,of shareholde1'8 of 20 
the Corporation, call a special meeting of the COrpoa'attOft. 
(4) The requisition for a special meeting under sub-section (3) 
mall state the object of the meeting, and shall be signed by the 
requialtionistsand deposited at the head-ofti.ce of the C&rporation, 
and. may oonsistof several documents in like form each signed by as 
OIIeor mOIre requisitionists. 
(5) If the board of directQl's of the Central Warehousing Corpora-
tion do not proceed within twenty-one days from the date of the 
requisition being so deposited to cause the special meeting to be called, 
therequis'itionists, or a majority of them, may, themselves call the 30 
meeting, but in either case, the meeting so called shall be held 
within three months from the date of the deposit of the requisition. 
(6) The Central Warehousing Corporation shall observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of b\lSiness at its 
meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided 3' 
by regulations made by the Central Warehousing Corporation 
ader thiJ Act. 

, 
9 
U. <1> The Central Oefti'Diftellt may, after chi •• ,piOpilatiifl mad. driMt.w 
by Parliament by law in this behaU, pay to the Central Warehousinl =c= 
Corporation for the purposes of either fund mal.taIa~ by the Cor· venaeut. 
potatlon-
<a> by way of grants, such sums of money as the Central 
GeYernment may cOiuider lletellaiy; an. 
(b) by way of loans, such sums of money on such terms and 
conditions as the Central Government may determine. 
(2) When making a payment under sub-section (1), the Central 
to Government shall specify the fund for the p\.irPOSeS of ;;hieb the pay-
ment 11 imide. 
15. The. Central Warehousing Corporation shall maiMain tWo C6~i __ ~ 
. ~~-. leparate funds, namely:- . I two luDell, 
(a) the Central Warehousing FWld (hereinafter referred to 
15 as the Warehousing Fund) j and. 
30 
(b) the General Fund: 
18. (1) To the WerehoUsing Fund ihall be credited- Wareboutial Pwlcl. 
(a) all moneys and other securities transferred to the Central 
Warehousing Corporation under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of 
lection '-1; : I 
(b) such grants and loans as the Central Government mat 
make for the purposes of the Warehousing Fundj And 
(c) such swns of money as may, from time to time, be 
realised out of the loans made from the Warehousing Fund or 
from interest on loans or dividends on investments made from that 
fund.: I 
(2) The WarehOUSing Fund shall be applied. ..... 
(a) for advancing loans to State Governments·on I1icl1 temu 
atrd e01lcUtiOlis as the CentAll WarehoUsing Cor,poratton ili8y deem 
fit for the purpose of enabling th~ to subscrtbe to the ahare 
capital of State Warehousing Corporations; 
(b) for advancing loans and. granting subsidies to State Ware-
housing Corporations or to S1&te Governments on such tetms and 
conditions as the Central Warehousing Corporation may deem At 
for the purpose of promoting the warehousing and storage of 
agricultural produce and notified commoditie:t, otberW1le· tbaa 
through co-operative societies. : 
1649 (B) LS--3. 

10 
l't (1) To ~he General Fund shall be cired:ited-
(4) all sums received by the Central Warehousing Corpora-
tion other than those referred to in sub-section (1) of section 16; 
and I 
(b) such grants and l~ as the Central Government may S 
make for the purposes of the General Fund. 
(2) The General Fund shall be applied-
(4) for meeting the salary, allowances and other remunera-
tion of the officers and other employees of the Central Ware-
housing Corporation; 
. (b) for meeting the other administrative expenses of the Cor-
poration; and I 
(c) for carryini out the purposes of this Act. 
CHAPrER m 
STA'l'I: W AUHOt1SIHG CORPORATIon 
18. (1) The State Government may, by not1fication in the Oftl-
cial Gazette and with the approval of the Central Warehousing 
Corporation, establish a Warehousing Corporation for the State 
under such name as may be specified in the notification. 
10 
IS 
(2) A State W8Il"ehousing Corporation established under tub- 20 
aeetion (1) shall be a body corporate by the name notified under 
that sub-section, having perpetual succession and a common teal, 
with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, 
and may, by the said name, sue and be sued. 
(3) The head-oftice of a State Warehousing Corporation shall be 25 
at Such place within the State as may be notified in the Oftlcial 
Gazette. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-aections (1). 
(1) a.nd (3). it shall not be necessary for the State Government to 
establish a Corporation under sub-section (1) where, under claulMt 30 
(g) of sub-section (2) of section 43, a C01"pOraJtiOll'l is deemed to be 
.ablithed for that State under th1t Act. 

II 
tt. (1) The authorised capital of a State Warehousing Corpora- S,.. QpItal 
tion shall be such swn not exceedini two crores of rupees as DIQ ctde~ 
be prescribed, divided into shares of the face value of one hundred 
rupees each, of which such number as may be determined by the 
5 Corporation in consultation with the State Government shall be 
Issued in the first instance and the remaining shares may be issued, 
from time to time, as and when the Corporation may deem fit after 
consultation with the Central Warehousing Corporation and with 
the sanction of the State Government. 
10 (Z) Of the share capital issued in the first instance and of any 
subsequent issue of such capital, the Central Warehousing Corpora-
tion shall. in anv case where the State Government has subscribed 
for fifty per cent. of such capital, subscribe for the remaining My 
per cent. of the capital. I I 
15 ZOo (1) The general superintendence end managemenlt of the !:~=-t 
affairs of a State Warehousing Corporation shall vest in a board of W.rehouaiD. 
directors which shall consist of the following, nameIy:- Corporadoa. 
(a) five di:rectors nominated by the Central Warehousing 
Corporation, of whom one shall be' nominated in conSultatIon 
20 with the State Bank and one at least shall be a non-oftlcial; 
(b) five directors nominated by the State Government; 
and 
(e) a managing director, appointed by the State Govem-
ment in consultation with the directors refeI'll'ed to in clause. 
25 (a) and ('b) and with the previous approval of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation. 
(Z) The Chainnan of the board of directors shall be appointed 
by the State Government from among the directors of the State 
Warehousing Corporation with the previous approval of the Cen-
.lo tral Warehousing Corporation. 
(l> 'nle managing director mall-
(a) exercise such powers and perform such duties u the 
board of directors or the State Warehousing Corporation m.a,. 
entruat or delegate to him; and 
35 (b) receive such salary and allowance. as the State Ware-
housing Corporation may, in consultation with the Central 
Warehousing Corporation, and with the previous approval of 
the State Government, fix. 
(4) The board of directors shall act on business principles having 
40 regard to public interest and' shall be guided by suchinstructiolW 0& 

12 
...... of polky .. may De Ilv,n to ~eft1 by the ~te Gov ... 
PWGt ar the Oentral Warehouain, Corporation. 
(5) If any dQu~~ arises as to whether a question is or 1s not • 
qu.-.sti®. Qf policy, or, if the State Government and the Central 
W arellQ~ing CpJ;'pofat1~ giv~ co~ctiQ,,, instrQctlons, the matter' 
alW,1 ~ re~~ tq th~ C~traI GQvernmeJl~ whose decision therecnt. 
~~~ . 
(6) The directors of a State Warehousing Corporation, other 
thu the managing director, shall be entitlect to receive "1 WIQ' of 
1'H11.1l\e1'&tiea auch sums 88 may be pmetibeci: 
~~ ~~ llP. o~a1lil. direotor .mall be entitled to receive any 
remuneration other than any allowances admillsible to him undef 
the rules regulating his conditions of service. 
(7) The term of offtce of, and. the manner of ftIling cuual vaoan-
~ among, directors shall be such u may be prescribed. 
~. A. pe1'SQIl ~ be diatqualified for bein~ chosen 0 1 apd. lor oem" 
a dif~t.q:r Qf a ~t~te Wa~ehous~" Corporation-
(i) if he is foUDd to be a lunatic or becomes of unsound raiJ1d; 
10 
(ii) if he is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insol~~ or 
has suspencied pa~~nt of his debts or has compounded with 20 
h1a ere~Utors; or . 
(iii) if ~e i!S Wi p.~s b~ convicted of any offence involving 
moral turpitude and sentenced in respect thereof to irnprtson-
ment for not less than six months, uniess a periodi of five years 
has elapsed from the date of expiry of the sentence; or ~, 
(.1') if ~e has been removed or dismissed from service of Gov-
ernment or a corporation owned and controlled by the Govem· 
ment; OIl' 
(v) except in the case of the managing di.t'eCtor, if he is a 
.... 1'"' offioial ot ~ ee..~ral. W~ehou&ing CorpGfaUon or a 30 
State Wareh0U$.l Co~tio.; or 
(vi) if he is personally intereRed. in a subaistinJit contract 
"l"l':\., 9f iQ, any work bein·e done for,. th~ St~te Wafehousin.r 
CQl'POration ~cept as a shareholder (othe;f than a director) in 
..., ~c ~~p~ 8&. ~ed in tl\e C~p.an~e, ~c~. 1958: 35 35 I of I,,,. 
Provided that where any such person is a shareholder, he shall 
d'",laM ta the W'*~ CqrporaUon ~, Mt~ ~ a.teDt of 
..... ..w.·bit ~ Pl. _ ~., 

IJ 
U. (1) 'nle State Government may, at any time, with the pre- • ..- • ., 
vious approval of the Central Warehousing Corporation. remon =:.. 
the managing director from office after giving him a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed removal 
, (I) The board of directors may remove from offtce any director 
whe-- . , 
(4) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications 
mentioned in section 21; or I ! 
(b) is absent without leave of the boud of directors tor 
10 more than three consecutive ~etin.Ils of the board without 
cau'se ~umeientt in the opinion of the board, to exonerate hil 
absence. 
23. (1) A State Warehousing Col"POration may appoint such Appolnt-
omeers and other employees as it considers necessary far the efft- :.~r.tc.. 
I, clent performance of its functions. and their 
oonclitiaDI 
(Z) Every per,on employed by a State Warehousing CorporatIon ofeemc.. 
U1W8l' this Act shall ~ subject to such conditions of senice and 
shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be determined by 
:re~lations made by the Corporation under this Act. 
20 !4. Subject to the provm.ona of this Act, a State Warehousing PuDctiaDI 
30 
3' 
Corporation may- of the State 
" arehou'''W CorpondoD 
(4) acquire and build godowns and warehou8el at IJUch 
placM within the State as it may, with the previous approval of 
the Central Warehousing Corporation, determine; 
(b) :run warehQUses in the State for the storage of agri-
cultural produce, seeds, manures, fertilizers. agricultural fm-
pl~~ent. and notift~ commoditiesi 
(0) arrange facUities for the transport of _,"cultural pro-
duce, seeds, manures, fertilizers, agricultural implemeata and 
Ilottfted. commodities t~ and from warehouses; 
(4) act as an agent of the Central Warehousing Corporation 
or ~ the Government ~or the purpose. of the pUTChase, 1181e, 
I_age. Elnei distribu.tion, of agricultural produce, .~eds. manure., 
fertilizers, agricultural inlpl«nnents and llotifltd commodities. 
.. 

I.f 
........ 25. (1) There shall be an Executive Committee of a State W~ 
c~ housing Corporation which shall consist of-
(a) the Chairman of the board of directors; 
(b) the managing director; and 
(c) three other directcxrs chosen in the prescribed mann.... j 
of ·whom one shall be a director referred to in clause «(I) of 
aub-section (1) of section 20. 
(2) The Cbairman of the board of directors shall be the Chair-
man of the Executive Committee. 
(3) Subject to any general or special directions as the board of 10 
directors may, from time to time, give, the Executive Committee 
thall be competent to deal with any matter within the competence 
of the State Warehousing Corporation . 
.... ;, . 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
SvhnUnbt 28. (1) Every Warehousing Corporation shall prepare before the 
=: of commencement of each year a statement of programme of its acti-
:rA~ial vities during the forthcoming year as well as a financial esti-
clIimMeI. mate in respect thereot'. 
IS 
(2) A statement prepared under sub-section (1) shall, not later :ao 
than three months before the commencement of each year, be 
lubmitted for approval-
(a) in the case of the Central Warehousing Corporation, 
to the Central Government; 
(b) in the case of a State Warehousing Corporation, to 25 
the Central Warehousing Corporation and the State Govern-
ment. 
(3) The statement and the financial estimate of a Warehousing 
Corporation referred to in sub-section (1) may, with the approval 
of the Central Government in the case of the Central Warehousing 3. 
Corporation, or with the approval of the Central Warehousing Cor-
poration and the State Government in the case of a State Ware. 
housing Corporation, be revised by the Warehousing Corporation. 
Borro:,:! %7. (1) A Warehousing Corporation may, in consultation with 
;: 0 • the Reserve Bank and with the previous approval of the approprl- 35 
~ ate Government, issue and sell bonds and debentures carrying in-
terest for the purpose of raising funds: 
Provided that the total amount of bonds and debentures lS8Ued 
and outstanding and of the other borrowings of the Corporation J 

s 
IS 
aball not at any time exceed ten times the amount of the paid-up 
share capital and the reserve fund of the Corporation. 
(2) A Warehousing Corporation may, fOl' the purpose of carryina 
out ita functions under this Act, borrow money-
(1.) from the Reserve Bank, or 
(1.i) from the State Bank, for such periods for which, and 
upon any of the securities against which, it is authorised to 
advance and lend moneys, under the provisions of the State 
Bank of India Act, 1955. 
10 (3) Subject to the proviso to sub-section (1), the Central Ware-
housing Corporation may borrow money from the Central Govern-
ment and a State Warehousing Corporation may borrow money 
:from the State Government and the Central Warehousing Corpora-
tion on such securities and on such terms and conditions as may be 
IS agreed upon between the borrowing corporation and the lender, in 
each case. 
(4) The bonds aad debentures of a W &rehousing CorporatlOJl 
may be paranteed by the appropriate Government as to the repq-
ment of principal and the payment of interest at such rate al may be 
30 fixed by the appropriate Government on the reeommendation of the 
board of directors of the Corporation at the time the bonds or deben-
tures are lssued. 
28. All moneys belonging to a Warehousing Corporation shall be n.poIk 
deposited in the Reserve Bank or the State Bank or, subject to IC~" 
25 any rules made under this Act, in any scheduled bank or co-opera-
tive bank. 
29. A W &rehousing Corporation may invest its funds in the InftltlMat 
aecurities of the Central or any S1Ja.te Government or in such other of fIIDcIL 
manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government. 
iO 30. (1) Every Warehousing Corporation shall establish a reserve DiIpoMJ of 
fund out of its annual net profits. proi& 
(2) After making prOvision for bad and doubtful debts, depre-
ciation on assets and all other matters which a:re usually proVided 
for by companies registered and incorporated under the Companlee 
3S Act, 1956, a WarehOUSing Corporation may, out of its net annual 
profits, declare a dividend: 
Provided that for 80 long as the reserve fund is less than the 
paid-up share capital of the Central Warehousing Corporation and 
until there has been repaid to the Central Government SUCh sum, 
40 if any, as that Government may have paid under a guarantee given 
In punuance of sub-seetion (1) of section 5 or lUb-section (4) of 

I' 
I8GUon 27, the rate of IUcb divtd4tnd, in the case of 'he Central 
Warehousing CmporatioD, shall Dot exceed the rate suaranteea by 
the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 6. 
AOCO\IDtl 31. (1) Every WlIlrehousing Corporation shall maintain proper 
:r w-::! accounts and other relevant records and prepare an. annual statement S 
boalln. of accounts inclwiing the profit and lou account and the balance 
Corporation. sheet in euch fonn as may be prescribed: 
Provided that, in the case of the Central Warebouain. Corporation, 
the aa:OWlts relating to the Warehousing Fund and the General FWld. 
shall be maintained separately. 10 
(2) The accounts of a Warehousing Corporation. sball be au4Lted 
by an .udit.or duly qu.aUf\wi ·to act as an auditor of. companies UDder 
aection 226 of ibe Companies Act, 1956. 
(3) The said auditor shan be appointed by the appropriate Gov-
ernment on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of IS 
India. ~ I 
(4)'The audi.-1Iball be supplied 'With a oopy "t the annual '-lance 
Ibeet and the profit and 10M lDCOW1i of the Warehousing Corporation 
and it shall be his duty to examine them together with the KOOWlts 
and vouchers relating thereto, and he shall have 4 list delivered to 20 
him of all books kept by the Corporation and shall at all reasonable 
times have access to the books, accounts and other documents of the 
Corporation and rmy require from any officer of the COlpOration such 
information and explanations as the auditor may think necessary fl8 
the performance of his duties as auditor. 2S 
(5) The auditor mall make a report to the mareholdera on the 
accounta exa:mJned by htmand on the annual balance sheet and the 
profit and lOiS account and in every such report, he shall state whe-
ther in hia opinion the eccounta give a true and fadr view-
(4) in the case of the balance sheet, of the It ate Of the Cor- 30 
poratlon'8 afta1rs at the end cd its flhaneial year, and 
(b) in the case of the proftt and losi acoount, cd the prOAt at 
loss for ita ftnanciBl year, • 
and in case he has called for any explulatitm or irifonnatioO from the 3S 
dcers, whether it haa been given and whether it iSlatisfactory. 
(6) The appropria~ Government may, Itfter consultatioD with ~ 
ComptroUer aDd Auditor-General of IAdia eli an, time iIne ~ 
t 

,1 
to the auditor requiring him Ito report to the appropriate Government 
upon .. the adequacy of measures taken by a Warehousing Corporation 
for the protection of its shareholders and creditors or UpOIl the .ufIi· 
ciency ~f his procedure in auditing the accounts of the Corporation 
S and may enlarge or extend the scope of the audit or direct that • 
different procedure in audit may be adopted. or direct that any other 
examination may be made by the auditor if in the opinion of the 
appropriate Government public interest so requires. 
(7) A Warehousing Corporation shall send a copy of every report 
10 of the auditor to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and 
to the Centn11 Governmenlt at least one month before it Is placed 
before the shareholders. ; ! 
(8) Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained. in this sec-
tion, the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India may, either of hi. 
IS own motion or on a request received. in this behalf" from the appro-
priate Government, undertake in respect of a Warehousing Corpora-
tion such audit and at such time as he may consider necessary: 
Provided that where the Central Government is required to make 
any payment on account of the guarantee given by it under sub-
20 section (1) of section 5, such auclit shall be undertaken by the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General of India or any person authorised. by him 
in this behalf. ' ! 
(9) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person 
authorised. 'by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of a 
25 Warehousing Corporation shall have the same rights, privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General has in connection with the audit of Government 
accounts and in particular, shall have the right to demand the pro-
duction of books, accounts connected. vouchers and other documents 
30 and papers and to inspec1; the office of the Corponltion. 
(10) The annual accounts of a Warehousing Corporation together 
with the audit report thereon shall be placed before the annual gene-
ral meeting of the COl"Poration within six months of the close of the 
ftnancial year. ' 
35 (11) Every audit report under this section shall be forwarded. to 
the appropriate Government within a month of its being placed 
before the annual general meeting and that Govemmentt shall as soon 
t.hel'Ieafter as may be cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament or the Legislature of the State, as the case may be. 
1649 (B) LS-4. 

VPlDcieI, 
etc., not to 
Invalidate 
act. and 
proc:eedin.s 
of Ware-
bouIina Corpora-
lIonl. 
18 
CHAPTER V 
MISC'ELLANJ;OUS 
U. No act or proceeding of a Warehousing Corporation shall be 
invalid by reason only of the existence of any vacancy among ttl 
directors or any defect in the constitution thereof. 
Delepdon. Ia. A W~hous.ing Corporation ~y, by genenu. or ~Ml order 
In WJitcing. d.elegate to the ~tB;ty or other oftlcer of the Corponl-
tion, subject to such conditions and limitatiorw, if a.ay. as ~y be 
lpecified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act 
u it may d"rD. necessary for the e&cient perfornumce of its functions. ~o 
~odD. 34. In any meeting of the shareholders of a Warehousing Corpora-
=-~c1cra. tion, every member shall have one vote in res~t of each share held 
by him in the Corporation. 
Dl'PU' 35. If there is any difference of opinion between the Central Ware-
~~ hOlUJing Corporation and a State Warehousing Corporation regarding IS 
'fIuebouaina their respective functions and powers under this Act, such difference 
~~ shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision thereoaa 
.arebou~iri shaD.·be final 
Cor JIltion. 
Dtclaratioa 36. Every director, aUditor, officer or other employee of a Ware-
efftdelltv housing Corporation shall, before entering "pon his duties, make a 20 
IDd secrecy. declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the Schedule. 
Indemnity 
fIt director •• 
otr_c.a, 
37. (1) Every direC'tcr of a Warehousing Corporation shell be 
lnderoniij.ed b.y the Corpo~ation concerned against all losses QcI 
expense$ i~ed in the 4ischarse of. his duties except such as we 
ca.u,sed by bj.s own wilful act or default. 35 
(2) A director of a Warehousing Corporation shall not be 1'81-
ponsible for any other director or for any ofticer or other employee 
of' the Corporation or for' any' loss or expense resulting to the CQr-
poration by the insufficiency or deficiency of value of, or title to, any 
property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the Corpomtion 
In good faith, or by the wrongful act of any person under obligation 30 
to the Corporation Qr QY anything done in good faith in the execution 
of the duties of h~ office or in relation thereto. 
II. (1:) Whoever, without the conscmt in writing of a WarehO\lfPl' 
Corporation, uses the name of that Corporation in any prospectus or 3 
advertisement, shall be punishable with imprisonment which ma,·5 

45 of 1961. 
i; 
atend to six month., or with be whtCh May exterld to one thouMnCl 
rupees, or with both. 
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any o1!enee under sub-
~ion (1) otherWise than on a complaint in writing by aD ofticer 
S authorised in this behalf by the Warehousing Corporation concerned. 
39. For the purposes of the Income-.tax Act, 1961, a Ware- Providanl 
housing Corporation shall be deemed to be a company within the ::::.: 
meaning of that Act and shall be liable to income-tax and super-tax and IUpeI-
IIccordtngly on its income, profits and gains: tu. 
10 Provided that, in the case of the Central Warehousing Corpora-
tion, any sum paid by the Centml Government under the guarantee 
given in pursuance of sub-section (1) .of section 5 or, in the case of a 
WarehOUsing Corporation, any sum paid by the Central or a State 
GovertUrient under any guarantee given in pursuance of sub-section 
IS (4) of section 27 shall nat be treated as income, profits and gains of 
a Warehousing Corporation, and any interest on the debentures or 
bonds issued by that Corporation out of such sums shall not be 
treat~ as e~penditure incurred by it: 
Provided further that in the case of any shareholder or debenture-
20 holder, such portion of a dividend or interest as has been paid out 
of any such swn advanced by. the Central Government shall be deemeci 
to be his income from interest on securities declared to beiDcome-tax-
free within the meaning of section 86 of that Act. 
". No provision of law relating to t1he winding up of companies Windma"~ 
25 or crorporations shall apply to a Watehousing Corporation alld any = 
such Corporation shall not be placed in liquidation save by order of Col1lOft .. 
the appropriate Government and in sUch mannt!'l" as it may diret.'t. lienl. 
'1. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Power CD 
Oftldal GaZette, make rules to carry out the purpOseI ot this Act. mab nal ••• 
30 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoillg power, 
ilrc.1l '1iilel may proVide for-
(4) the additional functions which a WarehoUlth'I Cotpora-
tiOll may performj 
(b) the manner of nomination end eleetlon of the dJrecton 
of the Central Warehousing Corporation and th'e periOd withJD 
which such direcior. shan be (lominated or eleiCted; 
(e) the term of o.e of, and the manner of 1Ullng CaUUIl 
vacancies among, and the remuneration payable to. the dlrectol'l 
of. Warehousing Corporationj 

ao 
(d) the manner of choosing· dJreetors ·on the Exeeutive C~om­
mittee of a Warehousing Corporationj 
(e) the authorised capital of a State Warehousing Corpora-
tion within the limit specified in sub-section (1) of section 19i 
(f) the form of the annual statement of accounts and the, 
baluce-sheet· to be prepared by a Warehousing Corporation; 
(g) the deposit of moneys of a Warehousing Corpora.tion in 
a scheduled bank or a co-operative bank; 
(h) the manner of issuing shares of a Warehousing Cor-
poration, the calls to be made in respect thereof, and all other 10 
matters incidental to the issue of shares; 
(i) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this sec-
tion shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty daY' 15 
which may be comprised. in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modifted 20 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such 
moc:liflcation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validit7 
. at an,ytbiJli previously done under that rule. 
rowe, or 42. (1) A Warehousing Corporation may, with the previous sane-
~~~ tion of the appropriate Government, by notification in the Official 2' 
~o Gazette, make regulations not inccm.sistent with this Act and the 
=.. rep. rules made thereunder to provide for all matters for which provision 
is necessary or expedient fol" the purposes of giving effect to the pro-
visions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the Il 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for-
(<<) the conditions of service of, and the remuneration pay-
able to, the officers and other employees of a ·Warehouatni 
Corporation; 
(b) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to" 
which, shares of the Central Wareho~sing Corporation may be 
transferred; 
(c) the manner in which meetings of a Warehousing Car-
poration and the Executive Committee thereof shall be conven-
ed, the fees for attending such meetings and the procedure to be 40 
followed thereat; 

81 
(d) the duties and conduct of otlcers and employees of • 
Warehousing Corporation; 
(e) the powers and duties which may be entrusted or dele-
gated to the managing director of a Warehousing Corporation; 
S (f) generally, the efftcient conduct of the affairs of a Ware-
housing Corporation. 
(3) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
Ofticial Gazette, rescind any regulation which it has sanctioned and 
thereupon the regulation shall cease to have effect. 
10 a. (1) With effect from the date on which the Central Ware- Re~ •• d 
housing Corporation is established under section 3, the Airricultural uymll. 
0{ J9'6. Produce (Development and Warehousing) Corporations Act, 1956, in 
so far as it has not been repealed by the National Co-operative 
Development Corporation Act, 1962, shall stand repealed. 
IS 
3S 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,-
(a) the shares allotted and the share certificates issued by 
the Central Warehousing Corporation established under the 
repealed Act (hereinafter referred to as the said Corporation) 
shall be deemed to hove been allotted and issued by the Corpora-
tion established under section 3 of this Act as if this Act had 
been in force on the day on which the shares were allotted and 
the share certificates were issued; 
(b) every shareholder of the said Corporation shall become 
the holder of as many shares in the Corporation established under 
aection 3 of this Act as are equivalent in number and value to 
the shares held by him in the said Corporation; 
(e) all moneys and other securities belonging to the National 
Warehousing Development Fund which, immediately before the 
said date, was maintained by the said Corporation shall stancl 
transferred to and be maintained by the Corporation established 
under aection 3 of this Act; 
(d) anything done or any action taken (including oy 
appointment, nomination, delegation, rule or regulation made) 
under the repealed Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent 
with the prOvisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or 
taken under this Act; 
(e) every share held by the said Corporation in a State Ware-
housing Corporation under the repealed Act shall be deemed to 
be a lIhare held .by the C01p)l'ation estabUshed under .ectfon 3 of 

21 
th1a Ad;. in file· ~t~dirrg State Wmho~1 Corporati06 
deemed to be established under this Act; 
(1) all rights, liabUiti9 an·d obligations of the saId Cor,or.-
ti-. whethel'lir'tSfIl. aut of any contr ... et or otherwise, shall be 
the rights, liabilities end obligaticna respectively of the Corp:>ra- S 
tion established under section 3 of this A~; 
(9) a State Warehousing Corporation establWred for • 
State under the repealed Act shall be deemed to be the· S •• 
Warehousing Corporation establlsfted for that State l.Ulder tIdI 
Act. 10 

"U SCll8P.~ 
(See section 36) 
~'IJ,* 'QI\'JIlDIll.I,TY AD ~ 
I, • declar,e Utat I will faJ,thf~. 
, ~y and to the ht!st of my judgment, skill and ability execute and 
perform the duties which are reqQ.ired of me as a director, officer, 
employee or auditor (as the case may be) of the Warehousing 
Corpqration and Wbich properly relate to the office or position in the 
sa..id Co~poration h.~ldJ by me. 
10 I fu~er declare that I will not communicate or allow to be com-
municated to any ~rson not legally entitled t1)ereto ~y iQlormatioD 
relating to the ~ff~4's of the said Corporation, nor will I allow any 
such person to inspect or have access to any books or dOCQJl1enta 
belonptg to, or in th~ possessio!) of, t;he Corporation 8.I\d relating tp 
IS the bustnes!! of the Corporation. 
Sign.,d ~elore m.e 
Date 

STATEMENT 0'" OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Agricultural Produce (Development and Warehousing) 
Corporations Act, 1956, two inter-dependent bodies. namely. the 
National C(H)perative Development and Warehousing Board and the 
Central Warehousing Corporation were established and they were 
under the administrative control of the Ministry of Food and Agri-
culture. Subsequently, as a result of the re-allocation of business 
among the Ministries, the two bodies came under the administrative 
control of two different Ministries. namely, the Ministry of Com-
mUnity Development and Co-operation and the Ministry of Food 
and Agriculture. In the interest of the better functioning of the two 
bodies and for administrative convenience, it has been decided that 
the two bodies should function independently under separate enact-
ments. A Bill has already been introduced for establishing a separate 
National Co-operative Development Corporation in place of the 
existing Board. The present Bill seeks to provide for the establish-
ment of a Central Warehousing Corporation and for each State, a 
State Warehousing Corporation. 
Under this Bill, the Central Warehousing Corporation will 
continue to perform the same functions as the existing Corporation. 
The Central Government will be a shareholder to the extent of forty 
~r cent. of the shares of the Corporation in the place of the National 
Co-operative Development Board. while the other shareholders of 
the existing Corporation will become the other shareholders of the 
new Corporation. The new Corporation will also maintain the 
Warehous'ng Fund. The existing State Warehousing Corporationa 
shall be deemed to be the Warehousing Corporations established 
for the respective State. under the new law. 
NEW DELHI; S. K. PATIL. 
The 24th August, 1962. 

If'lNANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The authurised share-capital of the C~ntral Warehousmg C6rpo~ 
ration is Rs. 2Q (twenty) crores. Un:d'er clause 4' of me Bill: fu~ 
Central GoVernment has to subscribe 40% of the share;.ca~iial"issu~d 
at any tim~ by the Central WaTehousing C6tporatJ.'on. The Corpora-
tion has issued one lakh shares of the value of Rupees ten crores 
for subScripti'on, out of which 40,000 shates have been subscn"'bed 
for by tIle National Co..operative DevelOpnlent and Warenousing 
Board" anc!' these shares will be" ttartsferted to Central Govemrtierif. 
A sum of rupees two crores has already been paid on these'sliates 
by the Board and the Central Government will have to pay the 
balance" of rupees two ctores as and ,*hen calls are" maae 5y the 
Corpotiffion. 
Futare i88l.1':~11 of share-capital 'by the Central Wafehousin., 
Corporation will be made only with' the approval of the Ceatral-
Government. Forty per cent. of such shares wililotave to be gubaettiob-
ed for by the Central Government and the non-recurring expenditure 
on this account will not exceed rupees four cl'ores. 
if my portion of the rest of the" sixtY. per ~eht of the" sl1at~ ... 
capitlll ntiW isSued: or that may be issued hi futUre reri:\ai~s unatloftM, 
it may be subscribed for by the Central Government and the State 
S'ank ot India in such proportion as rh~y be agteed upOn between 
tll~rn:. 
2. Under clause· 5· of the' Bill; the shares- of the ~Iltral W~ 
housin, Corporation have beell' guaranteeti by tbt! CeDtnl 
Government as to the re-payment of principal aftci the plf,YmEf!rt of 
the annual dividend. The Centrai Government have gual"lMeed the' 
payment of a minimum dividend of 31% on the shares of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation. 
3. Under clause 14, the Central Government can give grants and 
loans to the Central Warehousing Corporation from time to time as 
it may deem fit. During the last four years, the annual average of 
loans advanced to the Corporation comes to about Rs. 2·5 lakhs. 
4. Clause 15 of the Bill provides that the Central WarehOUSing 
Corporation shall maintain two Funds called the Central Warehous-
~ng Fund and the General Fund. The resources of the Warehousing 
1649 (B) LS-5. 

Fund will be utilised for advancing loans to the State Governments 
to enable them to subscribe to the share-capital of the State Ware-
housing Corporations and for advancing loans and granting 
subsidies to the State Warehousing Corporations or to the State 
Governments for the purpose of promoting the warehousing and 
storage of agricultural produce otherwise than through Co-operative 
Societies. During the last six years about Rs. 78 lakhs have befm 
advanced to the State Goyernments as loan for enabling them to 
subscribe to the share-capital of the State Warehousing Corporations. 
The resources of the General Fund will be utilised to meet the 
day-to-day expenses of the Central Warehousing Corporation to carry 
on its business activities and to carry out the purposes laid down in 
the Bill. 
5. Clause 26 of the Bill provides for the control by the Central 
Government over the financial estimates of the Central Warehousing 
Corporation. Similarly the financial estimates of the State Ware-
housing Corporations are subject to the control of the State Govern-
ments as well as the Central Warehousing Corporation which sub-
aeribes fifty' per cent. of the share-capital of State Corporations. 
6. Clause 27 of the Bill provides. for the guarantee by the appro-
priate Government of the repayment of principal and payment of 
interest on moneys borrowed by the Warehousing CorpoI:ations. 
7. Clause 31 of the Bill provides for the audit of the accounts of 
the Corporations by a qualified auditor, to be appointed in consulta-
tion with th~ Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. Further, 
the clause also 'empowers the Comptroller and Auditor-General to 
carry out the audit of the accounts of the Corporations as and when 
considered necessary by him or upon a request by the appropriat~ 
GovernmeJit. . 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 41 of the Bill empowers the Central Government in 
relation to the Central Warehousing Corporation and the State 
Government in relation to a State Warehousing Corporation to 
make rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. The matters in 
respect of which rules may be maae are specified in sub-clause (Z) 
and they relate to the manner of nomination and election of the 
directors of the Corporation concerned and of its executive com-
mittee, the term of office of and the manner of filing casual vacancies 
among the directors, the amount of the authorised capital of a State 
Warehousing Corporation within the limit specified in clause 19 (1) , 
the form of the annual statement of accounts to be furnished by a 
Corporation and other matters of a routine or administrative 
character. 
Clause 42 of the Bill empowers a Warehousing Corporation to 
make regulations not inconsistellit with the Act or the Ntes made 
thereunder for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the 
Act. The matters which may be provided for by regulations relate 
to procedural or administrative details. 
The delegation of legislative power is thus of a normal cha~er. 

LOK SABHA 
BFLL 
to proVide t6't- the irtCOtpora'tiori and regulation of corporations 
for the purpose of warehousing of agricultural produce and 
~in other commodities and for ma~ters connected 
t1iereWith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the introduction and cons.deration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri S. K. Pati!, 
Minister of Food and Agriculture.) 