Bm No. 91 of 19& 
THE ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1952 
[As INTRODUOED IN THE IIOUSE OF THE PEOPLE] 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the AdminiBtration 0/ Evacuee Property Act, 1950. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title and commencement.-(1) 'fhis .. t..(~t may be called the 
Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) Act, 1952. 
(~ It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by n01li.fication in the Official Gazette, appoint. 5 
2. Amendment of aection 2, Act XXXI of 195O.-1n section 2 of the 
Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950 (hereinafter referred to 8S 
the princiIJal Act), in clause (d),-
(1) at the end of sub-clause (iii), the word "or" shall be inserted, 
and after that sub-clause and belore the ElEplanation thereto the 10 
following clauses shall be' inserted, namely:-
"(iv) who has, after the 18th day of October, 1949, trans-
ferrt~d t.o Pakistan, without the previous approval of the Custo-
dian, his assets or any part of his RAsets situated in any part of 
the territories to which this Act extends; or 15 
(v) who has, after the 18th clay of October, 1949, uequired, 
if the acquisition has been made in person, by way of purchase 
or exchange, or. if the lIoquisition has been made by or through 
a member of his family, in any monn,er whatsoever, any right to, 
interest in, or benefit from, any property which is t.reated as 20 
eva.cuee or abandoned property under any IllW. for the time being 
in force ill l'akistan;"; 
(2) the E:rplanatioll to sub-clause (iii) shall be numbered as 
ElEpZanation I ~nd after that ElEplanation as so numbered, the follow-
ing further ElEplanation8 shall be inserted, namely: - 25 
.. ElEplanation II .-For the purposes of sub-clause (iv), t.he 
transfer to l>akistan by any person of any reasonable sum of 
money in accordance with the rules made in this behalf by the 
Central Government for the purpose of financing any transaction 
in the ordinary course of his trade or for the maintenance of an~· 30 
member of the family of such person shall not be deemed to be 
a transfer of his assets within the meaning of that sub-clause. 
Ea:p~anation IIf.-For the purposes of sub-clause (v), the 
a.cquisition of any right to, interest in, or benefit fl'om, any such 
property as is referred to in that Bub-clause by a firm, private 3li 
limited company or trust of which any person is a partner, 
member or beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be deemed to 

2 
be an acquisition by that person of slJch right, interest or benell.t. 
within the meaning of that sub-clause."; 
(3) clause (e) shall be omitted; 
(4) in clause (f), for the words beginning with '''evacuee pro-
S perty" means' and ending with the worU.~ "to the extent of such 
right or interest," the following shall be substituted, namely:-
, "evacuee property" means any property of an evacuee (whether· 
held by him as owner or as a trustee or as a beneficiary or as a.. 
tenant or in any other capacity), and includes any property :which 
10 has been obtained by any person from an evacuee after the 
14th day of August, 1947, by any mode of transfer which is not. 
effective by reason of the provisions contained in section 40.' 
3. OmJadon of lection 3, Act DXI of 19&O.-Section 3 of the prin-
cipal Act shall be omi~~ed. 
US t. Amendment or aecticm 8, Act XXXI of 1950.-III section 6 of the-
principal Act.-
(a) in sub-section (1). for the words "The State Government may~ 
in consultation with the Custodian-General" and the words "the. 
State", the words "The Central Government may." Rnd "any 
20 State" shall respectively be substituted: and 
(b) in sub-section (8), the words "but the State Government may, 
by general or special order, provide for the distribution of work among. 
them" shall be omitted. . 
6. Amndment of Hct.ton 10, Act ZDI of 1950.-1n sub-section (2) 
25 of section 10 of the principal Act, after clause (l) the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(ll) in any case where the evacuee property which hRS vested. 
in the Custodian consists of fifty-one per cent. or more of the shares 
in a company, the Custodian may take charge of the management., 
eo of the whole affairs of the company and exercise, in addition to any 
of the powers vested in him under this Act, all or any of the powers. 
of the directors of the company, notwithstonding' that the registered 
office of such company is situate ill ally part of the territories to which 
this Act extends, and notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
36 contained in this Act or the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913) 
or in the articles of association of the company;". 
8. Amendmnt of I8Ction 12, Act XXXI of 19&O.-ln sub-section· 
(1) of section 12 of the principal Act, for the words "where such allot-
ment, lease or agreement has been granted or entered into alter the 14th 
40 aay of August, 1947" the following shall be substituted. namely:-
"whether such allotment, Jease or agreement was granted or entered" 
into before or after the commencement of this Act." 
7. IDIertklll 01 new Hctlon 12.& In Act XDl of 1950.-After section 
12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
• '12A. Special provi,ion, with respect to tranllfer of tenancy' 
rights of evacuBeR.-(l) NotwithFltanding anything to the contrary 
r.ontained in this Act or in any other Jaw for the time being in force, 

3 
where tenancy rights have vested in the Custodian u.s evacuee property 
and the Custodian has granted a lease in respect of such property, 
the Custodian may, in any case where the lessor under whom the 
property was held immediately before it vested in the Custodian is 
not an evacuee, declare, by general or specia: order, that with effect IS 
from such date as may be specified in the order he shall stand absolved 
of all responsibilities with respect to the property or the lease granted 
by him, 
(2) On the making of any such de::iaration as is referrel to in 
sub-section (1),- 10 
(a) the lease granted by the C:.Istodiau shall be deem,ed to 
have effect as if gl'anted by the lessor unjer whom the p.operty 
was held immediately before the Cust:ldian -assumed possession 
or control thereof and shall continue to have such effe"t until it 
is determined by lupse of time or by operation of law; US 
(b) all Bums realise,} by the Custodian in l'espeC't of the 
said lease before the date of the declaration referred t1 in sub· 
section (1) shall, subject to the deluctiolJ of fee!'!, if any, 
payable t.o t·he Custodian, beeollle payable to the It'saor against 
whom the lease has now efJeet. 20 
(3) Nothing contained in this seetlOll sha.ll-
(a) render the Custodian liable to any person for any sum 
in excess of the sum payable to the lessor under clause (b) of 
sub-section (2), or 
(ll) prejli3ice any rights of the lessor or the lessee, to which 25 
he may be entitled under any other law for the time being in 
force, oonsistently with the terms and conditions, if any. of 
the lealle granted by the Custodian," 
8. Amendment of .CUOD 18, Act lCCa 01 1915O.-In section 16 of the 
principal Act, for sub-sections (1) and (2), the followinz sub-sections 30 
shall 'be substituted, namely:-
"16, Restoration of evacuee property,-(1) Subject to sueh rule:; 
as may b", made in this behalf, the Centra.l Government or any persoll 
authorised by it in this behalf may, on application madc to it or him 
by an evacuee or by any person claiming to be the heir of an evacuee, , .. 
aJ1'd, on being satisfied that it is expedient or proper 80 to do, grant a 
to the applicant a certifieate stating that any evacuee property, 
which has vested in the Custod:an and to which the applicant would 
have been entitled if this Act were not in force, shall be restored to 
~, ~ 
(2) If the evacuee or, as the case may be, the heir to whom a 
certificate has been granted under sub-section (1) applies to the 
Custodian in writing for the restorat:on of the eVBCuee propert:.' 
which has vested in the Custodian aud in re~pect of which the ('ert--
Heate has been granted, ,the Custodian _ shall, on the l-'roducti~u, by 46 
the applirant of the certlfioate and subJect to the other prO~JSIOnS 
contained in this section and in any rules that may be made In thlb 
h~haIf, restore the evacuee property to the applicant, 
(.\IA) On reet'ipt of an application under sub-section (2), the Uus-
tad ian shall I'BIISe public notice thereof to be given in the presoribed 50 

4 
manner and after holding a summary inquiry into the claim in such 
manner 8S may be prescribed shal1-
(a) if he is satisfied with respect to the title of the appliclWt 
to the property, make a formal order restoring the property to 
6 the applicant; or 
(b) if he is Dot so satisfied, reject the applicatiou; or 
(0) if he entertains any doubt with respect to the title of 
the applicant to t.he property, rtlfer him to a civil court for the 
cietenninatiol1 of his title thereto : 
10 Provided that no order for the restorution of any tlvucuee 
l'ropel'ts !lhal1 he made undtll' this seetion unlet;fl l'rovi~i()n has 
heen made in the prtlscrih~d manner for the recovery of any 
amount. due to the Custoditm in respect of the pl'Operty or the 
management thereof." 
• (; 9. Substitution of new section for section 18, Act XU! of 1960.-
For section 18 of tho principal Act, the foUowiug section shall be 
substituted and shall be deemed always to have been substituted, 
namely:-
"18. Occupa1/'cy or tenancy right8 not to be ertitl!/lIislwd.-
20 \Vhel'e the rights of 811 eVfl{:uee in IIny land or in auy house or other 
bllildhlg consif;t or eOl1sisted of occupancy 01' teuanc~' l'ights, nothing 
contained in Bny law for the time being in force or in any c:mtract 
or in any instrument hBving the fOl'ce of law or in liny decl'lw (,1' 
order of Ilny 'court, shall extinguish or be deemed to h"\'e extinguished 
any such rights either on the tenBnt becoming an evaC'uee within the 
meBning of this Act or at any time thereafter [10 88 to prevent such 
righti:l from vesting in the Custodian under the pl'ovisions of this 
Act or to pre,'ent the Custodian from exercising all or any of the 
powers coufllrrt!d 011 him by this Act in respflct of lilly such rights, 
80 and, notWithstanding anything cont'ained in any such law, contract, 
instrument, deoree or order, neith,er the evacuee nor the Oustodian, 
whether as an occupaDCY tenant or AS a teuRDt for a certain time, 
monthly or otherwise, of My land, or house or other building shall 
be liable to be ejected or be deemed to have become 80 IiRMe on any 
35 bTt'Olmd whatsoever for any default of the evucuee or the Custodian." 
10. Omi_ion of Ohapter IV, Act XXXI of 19&O.-ChRpter IV of the 
principal Act shall be omitted. 
11. Amendment of section H, Act DXI of 1960.-1n sedion 24 of 
the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(a) the word and figures "sedion H)" shall be omitted; 
(h) in thepro"iso, for the words. bro.clceti! and figures "sub-
clauKa (iii) of clause (d) of section 2, or. that the property is not 
evacuee property within the meaning of sub-clause (2) of clause 
(f) of section '2." the following words. brackets and figures shan be 
substituted, namely, "sub-clause (iii) or sub·clause (iv) or sub-clause 
(v) of clause (d) of section 2,". 

lS. Amendment of section U, Act XXXI of 1950.-Iu se(·tion 2!l of 
the principal Act, for sub-section (l), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
•. (1) AllY person aggrieved by an order under section 7 declaring 5 
his property to be evacuee property on the ground that he is an 
evacuee within the meaning of Bub-clause (iii) or sub-clause(iv) or sub-
clause (v) of clause (d) of section 2 may prefer an appeal, in suoh 
Ulanner and within such time as may be prescribed, to the district 
judge nominated in this behalf by the State Government." 
13. lSubetlt.ution of new sections for sectiou '0 ad 41 in A.c& XU! 10 
of 1960.-For sections 40 Ilnd 41 of the principal Act, the following 
sections shaH be substituted, I1amely:-
"40. Validity 0/ tranB/erB reBpecting property ,ubsequently 
declared to be evaouee prupcTty.-(1) No transfer made after the 
14th day of August, 1947, by or on bAhalf of any person in any 15 
manner whatsoever of SllY propprty belonging to hiro shall be 
effective so as to confer any rights or remedies in respect of the 
transfer on the parties thereto or any person olaiming under t.hern 
or !;lither of them, if, at BllY time ufter the transfer, the trnnsferor 20 
becomes an evacuee within the meaning of seetion 2 or the property 
of the transfer()r is declared or notified to be evaouee property within 
the meaning of this Act, unless the transfer is confirmed by the 
Custodian in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-seotion (1) shall apply to the 
transfer for valuable consideration of any such property as is referred .2S 
to t,hereill-
(a) whieh ha.s been or is made with the previous "p})rovul of 
the Custodian; or 
(b) in any case where the transferor has not left ImHa for 
l>ll.kistan within a. period of two years from the date of the 30 
trallsfer: 
Provided that in the oase of a transfer made before the 
commencement of the Administration of Evacuee Property 
(Amendment) Act, 1952, the transferor had not left India for 
Pukistan before such commencement, notwithstanding that a period 33 
of two years had already elapsed before such oommencement; or 
(c) ma.de after the commencement of the Administration of 
E,'8Cuce Property (Amendment) Act, 191)2, in any case where 
the value of the property 80 trari~ferred is less than five thoulland 
rupees: 40 
Provided that the transferor does not transfer any other 
prllperty belonging to him within n period of ODll Year from the 
fia te of the transfer. 
(a) An application under sub-section (1) for the oonfirmation 
of Qny transfer ma.y be made by the transferor or the tmnsferee or 4IS 
any person claiming under. or lawfully authorised by, either of 
them to the Custodian within two months from the date of the 
transfer or within two months from the date of the declaration or 
notification referred to in sub-section (1)' whichever is later, and the iSO 
proviRions of section 5 of the India.n Limitation Act, 1008 (IX cf ltoA) 
shall apply to any such application. 

5 
)0 
J,5 
20 
25 
30 
8 
(4) Where an applioation under sub-section (3) has been made 
to the Custodian for confirmation, . he shall ho~d an inquiry in respeo1j 
thereof in the prescribed manner and may reject the applioation if 
he is of opinion that-
(a) the transaotion has not been entered into in good faith 
or for valuable consideration; or 
(b) the transaction is prohibited under any law for the time 
baing in force; or 
lO) the transaction ought not to be confirmed for uny lither 
reason. 
(5) Where, in respect of any transfer made before the oommence-
ment of the Administration of Evacuee Property lAmendment) Aot, 
1952, the Custodian has rejected any appl:cation for confirmation 
thereof solely on the grounrl-
(a) that although the trllllsuution was entered into ill good 
faith, the consideration paid was not adequate, or 
(b) that the application was barred by : imitation , 
then, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
la.w or contract or decree or order of a civil court or ()ther authority, 
but subject to any rules that may be made by the Central Govemmp.nt 
in this behalf. the Custodian Olay exercise any of the following powers 
in reRppot nf fhA t.rnnRfflr. namp,lv:-
(i) confirm the transfer, if the tronsferee agl'eHS to pay to 
the custodian the difference in value between the value of the 
property as assessed by the Custodian and the amount actually 
paid by the transferee to the transferor; 
(ii) if the transferee Rgrees, take possession of such part of the 
property as, after dividing it by metes and bounds, is equinlout 
in value to the difference between the value of the property as 
II.ssessed by the Custodian and the amount actually paid by the 
transferee to the transferor; 
(iii) if the transferee agrees, take possession of the entire 
property by paying off to the transferee the amount which tha 
Custodian finds as having been actually paid by the transfer"e 
t.o the transferor as consideration for the transfer; or 
(iv) if the transferee does not agree to any of the COurRt'1 
referred to in clauses (i) to (iii) inclusive, auction the property 
Bnd take over such part of the sale proceeds as is equivalt'nt to 
the differenoe in value of the property as assessed by him aoel 
the amt'unt actually paid by the transferee to the trousfl1rcr. the 
surplus being paid to the transferee: 
Pl'Cvided that in the case of any transfer falling w;thin 
clause (b) ,of this sub-section, the powers conferred on the 
Custodian by this seotion shall no~ be exercised unless the Custo· 
dian finds that the transaotion has been ente!'ed into in good 
faith' hut the considerRtion paid is not adequate. 

7 
(6) If the application is not rejected under sub-section (4), the 
()ustodian may confirm the transfer either unconditionally or Oil 
.such terms and conditions as he may think fit to impose. 
(7) For tbe removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that every 
property transfelTed in contravention of the provisions of this section 5 
which does not confer any rights or remedies in relation W the traneflr 
-on the parties thereto shall be deemed to be property declared to b. 
eva.cuee property within the meaning of sub-section (1) of section 7 
and to have vested in the Custodian in accordance with the provisions 
·of section 8. 10 
41. Tran8action8 relating to evacuee property void j" l~crtain 
,oiroumBtances.-Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act. 
every transaction entered into by any person in respect of property 
decla.red or deemed to be declared to be evacuee property within the 
meaning of this Act, shall be void unless entered into by or with the 15 
previous approval of the Custodian." 
U. Subltltution of new section for Action 52, Act lCCa of 1950.-. 
For section 52 of the principal Act, the following section shan be substi-
'uted~ namely:-
"62. 'Power to 6zempt.-The Central Government nlay, by 20 
notification in the Offioial Gazette, declare that all or any of the 
provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereund,er shall not apply, 
or shall be deemed never to have applied, or shall cease to apply, or 
shall apply only with such modifications or subject to such conditions, 
restrictions or limitations as may be specified in the notification, to 21 
or in re!la.tion to any class of persons or class of property." 
16 • .Amendment of aectlon 68, Act XDI of 100.-In section 56 of 
the prinoipal Act,-
(1) in sub-section (~,-
(4) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 30 
namely:-
"(bb) the transfer by the Custodian of any case pend.. 
ing before any officer subordinate to him or the withdrawal 
to himself for disposal of any case so pending ':Ir the eX61cise 
of any similar powers by the Custodian General in respect c.f 31 
eases pending before any offioer subordinate to him:"; 
(b) for clause (q), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
" (q) the manner in which applications for the previous 
approval of the Custodian may be made under section 4040 
aud the matters which he shall take into account in grant-
ing such approval, and the nature of CBEles and the 

8 
oiroumstances in which the Custodian may oon6rm or reru.e 
to confirm a transfer under that section:"; 
(R) in sub-section (3),-
(a) the brackets, figure and words "(3) The State Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules. 
providing for nIl or Bny of the following matterR, namely :-" 
sha.ll be omitted, and 
(b) clauses (a), (b), (c), (d) a.nd (6) shall be relet.terf!d as. 
olauses (t). (u), (v), (w) and (a:) respectively. 

9 
STATEMENT OJ' OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill ~s designed to incorporate in the Administration of Evacuee-
Property Act, 1950 (XXXI of 1950), certain changes that are oonsidered 
necessary on account of the changed circumstances since the legislation 
was originally enacted. Provisions rela.ting to "intending evacuees" in 
the Act Ilrs 111) longer considered neceRsary and they Bre RcC'ordingly being 
deleted. Certain diffioulties whioh are being experienoed by a section 
of the population in disposing of their property on account of th~ existing 
provisions of the Act are also sought to be removed by means of amend. 
ments to sections 40 and ~1 of the Act. Opportunity has also been taken 
to incorporate certain other changes whk'h are considered necessary iD 
the light of the experience of the working of the. Act. 
AJIT PRA SAD JAIN. 
NEW DELHI; 
Tlte 22nd J·uly, 1952 .. 

, 
10 
ANNEXURE 
~XTkACT ,nox THE ADlIrfINISTRATlOl'i OF EVACUEE PROl'BRTY ,ACT, 1950 
(XXXI OF 1950) 
Section 2 (e) and (I) 
.2. Definition •. -hl this Act, unless the oontext otherwise requires,-
* * • * 
(6) "intending evacuee" means any person who, after the 14th 
-day IJf AlJgust, 1947,-
(i) has transferred to Pakistan his assets or any plArt thereof 
iituated in any part of the territories to which this Act utends: 
Provided that the transfer to Pakistan of Ally reasonable Bum 
of money in accordance with the ru:les made in this behalf by 
the Central Government, for the purpose of financing auy ti'&nS· 
aotion in the ordinary course of his trade or for the maiDtenlUlce 
of any member of the family of such person shall Dl>t be deRmed 
to be a transfer of assets within the meaning of thiCJ sub·clause.:; 
'or 
(ii) has acquired, if the acquisition has been made ill person, 
by way of purchase or exchange, or if the acquisition has been 
made by or through a member of his family, in any OIanner 
whatsoever, any right to, interest in, or benefit .from any pro· 
. pel'ty , which is treated as evacuee or abandoned property undp.r 
any law for the time being in force in Pakistan, 
E:tplanation.-For the purposes of sub·clause (ii) , the 
acqui~ition of any right to, interest in or benefit from rmy such 
property as is referred to in that sub·clause by a firm, private 
limited company or trust of which any person is a partner, 
member or beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be 
an acquisition by that person within the meaning nf that pub· 
·clause; or 
(iii) has, by the execution of any document ,)f tramder in 
writing, whether registered or not, or by means of any o~her 
donuruent in writing, sought to effect an exchange of the whole 
or any part of his property situated in any part of the territories 
toO which this Act extends, with any property situated ill 
Pakistan; 
and includes any person against whom an intention to settle in 
"Pakistan is established from his conduct or [rom documentary 
-evidence; 
(I) "~vacuee property" means any property in which 8 11 evacuee 
has any right or interest (whether personally or as a trustee or 8S a 
Ibeneficiary or in any other capacity}, and includes any lJrC'Jperty-
(1) which has been obtained by any person from an eVOOUf'8 
after the 14th day of August, 1947, by any mode of tramf£or, 
unless such transfer has been confirmed by the Cust'ldian, or 
(lA) belonging to a joint stock company of which no~ lass 
than fifty-one per cent. of the shares 8re held by evacuees, 
notwithstanding that the registered office of sllch .company is 
situated in any part of the territories to whioh this Act extends, 
·or 

11 
(9) belonging to any person who, after the 18th day of 
Ootober, 1949, has done or does any of the acts spt>cified in dause 
(e) of section 2l or in which any such person has nny right cr 
interest, to the extent of such right or interest, 
but does not inclune-
(i) any ornament and any wearing apparel, cooking vessels 
or other household etlects in the immediate poss~ssion of (In 
evacuee; 
(ii) any property belonging to a joint stook compauy, the 
registered office of which was situated before the 16th day of 
August, 1947, in any place now forming part of Pakistan and 
continues to be so situated after the said date; 
.. .. • .. 
Section 3 
8. ReferenceB to enactmenfB not in force in Part B States.-In the ap-
plication of this Act to any Part B State, unless the context otherwise re-
.quires, references to any enactment in force in Part A States but not in 
force in that Part B State sha.ll be construed as references to the correspon-
ding enactment, if any, in force in that Part 13 State. 
.. .. .. • Section 6(1) and (8) 
6. Appointment of Custodians, etc.-(l) The State Government may, 
in consultatioo with the Custodian-General, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint for the 'State a Custodian, and as many Additional, 
Deputy or Ass;stant Custodians of evacuee property ali may be necessarY 
for the purpose of discharging the duties imposed on the Custodian by 
'Or under this Act. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-seotion (2), Additional, Deputy and 
Assistant Custodians shall disoharge the duties imposed on them by or 
under this Act under the general superintendenoe and control of t·he 
Custodian for the State, but the State Government may, by general or 
speoial order, provide for the distribution of work among them . 
* * .. .. 
Section 1~(1) 
12. Power to vary or cancel leases Or allotments of evacuee propBrty.-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in foroe, the Custodian may cancel any allotment or terminate any lease or 
amend the terms of any le8se or agreeQlent under which any evacuee pro-
perty is held or occupied by eo person, wht>re such allotment, lease or agree-
ment has been granted or entered into atter the 14th day of August, 1947 . 
• * • • 
Section. 16(1) Gnd (9) 
16. Restoration of property.-(l) The Custodian may, on nppli~8t! 1\ 
made to him in this bt>half in writing by an evaouee or any person cla1mlllg 
to be the heir of an,.evacuee, l'6Itore, subject to such terms and conditions 

12 
as he may think fit to impose. the evacuet! property to which the eVRCUe& 
or other pers()n would have been entitled if this Act were not in force: 
Provided that the applicant pr-oduces in support of his application a. 
certificate from the Central Government, or from any person authorised by 
it, in thif> behnlf. to the effeet that the evar.uee property may be so restored 
if the applicant is otherwise entitled thereto. 
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (I), the Custodian shall 
cause public notice t.he,reof to b{, given in the prescribed manner and, after 
holding a summary inquiry into the claim in such manner Ill! may be pres· 
cribed, may-
(a) make a formal order dt>claring that the property shall be res-
tored to the applioant j or 
(b) reject the application; or 
(c) refer the applicant to a ch'il court for the detennination of his 
claim and title to the pr()perty: 
Provided thAt no order tor restornt,ion shall he malle under this section, 
unless provi!'lion has been made in the prescribed manner for the r(~covery 
of any am()unt due to the Custodiflll in respect of the property or th& 
management thereof . 
• • • • 
Section 18 
18. Occupancy or tenancy right not to be extinguillhed.-Nothing con-
tained in flny other lflw for the time being in force shsll be deemed to ex-
tinguish the right of occupuncy in any land ()J' the site of any bouse or other 
building of an evacuee which has vested in the Custodian and, notwithstand-
ing. anything contained in Ilny such law, neither the evacuee nOr the-
Custodian, whether as an occupancy tenunt or as a tenant for a fixed term 
of any land or the site of allY house or other building, shall be liable to be 
€jected or deemed to have become so liable on any ground whatsoever for 
any default of the Custodian. 
• 
Section 24(1) 
24. ATJpeals from orders under sections 7, 16. 19 and 40.-(1) Any 
person aggrieved by an order made under sc(,tion 7. section 16. section 19-
or flection 40 may prefer an appeal in sueh mnnner and within such time 
SA may be prescribed,-
(a) to the Custodian, where the original order has been passed 
hy a Deputy or ASlilistsnt Custodian ; 
. (b) to the Custodian-General. where the original order has been 
nassed by the Custodian. an Adtlit.ionfll Custodian or an Authorised 
TIeputy Custodian: 
Provided thAt whE're the appeal is preferred on the ground that the 
pf'rson aggrieved is not an eVBcuee within the men.ning of sub-clause (iii) 
of clause (Ii) of lIertipn 2, or that the property is not evacuee property 
within the meRning of sub-clause (2) of clause (f) of sectiou2. the appeal 
IIballl he prefp,rr~d in the manner prpseribE'd in !lection 25. 
• * • II! 

13 
Section fJ5( 1) 
25. AppealB from other orderB.-(I) Any p~rson aggrieved by an 
crder.-
(a) under section 7 declaring his proplll"ty as evacuee property 
0" the ground that he is 1111 evacuee within the meo.nillg of sub·clause 
(iii) of clause (d) of section 2, or that the property is evacuee propert,y 
within the meaning of suu-clause (B) of clause (/) of section 2, or 
(b) under section 22 dedarillg auy property of an intt'ndillg 
evacuee to be evacuee property, 
may prefer an appelll, in such mallller and within such time as may be 
prescribed, to the district judge nominatt'd in this behalf by the State 
Goverumellt. 
* * ... '" 
Sections 40 alld 41 
40. IltllJtric;Jion on transfer by evacuees.-(l) No transfer of any right or 
illtercst in HUY property mli-de in IIny manner whatsoever after the 14th day 
(If Augu~t. 11147, by Or on Ilt'hn If of nil,'" lJl·rS(}ll whose property is notified 
or dee!Urcd t{) be evucuee property, shall be effective so as to confer (mY 
rights or remedies 011 the parties to such transfer Ql" on any pt!l'son claiming 
under them unless it is confirmed by the Custodian. 
(2) An application for confirmation of such transfer mlly ·be made by the 
transferor or thtJ transferee or uny perseJoll claiming under, or lawfully autho-
rised by, either of them to the Custodian within two months from the da.te 
·of transfer or within two mont.hs from the commencement of this Act or 
within two months from the date of t.he 1l0tifh~atiol1 or deelnrutioll referred 
to ill sub-section (1), whichever is later. 
(3) The provisiolls of section 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (IX 
()f 19(8) shull apply to an application under sub-section (2). 
(4) The Cw;todiull shall hold all inquiry into the application in the pres-
cribed manner and may reject the application, if he is of opinion that--
(a) the transaction hM not been entered into in good faith or for 
valuable consideration, or 
(b) the transaction is prohibited under any Jaw for the time-being 
in force, or 
(c) the transaction ought not to be confirmed for any ot.her reason. 
(5) If the application is not rejected under sub-section (4), the Custo-
dian ma.y confirm the transfer either unconditionally or subject to such 
terms and conditions as he thinks fit to impose. 
41. Prohibition of registration of document8 in certain callos.·-(l) 
Where any document required to be registered under the Indian 
Regi8trati~n Act, 1008 (XVI of 19(8), purports to transfer au,Y right or 

14 
interest in any property in contravent,ion of the provIsions contained in 
section 20 or section 40, no registering officer shall register allY such 
document aud no revenue officer shall sanction any mutation of names. 
in respect thereof, un:less the party presenting the document for registration, 
produces a certifica.te from the Custodian declaring that the property is 
not property belonging to an intending evacuee or that it is not evacuee 
property or tha.t the transaction has been ('onfirmed or that the Custodian 
has given his previous approval to the transfer. 
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided herein, nothing contained in 
sub-section (1) shall be deemed to affect the provisions contained in tbP 
Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949 (XXII of 1949) , or in 
any other law for the tjm~ bein~ in force relating to the registration of 
documents. 
III 
'" '" 
Seotion 52 
52. ['ower to 8Z8mpt.-The Central Government may, by uotUication 
in the Official Gazette, exempt any person or class of persons or any pro-
perty or class of property from the operation of all or any of the provisions 
of this Act. 
• • Il 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Administration of Evacuee Property 
Act, 1950 
• 
(8Mi Ajit Prasad Jain, 
Minister for Rehabilitation) 