1
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
THE HISTORICAL HERITAGE CONSERV ATION BILL, 2018
By
SHRI DHANANJAY B. MAHADIK, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of a mechanism to maintain, preserve and protect the identified
and unidentified ancient, historical or archaeological sites, remains, monuments,
modules and carvings in the country and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Historical Heritage Conservation Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Definitions.
Bill  No. 91 of  2018
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) “historical or archaeological site” means areas where ruins or remains of
historical or archaeological importance are available or believed to be available for
more than hundred years including such geographical sites which have importance in
Indian Civilization or in any period of the history of national freedom movement and
also includes—
(i) such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as may
be required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving such site; and
(ii) the means of access to, and convenient inspection of, historical or
archaeological sites.
(c) “archaeological remains” includes the following which have been in existence
for not less than one hundred years—
(i) any coin, module, handwritten document, relics or other artifacts or
works of artisan;
(ii) any material or article which is associated with a construction or cave;
(iii) any material or article which is a witness of science, art, craftsmanship,
literature, religion, tradition, moral ethics or politics of previous eras;
(iv) any material or article of historical importance; and
(v) any material or article whose archaeological importance fulfills the
purposes of this Act and so declared through a notification in the Official Gazette.
(d) “historical monuments” means any structure, memorial, stupa, graveyard,
cave, stone modules, embossed write up or monoliths of historical, archaeological or
artistic interest which have been in existence for not less than one hundred years
including such building, fort, memorials which have importance in Indian Civilization
or in any period of the history of national freedom movement and also includes—
(i) remains of an ancient monument;
(ii) site of an ancient monument;
(iii) such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as may
be required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving such monument;
and
(iv) the means of access to, and convenient inspection of, an ancient
monument.
(e) “historical heritage” includes historical or archaeological site and remains,
antiquities and historical monument of significant historical importance relating to
Indian culture, civilization or national freedom movement;
(f) “non-governmental organisation” means an organisation, institution,
educational centre or research institution engaged in the field of preservation, protection
and maintenance of historical heritage for a period of not less than three years with a
good track record of its activities; and
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2) The words and expressions used in this Act but not defined herein and
defined in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958
shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in that Act.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
24 of 1958.
5

3
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up a
mechanism to maintain, preserve and protect historical heritage in all the States of the
country.
(2) The mechanism set up under sub-section (1) shall incorporate,—
(a) entrusting the responsibility of maintaining, preserving and protecting
historical heritage which have been declared as a symbol of national importance or
otherwise in any State of the country to an established non-governmental organisation;
(b) criteria for the selection of non-governmental organisations for entrusting
the work of preservation of historical heritage;
(c) constitution of body at national level to monitor and regulate the functioning
of non-governmental organisations and obtain annual or regular reports from such
organizations;
(d) providing adequate financial assistance to the non-governmental
organisations entrusted with the task of preservation of historical heritage under
this Act on the recommendation of body constituted under clause (c);
(e) entrusting responsibility on the non-governmental organisations responsibile
for maintenance, preservation and protection of historical heritage to create awareness
among people about the importance of preservation and protection of historical
heritage;
(f) provision of appropriate legal action against the non-governmental
organisations involved in irregularities;
(g) making the Government department related to maintenance of historical
heritages as the nodal agency to implement the mechanism set up under sub-section (1)
and to regulate and control the body constituted under clause ( c);
(h) provision to empower the non-governmental organisations to collect minimum
fee from the visitors after obtaining permission thereof from the body constituted
under clause (c); and
(i) entrusting responsibility of excavation, maintenance and supervision of other
heritages at local level to the non-governmental organisations.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure effective
implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government shall monitor and review, from time to time, the
functioning of non-governmental organisations engaged in preservation and protection of
historical heritage in such manner, as may be prescribed.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
6. If any non-governmental organisation indulges in any act which is or is likely to be
detrimental to the preservation and protection of any historical heritage, the appropriate
Government may initiate such action against such organisation as it may deem fit including
imposition of fine and cancellation of recognition.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Setting up of
a mechanism
to maintain,
preserve and
protect
historical
heritages.
Implementation
of the
provisions of
the Act.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules.
40
45

4
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a unique Nation in terms of its culture and heritage where the live examples of
its thousands year old culture and civilization still exists in the form of various historical
heritage monuments, sites and ruins etc. These are the proof of our golden and glorious
history which have an importance and respect not only for Indians but for foreign nationals
as well. But it’s very unfortunate that some of the heritage monuments neither earmarked or
identified nor being maintained appropriately. Many historical building are losing their original
shapes due to renovation and construction being done in their adjacent buildings. Proper
monitoring, protection and security is very important. The experience in this regard is not
very positive so far. Therefore, a policy is required to be framed at community level in this
regard. Apart from this, there is need to make efforts in this regard by entrusting non-
government organizations for protection of heritage buildings. We may get its effective
benefit if the responsibility of better management, regulation and monitoring system is
handed over to the local people where the heritage is situated.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DHANANJAY B. MAHADIK
February 13, 2018.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a mechanism for maintenance,
preservation and protection of historical heritage in the country. It also provides for the
constitution of body at national level to monitor and regulate the functioning of non-
governmental organisations. It further provides for adequate financial assistance to the
Non-governmental organizations for carrying out the provisions of the Act. Clause 5 provides
for adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the provision of the Act. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At
this stage, it is difficult to give an exact estimate of the expenditure to be incurred on it.
However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore per
annum will be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matter of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of a mechanism to maintain, preserve and protect the identified
and unidentified ancient, historical or archaeological sites, remains, monuments,
modules and carvings in the country and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Dhananjay B. Mahadik,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4582LS(S3)—13-03-2018.