THE VEXATIOUS LITIGATION (PREVENTION) BILL, 2019
By
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL,  M.P.
A
BILL
to prevent the institution or continuance of vexatious proceedings, in civil and criminal
matters in the High Courts and Courts subordinate thereto and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Vexatious Litigation (Prevention) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) An application for declaring a person as a vexatious litigants, may be filed in the
appropriate High Court—
(a) by the Advocate General or in absence of Advocate General, by a senior
advocate nominated by the High Court in this behalf; or
(b) by the Registrar General of the High Court; or
(c) with the leave of the High Court, by a person against whom the proceedings,
civil or criminal, have been instituted or are being continued.
Bill No.  91 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Declaration
of a person as
a vexatious
litigant.
5
10

2
(2) If, on application being filed under sub-section (1), the High Court is satisfied that
any person has habitually and without any reasonable ground instituted vexatious
proceedings, civil or criminal, in any court, whether against the same person or against
different persons, the High Court may, after giving the person who has instituted such
proceedings, an opportunity of being heard, declare that person as a vexatious litigant and
shall also order as provided under sub-section (1) of section 4:
Provided that if an application is filed by any person referred to in clause (b) or
(c) of sub-section (1), the Advocate General or, in the absence of Advocate General,
such senior advocate, as may be nominated by the High Court in this behalf, shall also
be heard.
3. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2) when the High Court under sub-
section (2) of section 3 or under sub-section (2) of section 6 declares a person as a vexatious
litigant, it shall also order that—
(a) no vexatious proceeding, civil or criminal, shall be instituted by the said
person in the High Court or in any other Court subordinate to that High Court; and
(b) no vexatious proceeding, civil or criminal, already instituted by the said
person in the High Court or in any other court subordinate to that High Court, shall
continue without obtaining the leave of the appropriate Court or appropriate Judge.
(2) It shall not be necessary for the person declared as a vexatious litigant to obtain
leave in the following cases—
(a) where such person has instituted a proceeding in the appropriate Court
before the appropriate Judge for the purpose of obtaining leave; or
(b) where, in any matter instituted against him, such person proposes to file or
take appropriate proceedings to defend himself; or
(c) where, in a proceeding instituted or continued by such person after obtaining
leave from the appropriate Court or the Judge, the said person proposes to file or take
appropriate further proceedings.
(3) The leave under sub-section (1) shall not be granted unless the appropriate Court
or the appropriate Judge, as the case may be, is satisfied that the proceedings are not an
abuse of the process of the Court and that there is prima facie reasonable ground for
granting leave to institute or continue proceedings by the person declared as a vexatious
litigant.
4. (1) Every order made under sub-section (2) of section 3, declaring any person as a
vexatious litigant, shall be published in the Official Gazette and may also be published in
such other manner as the High Court may direct.
(2) Every order referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall also be communicated to all the
courts subordinate to the High Court which passed such order.
5. (1) Where any proceedings, civil or criminal, is instituted or continued in any court
by a person against whom an order under sub-section ( 1) of section 3 has been made
without obtaining the leave required to be obtained from the appropriate Court or appropriate
Judge, such proceedings shall be dismissed by the said court.
(2) The court while dismissing the proceedings under sub-section (1) shall, in addition,
further direct such vexatious litigant to pay costs.
(3) Every person referred to in sub-section ( 1) who has instituted or continued any
proceedings without leave as aforesaid, may also be liable for punishment for contempt of
the High Court which had passed the order under sub-section (1) of section 3.
Leave of
Court
necessary for
vexatious
litigant to
institute or
continue any
civil or
criminal
proceedings.
Publication and
communication
of order.
Proceedings,
civil or
criminal,
instituted or
continued
without leave
of the
appropriate
Court to be
dismissed and
other
consequences.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. (1) Where any person against whom an order under sub-section ( 1) of section 3
has been made by a High Court, institutes or continues any proceedings, civil or criminal, in
another High Court or in a Court subordinate to such High Court, then the person referred
to in sub-section (1) of section 2 may make an application to such  High Court  for declaring
such person as a vexatious litigant.
(2) If, on an application filed under sub-section (1), the High Court is satisfied that
any person has been declared as a vexatious litigant under sub-section (2) of section 2, by
another High Court, the High Court may, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the
person who has instituted or continued any proceeding, civil or criminal, declare that person
as a vexatious litigant and shall also order as provided under sub-section (1) of section 3.
(3) Where an application under sub-section (1) is filed, the provisions of sub-sections
(2) and (3) of section 2, and sections 3, 4 and 5 shall apply in relation to such application.
7. (1) Every High Court may make rules for implementing the provisions of this Act.
(2) All rules made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law providing for striking out vexatious pleadings or prevention of
abuse of process of law, or which require consent, sanction or approval in any form of any
other authority for the institution or continuance of any civil or criminal proceeding.
Declaration
and order by
more than
one High
Court.
Power of
High Court to
make Rules.
Saving.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Indian courts face a big challenge of pendency of cases filed therein. There are many
factors responsible for huge pendency of litigation in courts, and frivolous and vexatious
litigation plays an important role in creating this backlog. Looking at the gravity of the
situation, the Law Commission of India made credible efforts to prepare its 192nd Report on
Prevention of V exatious Litigation in June, 2005. This Bill is an extension of the
recommendations as put forward by the Commission. Hon'ble Supreme Court has also asked
about a nationwide law to prevent non-genuine litigants from overburdening the courts.
The main purpose of enacting a law on the subject is to prevent a person from instituting
or continuing vexatious proceedings habitually and without reasonable ground in the
 High Courts and subordinate courts. It fills an important area where there has been a vacuum
in the past nearly five decades in this country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANJAY JAISWAL
June  10, 2019.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the concerned High Court to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent the institution or continuance of vexatious proceedings, in civil and criminal
matters in the High Courts and Courts subordinate thereto and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—501LS(S3)—19-06-2019.