THE VEXATIOUS LITIGATION (PREVENTION) BILL, 2017
BY
DR. RAMESH POKHRIY AL ‘NISHANK’,  M.P.
A
BILL
to prevent the institution or continuance of vexatious proceedings, in civil and criminal
matters in the High Courts and Courts subordinate thereto and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Vexatious Litigation (Prevention) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) An application for declaring a person as a vexatious litigants, may be filed in the
appropriate High Court—
(a) by the Advocate General or in absence of Advocate General, by a senior
advocate nominated by the High Court in this behalf; or
(b) by the Registrar General of the High Court; or
(c) with the leave of the High Court, by a person against whom the proceedings,
civil or criminal, have been instituted or are being continued.
Bill No. 91 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
Declaration of
a person as a
vexatious
litigant.
10

2
(2) If, on application being filed under sub-section (1), the High Court is satisfied that
any person has habitually and without any reasonable ground instituted vexatious
proceedings, civil or criminal, in any court, whether against the same person or against
different persons, the High Court may, after giving the person who has instituted such
proceedings, an opportunity of being heard, declare that person as a vexatious litigant and
shall also order as provided under sub-section (1) of section 4:
Provided that if an application is filed by any person referred to in clause (b) or
(c) of sub-section (1), the Advocate General or, in the absence of Advocate General,
such senior advocate, as may be nominated by the High Court in this behalf, shall also
be heard.
3. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2) when the High Court under sub-
section (2) of section 3 or under sub-section (2) of section 6 declares a person as a vexatious
litigant, it shall also order that—
(a) no vexatious proceeding, civil or criminal, shall be instituted by the said
person in the High Court or in any other Court subordinate to that High Court; and
(b) no vexatious proceeding, civil or criminal, already instituted by the said
person in the High Court or in any other court subordinate to that High Court, shall
continue without obtaining the leave of the appropriate Court or appropriate Judge.
(2) It shall not be necessary for the person declared as a vexatious litigant to obtain
leave in the following cases—
(a) where such person has instituted a proceeding in the appropriate Court
before the appropriate Judge for the purpose of obtaining leave; or
(b) where, in any matter instituted against him, such person proposes to file or
take appropriate proceedings to defend himself; or
(c) where, in a proceeding instituted or continued by such person after obtaining
leave from the appropriate Court or the Judge, the said person proposes to file or take
appropriate further proceedings.
(3) The leave under sub-section (1) shall not be granted unless the appropriate Court
or the appropriate Judge, as the case may be, is satisfied that the proceedings are not an
abuse of the process of the Court and that there is prima facie reasonable ground for
granting leave to institute or continue proceedings by the person declared as a vexatious
litigant.
4. (1) Every order made under sub-section (2) of section 3, declaring any person as a
vexatious litigant, shall be published in the Official Gazette and may also be published in
such other manner as the High Court may direct.
(2) Every order referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall also be communicated to all the
courts subordinate to the High Court which passed such order.
5. (1) Where any proceedings, civil or criminal, is instituted or continued in any court
by a person against whom an order under sub-section ( 1) of section 3 has been made
without obtaining the leave required to be obtained from the appropriate Court or appropriate
Judge, such proceedings shall be dismissed by the said court.
(2) The court while dismissing the proceedings under sub-section (1) shall, in addition,
further direct such vexatious litigant to pay costs.
(3) Every person referred to in sub-section ( 1) who has instituted or continued any
proceedings without leave as aforesaid, may also be liable for punishment for contempt of
the High Court which had passed the order under sub-section (1) of section 3.
Leave of
Court
necessary for
vexatious
litigant to
institute or
continue any
civil or
criminal
proceedings.
Publication and
communication
of order.
Proceedings,
civil or
criminal,
instituted or
continued
without leave
of the
appropriate
Court to be
dismissed and
other
consequences.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. (1) Where any person against whom an order under sub-section ( 1) of section 3
has been made by a High Court, institutes or continues any proceedings, civil or criminal, in
another High Court or in a Court subordinate to such High Court, then the person referred
to in sub-section (1) of section 2 may make an application to such high Court for declaring
such person as a vexatious litigant.
(2) If, on an application filed under sub-section (1), the High Court is satisfied that
any person has been declared as a vexatious litigant under sub-section (2) of section 2, by
another High Court, the High Court may, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the
person who has instituted or continued any proceeding, civil or criminal, declare that person
as a vexatious litigant and shall also order as provided under sub-section (1) of section 3.
(3) Where an application under sub-section (1) is filed, the provisions of sub-sections
(2) and (3) of section 2, and sections 3, 4 and 5 shall apply in relation to such application.
7. (1) Every High Court may make rules for implementing the provisions of this Act.
(2) All rules made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law providing for striking out vexatious pleadings or prevention of
abuse of process of law, or which require consent, sanction or approval in any form of any
other authority for the institution or continuance of any civil or criminal proceeding.
Declaration
and order by
more than
one High
Court.
Power of
High Court to
make Rules.
Saving.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Frivolous and vexatious litigations are the cause of concern for the courts for quite
some time. Often, this matter has been highlighted by various courts and the Law Commission
has also favoured for a check on the filing of frivolous and vexatious proceedings. At times,
it has been seen that many persons abuse the process of law and indulge in the habitual and
intentional filing of frivolous and vexatious civil or criminal proceedings to harass other
persons without any reasonable ground. It has also been observed by the courts that some
persons habitually and persistently file cases on the issues, which have already been
decided once or more than once against some parties or their successors or against different
parties. Besides the harassment, filing of such proceedings also leads to wastage of the
precious time of the law courts which are already burdened. Such frivolous litigation cause
unnecessary and avoidable strain on the States' resources in the area of dispensation of
justice.
There is no denying of the fact that every person has the right to file civil or criminal
proceedings against any other person, but a check is necessary to allow the court to
examine the bona fide of a person filing the proceeding. Many countries in the world, like
the USA, the UK have enacted a law on the filing of frivolous and vexatious litigation. In our
country also, there is a law on the subject in two States, i.e., Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra.
In view of the concern expressed by the courts, it is necessary that a central law be enacted
to prevent the filing of frivolous and vexatious complaints by declaring such a person as
vexatious litigant, who may thereafter be barred from filing or continuing any such complaint
without the permission of the High Court or the appropriate Court. It is also felt that if a
person is declared as vexatious litigant, provision should also be made to punish him for the
contempt of the court besides directing him to pay the cost.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK'
March 31, 2017.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the concerned High Court to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent the institution or continuance of vexatious proceedings, in civil and criminal
matters in the High Courts and Courts subordinate thereto and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal ‘Nishank’,  M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—132LS(S3)—27-06-2017.