THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
JHARKHAND BILL, 2009
By
SHRI INDER SINGH NAMDHARI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Jharkhand for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Sections of people and for the development, exploitation and proper utilization of
its resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.   (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Jharkhand
Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 91 of 2009
 TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
.
5

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Jharkhand to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Sections
of people or for the development, proper utilization and exploitation of the resources in the
State.
3.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Jharkhand.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Jharkhand is socially and economically backward. The problems of poverty,
unemployment and illiteracy are required to be addressed urgently and in a time-bound
manner. Measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of weaker sections in the region
and initiating new development schemes are also required to be undertaken in an expeditious
and time-bound  manner. The State of Jharkhand has also been facing the problem of naxalite
violence for a number of years. In view of its economic backwardness, the naxalites have
found sympathetic elements within the population. Therefore, economic backwardness is
the root cause of the naxalite problem. It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government
should provide special financial assistance to the State of Jharkhand for its all-round
development including the welfare of weaker sections and for the development and
exploitation of its vast natural resources which include coal, iron ore, manganese, and
strategically important resources such as uranium. Such a step of providing financial
assistance to this newly formed State would go a long way in building this nation more and
more strong.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; INDER SINGH NAMDHARI
July 28, 2009.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Jharkhand to meet the costs of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Jharkhand. As the
sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Jharkhand as special financial assistance
by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to
be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are
identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK SABHA
lok sabha————LOK   SA
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Jharkhand for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Sections of people and for the development, exploitation and proper utilization of its
resources.
————
(Shri Inder Singh Namdhari, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3996LS(S5)—28.10.2009.