5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 91 of 2024
THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT 
GUARANTEE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee  
Act, 2005.
Be it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee (Amendment) Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement.

2. In section 3 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 
2005 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),– 
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “one hundred days”, the words “two 
hundred days” shall be substituted; and
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:–
 “(2) Every person who has done the work given to him shall be entitled to 
receive wages at the rate of rupees eight hundred or at the wage rate for each 
day of work, whichever is higher.”.
3. In the principal Act, in Schedule II, after paragraph 35, the following paragraphs shall 
be inserted, namely:–
“36. Every registered person under the Scheme shall be entitled to the benefit of 
Employees’ State Insurance Fund constituted under the Code on Social Security, 2020.”
37. It shall be the duty of the Gram Panchayat to register all registered persons 
after making such enquiry as it deems fit and to comply all the procedure formalities to 
issue Employees’ State Insurance Scheme card containing such details of members of 
the household affixing their photographs for extending the benefit of Employees’ State 
Insurance Scheme as may be prescribed by the State Government.”.
5
10
15
Amendment of 
section 3.
Amendment of 
Schedule II.
42 of 2005.
2
36 of 2020.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 is a social 
security legislation that provides employment for rural  population and ensuring minimum 
number of employment days.
Keeping in view the changing needs of the society, it is essential to amend the law for 
providing more working days, high wages and health amenities to the registered persons 
under the Act. The present number of days of employment wages are very less and the 
registered persons are not able to find out their primary needs  depending on the employment 
and salary as per the scheme formulated under the parent Act. The social security welfare 
measures provided to the workers are also less. It is highly necessary to increase the number 
of working days and wages. Moreover, providing health protection to the registered persons 
under Employees’ State Insurance Fund constituted under the Code on Social Security, 2020 
is also inevitable. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2005 with a view to–
(a) increase the maximum number of days of employment to the registered persons 
from hundred days to two hundred days;
(b) increase the wages per day to a minimum of rupees eight hundred; and
(c) extend the benefit of Employees’ State Insurance Fund constituted under the 
Code on Social Security, 2020 to all the registered persons under the Act.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                  N . K .  P R E M A C H A N D R A N  
July 8, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for increasing the number of days of employment of 
the registered persons from one hundred days to two hundred days under the Act. It also 
provides for ensuring minimum wage of registered persons to rupees eight hundred for each 
day of work. Clause 3 provides for extending the benefit of Employees’ State Insurance 
Fund constituted under the Code on Social Security, 2020 to all the registered persons under 
the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh crore per 
annum is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed paragraph 37 empowers the State Government to 
prescribed rules for ensuring Employees’ State Insurance Scheme benefits to the registered 
persons. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative powers 
is of a normal character.
5

6
ANNEXURE
[Extract from the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment  
Guarantee Act, 2005] 
(42 of 2005)
* * * * *
 3. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the State Government shall, in such rural area in the 
State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every household whose 
rural adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than one hundred days 
of such work in a financial year in accordance with the Scheme made  under this Act. 
(2) Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme shall be entitled 
to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work.
* * * * *
SCHEDULE II
35. Every worker shall have an opportunity of being heard and register any grievance 
either orally or in writing, at all implementation levels for disposal as per the provisions of 
the Grievance Redressal Mechanism under the Scheme.
* * * * *
Guarantee 
of rural 
employment to 
household.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee  
Act, 2005.
(Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P .) 