36 of 2003. 5

As Introbuced IN Lok SABHA

3 - DEC 1004

Bill No. 91 of 2004

THE ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
Suet Basupes AcHARIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Electricity Act, 2003

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2004.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. Insection 3 ofthe Electricity Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
for sub-sections (1), (2) and (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—

“3. (7) The Authority shall, from time to time, prepare the National Electricity Policy
and tariff policy, in consultation with the State Governments for development of the power
system based on optimal utilization of resources such as coal, natural gas, nuclear substances
or materials, hydro and renewable sources of energy and submit the same to the Central
Government for its approval.

(2) The Central Government shall, after its approval, publish the National
Electricity Policy and tariff policy once in five years.

Short title and
‘commencement,

‘Amendment
of section 3.

National
Electricity
Policy.


Substitution of
new section
for section 5.

Establishment
ofa Rural
Electrification
Board.

‘Substitution of
new section 6,

Obligations
to supply
electricity to
rural areas,

Substitution of
new section
for section 7.

Generating
company and
requirement
for setting up
of generating
station,

Amendment
of section 61.

2

(3) The Authority may, from time to time, in consultation with the State
Governments, review or revise the National Electricity Policy and tariff Policy referred
to in sub-section (1),”.

3. For section 5 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be substituted
namely:—

“S. The Central Government shall esta! a Rural Electrification Board in
consultation with the State Governments for electrification in rural areas,”.

4 For section 6 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—

“6. (1) The Central Government and the appropriate Government shall endeavour to
supply electricity to all areas including villages and hamlets,

(2) The Central Government and the respective State Governments shall share
the cost of providing electricity in rural areas of the respective State in such Proportion
as may be agreed upon.”,

5. For section 7 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be Substituted,
namely:—

“7. Any generating company may establish, operate and maintain a generating station
if it gets the techno-economic clearance from the Authority and shall also obtain the clearance
from the respective State Government.”.

In section 61, after clause (i), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: —
+0) the principle of continuation of cross subsidy;

(0 subsidy, ifany, required to be paid to any class of consumers shall be equally
shared by the Central and the respective State Governments,”,

20


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Every society evolves legislation through an evolutionary process accommodating
new concepts and technologies in order to use resources consistent with its social needs.
The Electricity Act, 2003, needs to be amended to make it meet the aspirations of the people.

Asa first step the State Electricity Boards should not be liquidated and handed over to
the private sector. Removal of subsidies and guarantee of profits to the Multi National
Electricity Companies have resulted in the denial of supply of power to rural areas and the
disadvantaged sections in urban areas. Elimination of cross subsidization is causing adverse
impact. In a country where thirty per cent of population is living below poverty line, the
cross subsidization should continue.

To have balanced policy and to avoid any arbitrary decisions while formulating the
policy, it is strongly felt that policy should be drafted by Central Electricity Authority in
eonsultation with States and thereafter be approved and notified by the Central Government.
‘The techno-economic appraisal/clearance (TEA) by the Central Electricity Authority is neither
an administrative approval nor any licensing but this is a process of optimization of project
parameters for maximization of overall benefits from the projects, which has direct bearing
aver tariff, In fact in today's scenario, with the entry of large number of players in the power
sector, it is required that all the power generation projects should be thoroughly examined
by the Central Electricity Authority for optimal utilization ‘of national resources and protection
of consumers’ interest.

‘The emphasis of the Electricity Act is to provide electricity in urban areas and no
responsibility has been cast to assess the ‘demand and supply of electricity in rural areas
especially when all the villages are to be electrified by the year 2007 and 80000 villages, which
arot be connected to grid, are to be electrified by 2012, Taking into consideration that all
the State Governments are reeling under financial crunch, financial resources are to be
appropriated in a fixed share so that both Union Government and State Government may
ree substantial investment in the electrification of rural India.

in fact the electricity Act is based on the California type model, which has failed
miserably leading to soaring prices, rolling blackouts and laying off of thousands of workers.

{As per the Constitution of India Electricity is @ subject under the concurrent list. The
State Governments/Union territory administrations are answerable to the people of their
~ States for consistent quality power supply at an affordable price.

‘The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

‘New DELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA
July 5,2004.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

in rural areas. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve ‘expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. As regards the financial burden of State Governments in extending electricity
to rural areas, it shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. It |
likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore from the

Consolidated Fund of India, A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand
crore is also likely to be involved.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE Etecrrictry Acr, 2003

(36 0F 2003)

. . . . * *

3.(/) The Central Government shall, from tme to time, prepare the National Electricity
Policy and tariff policy, in consultation with the State Governments and the Authority for
development of the power system based on optimal utilization of resources such as coal,
natural gas, nuclear substances or materials, hydro and renewable sources of energy.

(2) The Central Government shall publish the National Policy and tariff policy
from time to time. -

. * * * .

5. The Central Government shall also formulate a national policy, in consultation with
the State Governments and the State Commissions; for rural electrification and for bulk
purchase of power and management of local distribution in rural areas through Panchayat
Institutions, users’ associations, co-operative societies, non-governmental organisations or
franchisees.

* * * * * *

6. The Appropriate Government shall endeavour to supply electricity to all areas
including villages and hamlets.

* * * * * *

7. Any generating company may establish, operate and maintain a generating station
without obtaining a licence under this Act if it complies with the technical standards relating
to connectivity with the grid referred to in clause (b) of section 73.

61. The Appropriate Commission shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, specify
the terms and conditions for the determination of tariff, and in doing so, shall be guided by
the following, namely:—

(a)* * * * *
(b)* . . * 4 .
(c)« + * * *
(d)s * . . के
(e)* * * . .
(fs . . ’ *
(g)* . . * *
(h)s * * ’ .

(i) the National Policy and tariff policy:

National
Electricity
Policy‘ and
Plan,

National
policy on
electrification
and local
distribution in
rural areas.

Obligations to
supply
electricity 10
rural areas,

Generating
company and
requirement
for setting up
of generating
station

Tariff
regulations.


6

Provided that the terms and conditions for determination of tariff under the |
(Supply) Act, 1948, the Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998 and the enactments
specified in the Schedule as they stood immediately before the appointed date, shall continue
to apply for a period of one year or until the terms and conditions for tariffare specified under
this section, whichever is earli

* . * . *