1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRIMATI DARSHANA VIKRAM JARDOSH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After Clause ( 1) of article 72 of the Constitution, the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(1A) Save as otherwise provided in clause ( 1), the power to grant pardons,
reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the
sentence of any person convicted of any offence referred to in clause ( 1) shall be
Amendment
of article 72.
Bill No. 91 of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
exercised by the President within a period of eighteen months from the date of receipt
of the petition of mercy:
Provided that if the President does not exercise the power within the aforesaid period,
it shall be deemed that the petition of mercy has been declined.".

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 72 of the Constitution empowers the President to grant pardons, reprieves,
respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any
person convicted of an offence mentioned in that article. Though, the President has been
bestowed with absolute powers in this regard, no time limit has been fixed within which such
power has to be exercised. As a result, the mercy petitions are kept pending for a long period
without any decision. As a fall out of this, the convicts are to be kept guarded in jails and
heavy expenditure is incurred upon them which is tax payers money and a drain on national
exchequer. In the present situation, attempts are being made both externally and internally to
hurt harmony and cohesiveness of our civil society in the form of terrorist activities or other
such heinous crimes.
The persons who commit such heinous crimes misuse the provision of mercy petition
to delay the sentence as disposal of such petitions take several years.
It is high time that such inordinate delay in disposal of mercy petitions be addressed to
by providing that the power of the President to grant pardon, reprieve, respite or remission
of punishment etc. must be exercised within eighteen months of the receipt of the mercy
petition.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DARSHANA VIKRAM JARDOSH
February 26, 2015
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
72. (1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprives, respites or
remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person
convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any
law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
* * * * *
4
Power of
President to
grant
pardons, etc.,
and to
suspend,
remit or
commute
sentences in
certain cases.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Darshana Vikram Jardosh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5614LS(S3)—15-04-2015.