Short title
and
commencement.
THE RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 109 of the Railways Act, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), after clause (b), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the railway administration where the loss of life or personal
injury to a passenger occurs shall be made a party amongst others, if any, before the
Claims Tribunal.”.
3. In section 123 of the principal Act,—
(a) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(aa) “accidental falling” means accidental falling of any passenger from
a train carrying passengers but does not include—
Amendment
of section
109.
24 of 1989.
Amendment
of section
123.
Bill No. 91 of  2014
10
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(i) a passenger falling from a train while entering or leaving or
attempting to enter or leave any carriage while the train is in motion, or
elsewhere than at the side of the carriage adjoining the platform, or other
place appointed by the railway administration for passengers to enter or
leave the carriage, or while standing near the door or opens the door of
any carriage while the train is in motion; or
(ii) a person who violates the provisions of section 153 or
section 154; or
(iii) any passenger or any other person referred to in section 156;’;
(b) in clause (c), sub-clause (2) shall be omitted.
4. After section 124A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“124B. When in the course of working a railway, an incident of accidental falling
occurs, then, whether or not there has been any wrongful act, neglect or default on
the part of the railway administration such as would entitle a passenger who has been
injured or the dependent of a passenger who has been killed to maintain an action and
recover damages in respect thereof, the railway administration shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law, for the time being in force, be liable to pay
compensation to such extent as may be prescribed and to that extent only, for loss
occasioned by the death of, or injury to, a passenger as a result of such accidental
falling:
Provided that no compensation shall be payable under this section by the
railway administration if the passenger dies or suffers injury due to—
(a) suicide or attempted suicide by him;
(b) self-inflicted injury;
(c) his own criminal act;
(d) his own carelessness or negligence:
Provided that for the purposes of this clause, it may be established
and proved by the passenger or on his behalf that he had taken reasonable
care and precaution to avoid occurrence of such incident;
(e) any act committed by him in a state of intoxication or insanity.’’.
Insertion of
new section
124B.
Compensation
on account of
accidental
falling.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
At present, the  provisions of section 109 of the Railways Act, 1989 provides that an
application before the Claims Tribunal for compensation for loss of life or personal injury to
a passenger, may be instituted against,—
(i) the railway administration from where the passenger obtained his pass or
purchased his ticket, or
(ii) the railway administration on whose railway the destination station lies, or
(iii) the loss or personal injury occurred.
2. The options made available for filing of claims are misused and claims against
different railways are filed for the same loss or injury, resulting into filing of duplicate and
false claims by the claimants causing loss to the exchequer.  To prevent this, it is considered
necessary that the railway under whose jurisdiction the loss or injury has occurred should as
a rule be made a party amongst others, if any, before the Railway Claims Tribunal, so that the
railway under whose jurisdiction loss or injury occurred can check, if the claim against such
loss or injury has already been filed.
3. Under sub-clause (2) of clause (c) of section 123 of the Railways Act, 1989, accident
cases of ‘the accidental falling’ of any passenger from a train carrying passengers has been
included in the definition of ‘untoward incident’.  Most of the cases of ‘the accidental falling’
arising out of falling down from train  are because of negligence, carelessness and
misadventure on the part of the passengers while entraining and detraining a moving train
knowing that any accident may take place.  However, railways are being made liable to pay
compensation even when there is no fault on the part of railway.
4. Therefore, cases of ‘accidental falling’ will be categorised separately under clause
(aa) in section 123 to enable railways to ensure its liability when there is fault on its part and
non-payment where there is no fault on its part  in such incidents.
5. Through the proposed amendments, the filing of duplicate claims, by making different
railways as party for the same claim, could be avoided, and the settlement of compensation
in train accidents and untoward incidents, where there is fault on the part of railway, will be
expedited. Accordingly, it is proposed to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; D.V. SADANANDA GOWDA
The 30th July, 2014.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 124B in the Railways Act, 1989.
Under the said section, the railway administration will pay compensation to a passenger who
has been injured or to his dependent in case of his death, if an incident of accidental falling
occurs, but no compensation will be paid due  to  his negligence, carelessness etc. As the
compensation for the cases mentioned in the proposed amendment is already being paid by
the railways, no additional financial implications are involved. Instead, loss to the exchequer
could be avoided by ensuring that railway is not made liable to pay compensation in accidents
caused due to  carelessness and negligence on the part of travelling passengers. The
provisions of new section 124B do not involve any additional expenditure of non-recurring
nature.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 124B in the Railways Act, 1989.  Under
the said section, the extent of compensation payable to any person in case of death or
injuries will be prescribed by rules made under section 129 of the said Act.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of administrative
detail, and as such, it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
3. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE RAILW AYS ACT, 1989
(24 OF 1989)
* * * * *
109. An application before the Claims Tribunal for compensation for the loss of life or
personal injury to a passenger, may be instituted against,—
* * * * *
(b) the railway administration on whose railway the destination station lies or
the loss or personal injury occurred.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XIII
L
IABILITY OF RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION FOR DEATH AND INJURY TO PASSENGERS
DUE TO ACCIDENTS
123. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(c) ‘‘untoward incident’’ means—
* * * * *
(2) the accidental falling of any passenger from a train carrying passengers.
* * * * *
Railway
administration
against which
application
for
compensation
for personal
injury is to be
filed.
Definitions.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989
————
(Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda, Minister of Railways )
GMGIPMRND—1969LS(S3)—04.08.2014.