AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

10 AUG 2005

Bill No. 91 of 2005

THE PAYMENT OF BONUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
| By
Suri GiINGEE N. RAMACHANDRAN, M.P.

A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the’ Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— |
1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Bonus (Amendment) Act, 2005.

(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the ist May, 2005.
965. 5 2. In section 2 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as

the Principal Act) in clause (13), the words "not exceeding three thousand and five
hundred rupees per mensem"™ shail be omitted.

3. Section 12 of the principal Act shall be omitted.

Short title and
commencement.

Amendment
of Section 2.

Omission of
Section 12.


it | STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

| _ The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 provides for payment of bonus to employees under -
| the Act. The Act was amended in the year 1995 with a view to enhance the eligibility limit of

| salary/wage for payment of bonus from rupees two thousand five hundred per mensem of
rupees three thousand five hundred per mensem and the calculation ceiling from rupees one

| thousand six hundred per mensem to rupees two thousand five hundred per mensem.
) According to section 12 of the Act, the bonus payable to an employee whose salary or wage

| | exceeds rupees two thousand five hundred per mensem has to be calculated as if his salary
or wage was rupees two thousand five hundred per mensem. |
|

|

>, eo es ee SS lOO की

——-_ = a शा *ं

Ais
>>

In today's world of high prices and salaries, imposing a ceiling on the salary for the
purpose of bonus is highly unjust. The Union Government is paying bonus to all its Group
II, जा and IV employees though their salaries are higher than the prescribed limit of rupees
three thousand five hundred per mensem for workers as provided in the Payment of Bonus
Act, 1956. Non-payment of bonus to the workers in industrial sector on the lines of the.
employees of the Central Government is unfair and is also legally untenable.

ee
= at — pie
“9 2,

The workers, officers and supervisors are being deprived of getting share of the profit
as the profit sharing bonus has been limited to some class IV employees only.

“ It is, therefore, necessary to remove the ceiling on salary of employees for bonus —
purpose and to make them eligible for bonus irrespective of their salaries or wages.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New DELHI; GINGEE N. RAMACHANDRAN
July 11,2005.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The Bill seeks to amend the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 with a view to omitting the
provisions of eligibility limit of rupees three thousand five hundred per mensem for payment
of bonus and limit of rupees two thousand five hundred per mensem for calculation of bonus
payable to the employees by the employer and to make the employees eligible for bonus
irrespective of any limit on their salaries or wages.

The Bill if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand two hundred
crore only from the Consolidated Fund of India. |

No non-recurring expenditure is likely 10 06 involved.


Definitions.

Calculation
of bonus with
respect to
certain
employees.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PAYMENT OF Bonus Act, 1965
(No. 21 of 1965)
x a . * मे ue a
a cs % * *
(13) "employee" means any person (other than an apprentice) employed on a salary
or wage not exceeding (three thousand and five hundred rupees) per mensem in any industry

to do any skilled or unskilled, manual, supervisory, managerial, administrative, technical
or clerical work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied.

x ® * % के .

12. Where the salary or wage of an employee exceeds two thousand and five hundred
rupees per mensem, the bonus payable to such employees under section 10 or, as the case
may be, under section 11, shall be calculated as if his salary or wage were two thousand and
five hundred rupee. |

€ s x * % *



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965.

(Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran, M.P_)

MGIPMRND—1634LS(S1)—28-7-2005.