     AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 91 of 2021
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
By
DR THOL. THIRUMAA V ALA V AN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment)
Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5

2.  In section 2 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1),–
(a) after clause (e), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–
“(e) “Fund” means the National Electoral Fund constituted under section
29CA;
(eb) “paper trail” means the printed paper slips generated by the printer
attached to the electronic voting machines and collected in a drop box
attached to it comprising the proof of voting to a particular candidate and
political party;”; and
(b) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(ga) “public funding” means funding to the political parties and candidates
out of the Fund;”.
3. In section 8 of the  principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (n), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–
“(o) the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 (10 of 1997); or
  (p) the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act, 1989 (33 of 1989),”.
4. For section 29B of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:–
“29B.(1) Subject to the provisions of any other law for the time being in force,
a political party may accept an amount of contribution voluntarily offered to it
by any person:
       Provided that where the amount of contribution exceeds rupees two
thousand, it shall be accepted by political party only by cheque or electronic
transfer and shall be reported in the annual statement of that financial year of
such political party:
            Provided further that the total amount of contributions received in cash
shall not exceed twenty per cent. of all voluntary contributions received by a
political party:
(2) No political party shall be eligible to accept any contribution from any
company or corporation incorporated in India or abroad.
(3) No political party shall be eligible to accept any contribution from any
foreign source defined under clause (e) of section 2 of the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act, 1976 (49 of 1976).
(4)  If any political party receives any contribution in contravention of
provisions of sub-sections (2) or (3), it shall be liable to remit the amount received as
contribution and pay following amount of fine to the Election Commission–
(a)   one hundred per cent. of the amount received as contribution for first
violation;
(b)     two hundred per cent. of the amount received as contribution for second
violation;
(c)     three hundred per cent. of the amount received as contribution for third
violation; and
2
Amendment
of section 2.
5
10
15
43 of 1951.
Amendment
of section 8.
Substitution of
new section for
section 29B.
Political
parties
entitled to
accept
contribution.
20
25
30
35
40

(d)     four hundred per cent. of the amount received as contribution for every
subsequent violation:
Provided that if a political party fails to pay the amount of fine assessed by the
Election Commission within three months, it shall be liable for an additional  penalty
of nine per cent. interest per annum on the amount of fine:
Provided further that if a political party fails to remit the amount of fine assessed
by the Election Commission in addition to any amount which is otherwise due, it shall
be liable for a fine of —
(a)  thirty per cent. upto three months after the due date;
(b)  fifty per cent. upto six months after the due date;
(c)  seventy per cent. upto nine months after the due date;
(d)  one hundred  per cent. upto one year after the due date:
Provided that no fine shall be levied by the Election Commission without
giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the office bearers of the political
party concerned.”.
5. In section 29C of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:–
  “(1) The treasurer of a political party or any other person authorized by the
political party in this behalf shall, in each financial year, prepare a report in
respect of the contributions received under sections 29B and 29CD.”.
6. After PART IV A, the following PART and sections thereunder shall be
inserted, namely:—
“PART IVB
NATIONAL  ELECTORAL  FUND
29CA. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the
National Electoral Fund for the purpose of public funding to the political parties and
candidates validly nominated by them for the general elections to the House of People
and Legislative Assembly of a State under the superintendence, direction and control
of Election Commission, which shall be its custodian and exercise such power as
conferred upon and perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Fund shall be administered by an Authority consisting of –
(a) the Chief Election Commissioner  –  Chairperson;
(b) one Election Commissioner to be nominated by the Chief Election
Commissioner  – Vice-Chairperson;
(c)  Finance Minister of the Union Government – ex-officio member;
(d) Leader of Opposition or the Leader of the single largest political party
in opposition in the House of People – ex-officio member;
(e) an officer of the Election Commission to be nominated by the Chief
Election Commissioner – ex-officio member;
(f) Finance Secretary  to  the Union Government – ex-officio member;
 (g) one leader of a political party in the House of People to be nominated
by the Speaker – ex officio member;
Amendment of
section 29C.
Insertion of
new Part IVB.
Constitution
of National
Electoral
Fund.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

 (h) five members of  the House of People representing the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward Classes, minorities and woman
members to be nominated by the Speaker – ex officio members; and
(i) Leader of Opposition or the Leader of the single largest political party
in opposition in the Legislative Assemblies of States and Union territories–
ex-officio members.
(3) The term of office of the ex-officio members except the ex-officio members
under clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (2) shall be two years and the term of the
members under clause (a), (b), (c) and (d) of sub-section (2) shall be five years.
(4) Every decision of the Authority shall be taken by majority.
 (5) The President may, by order, remove from office any member of the Authority
if he–
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any paid
employment; or
(c) is unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a member; or
(e) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the President,
involves moral turpitude.
29CB. (1) The Fund shall consists of contributions from any person, company
or corporation.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall also contribute
to the Fund such sums of money, as may be prescribed.
(3) No company including a foreign company which has been in existence for
less than three financial years, shall be eligible to contribute to the Fund.
(4) The aggregate of amount which may be contributed by a Company shall
not exceed seven and half per cent. of its average net profit during the preceding
financial year:
Provided that no company shall be eligible to make contribution to the Fund
unless a resolution to that effect has been passed by the Board of Directors of such
company.
(5) The Fund shall be allocated exclusively for the purpose of public funding
of political parties and candidates nominated.
29CC. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 2013 (18
of 2013), no company shall directly or indirectly contribute any amount to any political
party either as donation or subscription or payment:
(2)  If  any company directly or indirectly,–
(a) contributes any amount to any political party either as donation or
subscription or payment caused to be given by the company on its behalf or from its
account to a person who is carrying an activity which, at the time at which such
donation or subscription or payment was made, is likely to affect public support for
such political party; or
Restriction on
contribution
by the
companies.
Contribution
to the Fund.
4
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(b) makes any  payment for an advertisement in any publication either in print
media or souvenir, brochure, tract, pamphlet or broadcast either in electronic or social
media on behalf of any political party, shall be deemed to be a contribution made to a
political party.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of every company to disclose in its profit and
loss Account giving particulars of the total amount contributed to any political party
during the financial year to which that account relates.
(4) If any company contributes any amount in contravention of the provisions
of this Act, such company shall be liable to penalty which may extend upto five times
the amount so contributed and every officer of the company in default shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto six months and fine
which may extend upto five times the amount so contributed.
29CD. (1) Every political party registered under section 29A and nominating its
candidates for contesting general elections shall be entitled to receive public funding
out of the Fund.
(2) The moneys to a political party shall be credited to a separate bank account
opened for the purpose of receiving such funding.
(3) The moneys received from the Fund by a political party shall be utilized as
follows:–
(a)  rupees three lakhs for every valid nomination filed by the candidate of a
political party for contesting election to the House of People and rupees fifty thousand
for contesting election to the Legislative Assembly of a State as election cost;
(b)  rupees fifty thousand for every valid nomination filed by the candidate of
each political party for contesting election to the House of People and rupees twenty
thousand for contesting election to the Legislative Assembly of a State as
administrative cost:
Provided that every expenditure above rupees five thousand and as
received under clause (a) shall be made only through cheque or electronic
transfer by the political party.
(2) Every candidate nominated by the political party for contesting general
elections and whose nomination papers are found valid after the expiry of date of
withdrawal shall be entitled to receive public funding out of the Fund in a separate
bank account as follows–
  (a) rupees hundred per vote polled in the last general election to the
House of People or rupees twenty lakhs lumpsum whichever is higher
and rupees fifty per vote polled in the last general elections to the
Legislative Assembly of the State or rupees fifteen lakhs lumpsum whichever
is higher;
  (b)  rupees six lakhs as lumpsum for elections to the House of People and
rupees three lakhs as lumpsum for elections to Legislative Assembly if the
political party has nominated its candidates for first time:
   Provided that every expenditure above rupees one thousand as received
under clauses (a) and (b) shall be made only through cheque or electronic
transfer by the candidates.
 (3) For all payments made during election by the candidates, necessary bills
and vouchers shall be obtained in respect of such payments and any amount so
unused by the candidates after the day of counting and shall stand forfeited to the
Fund:
Political
parties and
candidates
to receive
public
funding.
5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

 Provided that the political party shall be allowed to retain the
administrative cost.
 29CE. (1) Every  political party shall maintain a statement of election expenditure
in such form and manner as may be notified by the Election Commission by order, in
respect of every constituency.
(2) The Election Commission shall before making any such order consult the
political parties.
29CF. If  any political party fails to observe the limit imposed on the election
expenses during elections to the House of People or Legislative Assembly, as the
case may be, the Election Commission shall by order, published in the Official Gazette,
impose a fine on such political party as under–
 (a) twenty per cent. of the amount spent in excess of  the ceiling for first
violation and reduction of twenty-five percentage in public funding to such political
party;
 (b) forty per cent. of the amount spent in excess of  the ceiling for second
violation and reduction of forty-five percentage in public funding to such political
party;
(c) eighty per cent. of the amount spent in excess of  the ceiling for third
violation and reduction of fifty percentage in public funding to such political party;
(d) hundred per cent. of the amount spent in excess of  the ceiling for fourth
violation and reduction of sixty percentage in public funding to such political party;
(e) two hundred percent of the amount spent in excess of  the ceiling for fifth
violation and reduction of eighty percentage in public funding to such political party;
(f) stoppage of complete public funding to such political party for two
subsequent general elections for the sixth violation; and
(g) stoppage of complete public funding to the party and its candidates
nominated for three subsequent general election for the seventh violation:
Provided that no fine shall be imposed by the Election Commission without
giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to such political party to present
its case:
Provided further that the Election Commission may for reasons to be
recorded in writing reduce the percentage of fine up to third violation but may
not waive it off completely:
Provided also that if any political party fails to remit the amount of fine
within three months, the Election Commission may levy an additional penalty
of one hundred per cent. on the amount of fine.”.
7. For section 39A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:–
“ 39A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the Election Commission shall, allocate a fair and equitable sharing of
time to political parties on the cable television network operations and other electronic
media, both public and private, in such manner, as it may deem appropriate to display
and propagate any matter in electronic form and to address public in connection with
elections.
Limitation
of election
expenses by
political
parties.
Penalties on
political
parties for
failure to
observe
limitations of
election.
Substitution of
new sections for
section 39A.
Allocation of
fair and equitable
sharing time.
6
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(2) While allocating time under sub-section (1), the Election Commission shall
take into consideration the performance of the political parties at the last general
elections.
(3) The allocation of fair and equitable sharing of time under sub-section (1)
shall be made after the publication of list of contesting candidates and shall be valid
till forty-eight hours before the hour fixed for poll for such election.
(4) The cable television network, broadcasters, service providers and electronic
media shall be paid adequate amount from the Fund for the purposes of sub-section (1).
(5) The allocation of fair and equitable sharing of time to all political parties
under sub- section (1) shall be binding on cable television operators, broadcasters,
service providers and other electronic media.
(6) The Election Commission may, for the purpose of this section, issue a code
of conduct for cable operators, broadcasters, service providers and electronic media
and every person managing or responsible for the management of the cable network
or electronic media shall abide by such code of conduct.
(7)  Any violations of the order of the Election Commission shall be punishable
under this Act with a fine—
(a) upto rupees fifty lakhs for first violation;
(b) upto rupees fifty lakhs for every subsequent violations; and
(c) a maximum upto twenty five crores, and suspension of the licences:
Provided that any fine if not paid within specified time shall attract an additional
interest of nine per cent. per annum and a penalty upto one hundred per cent.
(8) The fine recovered under sub-section (6) shall be credited to the Fund.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,-
(a) “electronic media” includes radio and any other broadcasting media notified
by the Central Government in the Official Gazette;
(b) “cable television network” and “cable operators” have the meanings
respectively assigned to them under the Cable Television Network
(Regulation) Act, 1995 (7 of 1995).
39AA. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in
force, the Election Commission shall notify subsidized rates of advertisements for
political parties on cable television networks, electronic media, newspapers and
magazines and allocate a fair and equitable quota of time for advertisement on the
cable television network and other electronic media, both public and private.
(2) Every political party contesting elections shall be eligible for availing facility
of advertisement at subsidized rates.
(3) Every broadcaster, cable television operator, service provider, other
electronic media, newspaper and magazine shall abide by the orders of the Election
Commission for the matter provided in sub-section (1).
(4) If any broadcaster, cable operator, service provider or other electronic media
violates the orders of the Election Commission such service provider shall be liable
to pay—
(i)      a fine upto rupees fifty lakhs, or three times of the amount charged in
excess, whichever is higher, for first violation;
Advertise-
ment rates
and slots of
advertise-
ment, etc.
7
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(ii)      a fine upto rupees eighty lakhs, or four times of  the amount charged in
excess, whichever is higher for second violation;
(iii)    a fine of ten times the amount charged in excess for every subsequent
violation thereafter.
(5) If any newspaper or magazine violates the orders of the Election Commission,
such newspaper or magazine shall be liable to pay—
(i)    a fine upto rupees five lakhs, or three times of the amount charged in
excess, whichever is higher for first violation;
(ii)  a fine upto rupees ten lakhs, or four times of the amount charged in
excess, whichever is higher for second violation;
(iii)  a fine of rupees ten times of the amount charged in excess for every
subsequent violation thereafter.
(6) The Election Commission shall take into consideration the grades of
broadcasters, cable operators, service providers, electronic media, newspapers and
magazines for the purposes of notifying rates as specified in sub-section(1).
 (7) Every broadcaster, cable operator, service provider, electronic media,
newspaper and magazine shall maintain such books of accounts, other documents
and electronic record, as the Election Commission may direct, for the purposes of
sub-sections (1), (2) and (3).
39AB. (1) Where the Election Commission considers it expedient so to do for
the purposes of this Act, it may, by order in writing,—
(a) call upon any cable television network, broadcaster, service  provider,
other electronic media, newspaper and magazine to furnish such information or
explanation relating to its affairs as it may require; or
(b) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the
affairs of any cable television network, broadcaster, service provider, other
electronic media, newspaper and magazine; or
(c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect the books of
accounts, other documents and electronic data of any cable television operator,
broadcaster, service provider, other electronic media, newspaper and magazine.
(2) Where any inquiry in relation to the affairs of a cable television network
operator, broadcaster, service provider, other electronic media, newspaper or magazine
has been undertaken under sub-section (1)—
(a) every cable television operator, broadcaster, service provider, other
electronic media, newspaper or magazine; or
(b) every director, manager, secretary or other officer, if the cable operator,
broadcaster, service provider, other electronic media, newspaper and magazine
is a company; or
(c) every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if the cable operator,
broadcaster, service provider, other electronic media, newspaper and magazine
is a firm; or
(d) every other person or body of persons who has had dealings in the
course of business with any of the persons mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and
(c); or
(e) every authority, shall furnish to the Authority making the inquiry, all
such books of accounts, other documents and electronic data in his custody or
Powers of the
Election
Commission to
call for
information,
conduct
investigations,
etc.
8
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

power  relating to, or having a bearing on the subject-matter of such inquiry and
also to furnish to the Authority with any such statement or information relating
thereto, as the case may be, required by him, within such time as may be specified.
(3) Every cable television operator, broadcaster and other electronic media
shall maintain such books of accounts, other documents and electronic data as may
be prescribed by the Election Commission.
(4) The officer conducting the inquiry under  sub-section (1) shall, for the
purpose of such inquiry, have the  same powers as vested in a Court under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for trying a suit in respect of the following matters,
namely –
(a)  enforcing the attendance of any person or examining him on oath;
(b)  requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c)  receiving evidence on affidavit;
(d)  issuing commissions for the examination of witness,
and any such inquiry shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within
the meaning  of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196,
of the  Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
(5) The officer conducting inquiry under sub-section (1) may, for the purposes
of sub-section (4) of  section 29B, section 29CF, sub-section (7) of section 39A or
sub-section (4) of  section 39AA,–
(a) assess the amount of fine; and
(b) issue an order for recovery of fine or penalty amount, as the case may
be:
Provided that if the person upon whom a written notice or order is served
fails to present his case even after affording a reasonable opportunity the case
shall be decided ex parte.
(6) Every appeal against the order of an officer under sub-sections (1), (2) and
(5) shall lie with a panel of two senior most officers of the Election Commission to be
constituted by the Chief Election Commissioner in such manner as may be prescribed.
(7) Every recovery of fine as assessed by the Election Commission shall  be
recovered by an officer authorized for the purpose.
(8) The authorized officer under sub-section (7) shall–
(a) recover the fine by issuing a notice to any person, who controls the
finance of the cable network operator, broadcaster, service provider, other
electronic media, newspaper or magazine or the political party to pay the sum;
(b) recover the arrear, if any, by issuing a certificate under his signature
specifying the amount of arrears  to be recovered by the recovery officer, by
initiating the proceedings to recover the amount therein from the cable network
operator, broadcaster, service provider, electronic media, newspaper, magazine
or the political party by one or more modes mentioned below:–
(i)   attachment and sale of the movable or immovable property of the
establishment, or as the case may be, the employer;
(ii)   causing arrest or detention of the employer;
9
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(iii)  appointing a receiver for the management of the movable or immovable
properties:
          Provided that the attachment, any sale of any property under this
section shall first be effected against the properties of the cable network
operator, broadcaster, service provider, electronic media, newspaper, magazine
or the political party and where such attachment and sale is insufficient for
recovering the whole of the amount of arrear specified in the certificate, the
recovery officer may take such proceedings against their property for
recovery of the whole or any part of such arrears, as he may deem appropriate.
(9) The recovery of arrears shall be proceeded with under this section as if it is
recovery of arrears of taxes under the Income-Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961).
(10) An appeal against the orders of the panel of two senior most officers of
the Election Commission under sub-section (6) shall lie to the High Court within sixty
days from such order:
Provided that the High Court shall decide the appeal within six months from
the day of issue of such notice.”.
8. In section 58 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (aa), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(ab) voting machine and V oter V erifiable Paper Audit Trail (VVPA T) is tampered
or hacked during the course of the recording of votes or upto the period of final
counting.”.
9. For section 61A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:–
“61A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the giving and
recording of votes, and counting of votes by electronic voting machines in elections,
in such manner as may be prescribed, may be adopted in such constituency or
constituencies as the Election Commission may, having regard to the circumstances
of each case, specify.
(2) No elections by electronic voting machines shall be conducted in any
constituency, if the electronic voting machines are not manufactured and maintained
with such safety measures, as may be prescribed.
(3) The election shall be conducted by ballot if the condition as laid down in
sub-section (2) is not fulfilled.
(4) The political parties shall have a right to verify and record their concerns at
every stage of elections, which shall be taken into account by the Election Commission.
Explanation.– For the purpose of this section, “electronic voting machine”
means any machine or apparatus whether operated electronically or otherwise used
for giving, recording or counting of votes, and shall include a printer and drop box for
recording votes and generating paper trails as valid proof of vote recorded, and any
reference to a ballot box or ballot paper in this Act or rules made thereunder shall,
save as otherwise provided, be construed as including a reference to such electronic
voting machine whenever such electronic voting machine is used at any election.”.
10. In section 64A of the principal Act, in the marginal heading and in  sub-
section (1), for the words “ballot papers”, the words “ballot papers or electronic
voting machine” shall be substituted.
11. In section 75A of the principal Act, in sub-section(1), after clause (iii), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
Amendment
of  section 58.
Substitution of
new section for
section 61A.
Electronic
V oting
machines at
elections.
Amendment
of section
64A.
Amendment of
section 75A.
10
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

“(iiia) conflict of interest;”.
12. In section 77 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in Explanation 1 after
paragraph (b), the following paragraph shall be inserted, namely:–
“(ba) the expenditure incurred from–
(i) public funding money;
(ii) money received by the candidate in cash or kind from political party;
(iii) money received from interest groups,
  shall be deemed to be expenditure in connection with the election incurred or
authorised by a candidate of that political party or his election agent for the purposes
of this sub-section.”.
13. After section 77 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:–
“77A. Every political party contesting elections shall submit to the Election
Commission a statement of account including the expenses made constituency-wise
within sixty days from the date of counting in such manner as may be prescribed.
14. In section 78 of the principal Act,–
(a) after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:–
“Provided that the district election officer shall forward the account of election
expenses to the Election Commission within sixty days from the date of election.”;
and
(b) after sub-section (1), the following  sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–
“(1A) The Election Commission shall, within one hundred and twenty days
from the date of election, compile the data in respect of all accounts of the
election expenses lodged by the contesting candidates and all such data
shall be uploaded on the website of Election Commission.”
15. In section 78A of the principal Act,–
(a) in sub-section (1), for the word, “Government”, the words “Election
Commission” shall be substituted; and
(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (i), the words “the Central Government in
consultation with” shall be omitted.
16. In section 78B of the principal Act,–
(a) in sub-section (1), the words, “as the Central Government may, by order,
determine in consultation with the Election Commission”, shall be omitted; and
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “the Central Government may, in consultation
with the Election Commission, impose conditions”, the words  “ it may impose
conditions” shall be substituted.
17. In section 81 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “any
elector”, the words “any elector or Election Commission suo moto upon a preliminary
inquiry” shall be substituted.
18. In section 86 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:–
Amendment
of section 77.
Insertion of
new section
77A.
Lodging of
account by the
political party.
Amendment
of section 78.
Amendment
of section
78A.
Amendment
of section
78B.
Amendment
of section 81.
Amendment
of section 86.
11
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

“Provided that if the trial is not concluded within six months, the petitioner shall
be eligible to prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court.”.
19. In section 100 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (d) after sub-
clause (iii), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–
“(iiia) by irregularities in electoral roll resulting in prevention of electors to
vote in significant numbers, or
(iiib) by expenses in excess of ceiling by the returned candidate, his election
agent, or his political party, or”.
20.  In section 116C of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
“Provided that the Supreme Court shall dispose of the appeal as early as may
be, but not later than three months from the date of entertaining such appeal shall be
substituted.”.
21. In section 123 of the principal Act,–
(a) in sub-section (3) for the words “religious symbols”, the words “religious
symbols, slogans, customs, usages and rituals”, shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (3B) –
(i) for the words “glorification”, the words “glorification, propagation or
practice of untouchability, racism, ethnicism or genecism”, shall be
substituted.
(ii) for the  Explanation, the following explanation shall be substituted;
 “Explanation.–For the purposes of this clause,—
(a) “sati” and “glorification” in relation to sati shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987 (3 of
1988);
(b) “untouchability” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to it in the
Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955  (22 of 1955);
(c) “atrocities” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to it in the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
(33 of 1989); and
(d) “racism”, “ethnicism” and “genecism” shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to it in the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, 1965;”; and
(e)  after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–
“(4A) The propagation of any corrupt practice by cable operators, broadcasters,
service providers, other electronic media, newspapers and magazine as mentioned in
clause (a) of  sub-section (2) and sub-sections (3), (3A), (3B) and (4) for the furtherance
of the prospects of election of any candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election
of any candidate or a political party:
Provided that unfair reporting of any corrupt practice by any cable operator,
broadcaster, service provider, other electronic media, newspaper and magazine shall
be deemed to be a corrupt practice; and
(d) after sub-section (8), the following sub-sections be inserted, namely:–
Amendment
of section 100.
Amendment
of section
116C.
Amendment
of section 123.
12
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

“(8A) The payment made to cable operator, broadcaster, service provider, other
electronic media, newspapers or magazine by any candidate, or his election agent, or
any other person with the consent of the candidate or his election agent or a political
party for the furtherance of the prospect, or for prejudicially affecting the election of
any candidate, or a political party:
Provided that no legal expenses received under this Act, for the purpose of
advertisement shall be deemed to be a corrupt practice committed by any cable operator,
broadcaster, service provider, other electronic media, newspaper, and magazine.
(8B) The broadcasting or publishing of any opinion or exit poll by any cable
operator, broadcaster, service provider, other electronic media, newspaper or magazine
without —
(a) expenditure details and source of funding; or
(b) credentials of the persons conducting such polls, and credentials of the
agencies involved in opinion or exit poll; or
(c) methodology applied; or
(d) sample size and its nature; or
(e) dates of sample size and survey; or
(f) margin of error, or other riders; or
(g) other criterions as notified by the Election Commission from time to time:
Provided that –
(i) no opinion poll shall be broadcasted before two months of the date of
first poll of general elections;
(ii) no exit poll shall be broadcasted from the date of voting to a period
before two days, of final counting of general elections.”.
22. In section 126 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (c) the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(ca) broadcast or publish any election matter in the form of interviews, opinions,
clippings, election symbols, themes of any candidate or their election agent or political
party by means of television, internet protocol, newspapers, magazines or any other
means,”.
23. In section 130 of the principal Act,–
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the words, “one hundred meters”, the words “one hundred and fifty
meters” shall be substituted; and
    (ii) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
 “(ea) causing public nuisance, abetting commission of an offence by way of
broadcast or publishing any matter relating to election in the form of
interviews to the public; or
 (eb) rendering, joining or continuing in an unlawful assembly;”; and
(b) in sub-section (2) for the words, “ two hundred and fifty rupees” , the words
“one thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 126.
Amendment
of section 130.
13
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

24. In section 131 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after the words “polling
station”, the words “or district election officer, observer, returning officer, assistant
returning officer, polling officer or any other officer appointed  for the conduct of
election”, shall be inserted.
25. In section 135 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words  “a
ballot paper out of a polling station”, the words “ballot paper or electronic voting
machine out of polling station or attempts to hack or tamper the electronic voting
machine” shall be substituted.
26. In section 135A of the principal Act,–
(a) in sub-section (1),–
(i) for the words, “booth capturing”, the words “booth capturing or hacking
or tampering electronic voting machine” shall be substituted; and
(ii) in the Explanation, after paragraph (d), the following paragraph shall be
inserted, namely:–
“(da) hacking or tampering the electronic voting machines by any person or
persons so as to affect the outcomes of elections fraudulently.”.
27. In section 136 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (g), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:–”
“(ga) fraudulently hacks or attempts to hack or tamper the electronic voting
machines.”.
28. In section 169 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),–
    (a)  after clause (bb), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–
“(bba) the regulation of rates of advertisements for the electronic and
print media;
     (bbb) the manner in which opinion and exit polls to be regulated;”;
(b) for clause (gg), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(gg) the procedure as to counting of votes, and of paper trails recorded
and printed by printer attached to the electronic voting machines”; and
(c) after clause (hh), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(hha) the manner and time in which the public funding to the political
parties, and candidates is given, and procedures to be followed for
maintaining account of expenditure; and
(hhb) the guidelines to be followed by the cable television network
operators, broadcasters, service providers, other electronic media,
newspapers and magazines.”.
Amendment
of section 131.
Amendment
of section 135.
Amendment
of section
135A.
Amendment
of section 136.
Amendment
of section 169.
14
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

15
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Having ratified the International Bill of Human Rights viz. Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 1948; International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 1966; International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966;
and other treaties like International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, 1965; Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, 1979, it  becomes obligatory upon the State to make
necessary changes in our electoral system and outcomes.
Signing of Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU) Declarations by India of which
she is a member on Free and Fair Elections (Paris Declaration 1994) and Universal
Declaration on Democracy (Cairo Declaration 1997) and the various resolutions
adopted by United Nations General Assembly, it becomes necessary that the best
practices and designs in the electoral system and outcomes across the world be
incorporated in our electoral system. The letter and spirit of our great Constitution
which enshrines Justice, Liberty, Equality and Fraternity assuring the dignity of
individual has made these long standing ‘comprehensive electoral reforms’ overdue.
There have been seven to eight reports from Goswami Committee (1990),
V ohra Committee (1993), Indrajit Gupta Committee (1998), 170th Law Commission
Report (1999) and 255th Report (2015), ECI proposed Electoral Reforms (2004), 2nd
Administrative Reforms Commission Report (2008) pending consideration, with
considered advice of political parties and civil society associations.
The Bill intends to bring in “electoral system, laws, methods, process and
outcomes” with an objective to realise the principle of our Parliamentary Democracy.
 The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act,
1950 with a view to:–
(a) constitute a National Electoral Fund for provisions for public funding
to political parties and candidates;
(b) ensure fair media regulation and equitable access for political parties
and candidates for advertisements relating to elections;
(c) provide for ceiling on expenditures of  political parties and third party
interest groups;
(d) empower the Election Commission to call for information and conduct
of investigations in certain matters of media regulation and imposing
fines thereto;
(e) empower the Election Commission  to impose penalty on political
parties for failure to adhere to expenditure limit during elections; and
(f) provide for political parties to lodge account with the Election
Commission regarding expenses incurred in the elections.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI;           THOL. THIRUMAA V ALA V AN
February 11, 2020
PRESIDENT’S RECOMENDA TION UNDER ARTICLE 117(3) OF THECONSTITUTION
[ Copy of DO Letter No. 11018/02/2020-Leg.II  dated 9 September, 2021 from
Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel, Minister of State for Law and Justice to the Secretary General,
Lok Sabha].

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Representation
of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2021 (Amendment of section 2, etc.) by Dr. Thol.
Thirumaavalvan,M.P., Lok Sabha, recommends the consideration of the Bill in Lok
Sabha under article 117(3) of the Constitution.
16

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill vide proposed section 29CA provides for the constitution
of a National Electoral Fund for the purpose of public funding to the political parties
and candidates validly nominated by them for the general elections to the House of
People and Legislative Assembly or a State. It also vide proposed section 29CB
provides that the Fund shall constitute contributions from the Central Government
and the State Governments. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India.  However, it is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore would be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
17

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill vide proposed section 29CA empowers the
Central Government to make rules regarding the proposed National Electoral Fund for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. It also vide proposed clause 28 empowers the
Central Government to make rules regarding regulation of rates of advertisements for
the electronic and print media.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
18

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTA TION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950
          *                       *                     *             *                  *                  *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(e) “elector” in relation to a constituency means a person whose name is entered
in the electoral roll of that constituency for the time being in force and who is not
subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 16 of the Representation
of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);
(f) “political party” means an association or a body of individual citizens of
India registered with the Election Commission as a political party under section 29A.
*                     *                     *             *                  *                  *
8. (1) A person convicted of an offence punishable under—
          *                       *                     *             *                  *                  *
(n) the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002 (15 of 2002), shall be disqualified,
where the convicted person is sentenced to—
      (i) only fine, for a period of six years from the date of such conviction;
     (ii) imprisonment, from the date of such conviction and shall continue to be
      disqualified for a further period of six years since his release.
          *                       *                     *             *                  *                  *
29B.  Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), every
political party may accept any amount of contribution voluntarily offered to it by any
person or company other than a Government company:
Provided that no political party shall be eligible to accept any contribution
from any foreign source defined under clause (e) of section 2 of the Foreign
Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976 (49 of 1976).
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 29C,—
(a) “company” means a company as defined in section 3;
(b) “Government company” means a company within the meaning of section
617; and
(c) “contribution” has the meaning assigned to it under section 293A, of the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and includes any donation or subscription offered by
any person to a political party; and
(d) “person” has the meaning assigned to it under clause (31) of section 2 of
the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), but does not include Government company,
local authority and every artificial juridical person wholly or partially funded by the
Government.
          *                       *                     *             *                  *                  *
29C. (1) The treasurer of a political party or any other person authorised by
the political party in this behalf shall, in each financial year, prepare a report in respect
of the following, namely:—
19
Interpretation
Disqualification
on conviction for
certain offences.
Political
parties entitled
to accept
contribution.
Declaration of
donation received
by the political
parties.
(a) the contribution in excess of twenty thousand rupees received by such

political party from any person in that financial year;
(b) the contribution in excess of twenty thousand rupees received by such
political party from companies other than Government companies in that financial
year.
(2) The report under sub-section (1) shall be in such form as may be prescribed.
(3) The report for a financial year under sub-section (1) shall be submitted by
the treasurer of a political party or any other person authorised by the political party
in this behalf before the due date for furnishing a return of its income of that financial
year under section 139 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), to the
Election Commission.
(4) Where the treasurer of any political party or any other person authorised
by the political party in this behalf fails to submit a report under sub-section (3) then,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), such
political party shall not be entitled to any tax relief under that Act.
          *                       *                     *             *                  *                  *
39A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the Election Commission shall, on the basis of the past performance of
a recognised political party, during elections, allocate equitable sharing of time on the
cable television network and other electronic media in such manner as may be
prescribed to display or propagate any election matter or to address public in
connection with an election.
(2) The allocation of equitable sharing of time under sub-section (1), in respect
of an election, shall be made after the publication of list of contesting candidates
under section 38 for the election and shall be valid till forty-eight hours before the
hour fixed for poll for such election.
(3) The allocation of equitable sharing of time under sub-section (1) shall be
binding on all political parties concerned.
(4) The Election commission may, for the purpose of this section, make code of
conduct for cable operators and electronic media and the cable operators and every
person managing or responsible for the management of the electronic media shall
abide by such code of conduct.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “electronic media” includes radio and any other broadcasting media notified
by the Central Government in the Official gazette;
(b) “cable television network” and “cable operator” have the meanings
respectively assigned to them under the cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act,
1995 (7 of 1995).
          *                       *                     *             *                  *                  *
58. (1) If at any election,—
          *                       *                     *             *                  *                  *
(aa) any voting machine develops a mechanical failure during the course of
Allocation of
equitable
sharing of
time.
Fresh poll in the
case of
destruction, etc.,
of ballot boxes.
20

the recording of votes; or
* * * * *
61A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules made
thereunder, the giving and recording of votes by voting machines in such manner as
may be prescribed, may be adopted in such constituency or constituencies as the
Election Commission may, having regard to the circumstances of each case, specify.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, “voting machine” means any
machine or apparatus whether operated electronically or otherwise used for giving or
recording of votes and any reference to a ballot box or ballot paper in this Act or the
rules made thereunder shall, save as otherwise provided, be construed as including a
reference to such voting machine wherever such voting machine is used at any
election.
* * * * *
64A. (1) If at any time before the counting of votes is completed any ballot
papers used at a polling station or at a place fixed for the poll are unlawfully taken out
of the custody of the returning officer or are accidentally or intentionally destroyed
or lost or are damaged or tampered with, to such an extent that the result of the poll at
that polling station or place cannot be ascertained, the returning officer shall forthwith
report the matter to the Election Commission.
* * * * *
75A. (1) Every elected candidate for a House of Parliament shall, within ninety
days from the date on which he makes and subscribes an oath or affirmation, according
to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule to the Constitution, for
taking his seat in either House of Parliament, furnish the information, relating to—
(i)   the movable and immovable property of which he, his spouse and his
dependant children are jointly or severally owners or beneficiaries;
(ii)    his liabilities to any public financial institution; and
(iii)   his liabilities to the Central Government or the State Government,
to the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the
People, as the case may be.
* * * * *
77. (1) Every candidate at an election shall, either by himself or by his election
agent, keep a separate and correct account of all expenditure in connection with the
election incurred or authorized by him or by his election agent between the date on
which he has been nominated and the date of declaration of the result thereof, both
dates inclusive.
Explanation 1.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that—
(a) the expenditure incurred by leaders of a political party on account of travel
by air or by any other means of transport for propagating programme of the political
party shall not be deemed to be the expenditure in connection with the election
incurred or authorised by a candidate of that political party or his election agent for
the purposes of this sub-section.
V oting
machines at
elections.
Destruction,
loss, etc., of
ballot papers
at the time of
counting.
Declaration of
assets and
liabilities.
Account of
election
expenses and
maximum
thereof.
21

(b) any expenditure incurred in respect of any arrangements made, facilities
provided or any other act or thing done by any person in the service of the Government
and belonging to any of the classes mentioned in clause (7) of section 123 in the
discharge or purported discharge of his official duty as mentioned in the proviso to
that clause shall not be deemed to be expenditure in connection with the election
incurred or authorised by a candidate or by his election agent for the purposes of this
sub-section.
78. (1) Every contesting candidate at an election shall, within thirty days from
the date of election of the returned candidate or, if there are more than one returned
candidate at the election and the dates of their election are different, the later of those
two dates, lodge with the 5 [district election officer] an account of his election expenses
which shall be a true copy of the account kept by him or by his election agent under
section 77.
* * * * *
78A. (1) The Government shall, at any election to be held for the purposes of
constituting the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State, supply,
free of cost, to the candidates of recognised political parties such number of copies of
the electoral roll, as finally published under the Representation of the People Act,
1950 (43 of 1950) and such other material as may be prescribed.
(2) The material referred to in sub-section (1) shall be supplied,—
(i) subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Election Commission with respect to the
reduction of the maximum expenditure which may be incurred by the candidate
under section 77; and
(ii) through such officers as may be specified by the Election Commission
who shall act in accordance with such general or special directions as may be
given by the Election Commission.
* * * * *
78B. (1) The Election Commission shall, at any time between the date of
publication of the notification calling the election for the purposes of consitituting
the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State and the date on which
the poll is to be taken, supply or cause to be supplied, such items as the Central
Government may, by order, determine in consultation with the Election Commission,
to the electors in the constituencies concerned or to the candidates set up by the
recognised political parties.
(2) Where the Election Commission supplies the items to the candidates under
sub-section (1), the Central Government may, in consultation with the Election
Commission, impose conditions with respect to the reduction of the maximum
expenditure which may be incurred by the candidate under section 77.
Explanation.—For the purposes of section 39A, this Chapter and clause (hh)
of sub-section (2) of section 169, the expression “recognised political party”, has the
meaning assigned to it in the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order,
1968.
* * * * *
Lodging of
account with
the district
election
officer.
Free supply of
copies of
electoral rolls.
Supply of
certain items
to candidates,
etc.
22

81. (1) An election petition calling in question any election may be presented
on one or more of the grounds specified in  sub-section (1) of section 100 and section
101 to the  High Court by any candidate at such election or any elector within forty-
five days from, but not earlier than the date of election of the returned candidate, or if
there are more than one returned candidate at the election and the dates of their
election are different, the later of those two dates.
Explanation.—In this sub-section, “elector” means a person who was entitled
to vote at the election to which the election petition relates, whether he has voted at
such election or not.
* * * * *
86. (1) * * * * *
(6) The trial of an election petition shall, so far as is practicable consistently
with the interests of justice in respect of the trial, be continued from day to day until
its conclusion, unless the High Court finds the adjournment of the trial beyond the
following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded.
(7) Every election petition shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and
endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial within six months from the date on
which the election petition is presented to the High Court for trial.
* * * * *
100. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) if  the High Court is of
opinion—
(a) * * * *
(d) that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a returned candidate,
has been materially affected—
(i) by the improper acceptance or any nomination, or
(ii) by any corrupt practice committed in the interests of the returned
candidate  by an agent other than his election agent, or
(iii) by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any vote or the
reception of any vote which is void, or
(iv) by any non-compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or
of this Act or of any rules or orders made under this Act,
the High Court shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be void.
* * * * *
116C. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the rules, if any, made
thereunder, every appeal shall be heard and determined by the Supreme Court as
nearly as may be in accordance with the procedure applicable to the hearing and
determination of an appeal from any final order passed by a High Court in the exercise
of its original civil jurisdiction; and all the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (5 of 1908), and the Rules of the Court (including provisions as to the furnishing
of security and the execution of any order of the Court) shall, so far as may be, apply
in relation to such appeal.
* * * * *
123. The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for the purposes of
this Act:—
Presentation
of petitions.
Trial of election
petitions.
Grounds for
declaring
election to be
void.
Procedure in
appeal.
Corrupt
practices.
23

(1) * * * * *
(3) The appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the
consent of a candidate or his election agent to vote or refrain from voting for any
person on the ground of his religion, race, caste, community or language or the use
of, or appeal to religious symbols or the use of, or appeal to, national symbols, such
as the national flag or the national emblem, for the furtherance of the prospects of the
election of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate:
Provided that no symbol allotted under this Act to a candidate shall be deemed
to be a religious symbol or a national symbol for the purposes of this clause.
* * * * *
(3B). The propagation of the practice or the commission of sati or its glorification
by a candidate or his agent or any other person with the consent of the candidate or
his election agent for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of that candidate
or for prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “sati” and “glorification” in
relation to sati shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the
Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987 (3 of 1988).
(4) The publication by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the
consent of a candidate or his election agent, of any statement of fact which is false,
and which he either believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to
the personal character or conduct of any candidate, or in relation to the candidature,
or withdrawal, of any candidate, being a statement reasonably calculated to prejudice
the prospects of that candidate’s election.
* * * * *
(8) booth capturing by a candidate or his agent or other person.
Explanation.—(1) In this section, the expression “agent” includes an election
agent, a polling agent and any person who is held to have acted as an agent in
connection with the election with the consent of the candidate.
* * * * *
126. (1) No person shall—
(a) convene, hold or attend, join or address any public meeting or procession
in connection with an election; or
(b) display to the public any election matter by means of cinematograph,
television or other similar apparatus; or
(c) propagate any election matter to the public by holding, or by arranging the
holding of, any musical concert or any theatrical performance or any other
entertainment or amusement with a view to attracting the members of the public
thereto, in any polling area during the period of forty-eight hours ending with the
fixed for the conclusion of the poll for any election in the polling area.
* * * * *
130. (1) No person shall, on the date or dates on which a poll is taken at any
polling station, commit any of the following acts within the polling station or in any
public or private place within a distance of 3 [one hundred metres] of the polling
station, namely:—
  (a) canvassing for votes; or
Prohibition of
public
meetings
during period
of forty-eight
hours ending
with hour
fixed for
conclusion of
poll.
Prohibition of
canvassing in or
near polling
station.
24

  (b) soliciting the vote of any elector; or
  (c) persuading any elector not to vote for any particular candidate; or
  (d) persuading any elector not to vote at the election; or
  (e) exhibiting any notice or sign (other than an official notice) relating to the
election.
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees.
* * * * *
131. (1) * * * * *
(3) If the presiding officer of a polling station has reason to believe that any
person is committing or has committed an offence punishable under this section, he
may direct any police officer to arrest such person, and thereupon the police officer
shall arrest him.
* * * * *
135. (1) Any person who at any election unauthorisedly takes, or attempts to
take, a ballot paper out of a polling station, or wilfully aids or abets the doing of any
such act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both.
* * * * *
135A. (1) Whoever commits an offence of booth capturing shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which  shall not be less than one year but which may
extend to three years and with fine, and where such offence is committed by a person
in the service of the Government, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to five years and with
fine.
Explanation.— For the purposes of  this sub-section and section 20B, “booth
capturing” includes, among other things, all or any of the following activities, namely:—
(a) seizure of a polling station or a place fixed for the poll by any person or
persons, making polling authorities surrender the ballot papers or voting machines
and doing of any other act which affects the orderly conduct of elections;
(b) seizure of a place for counting of votes by any person or persons, making
the counting authorities surrender the ballot papers or voting machines and the
doing of anything which affects the orderly counting of votes.
* * * * *
136.(1) A person shall be guilty of an electoral offence if at any election he—
        (a)   *              *              *              *
(g) fraudulently or without due authority, as the case may be, attempts to do
any of the foregoing acts or wilfully aids or abets the doing of any such acts.
* * * * *
169. (1) The Central Government may, after consulting the Election Commission,
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules  for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
Penalty for
disorderly
conduct in or
near polling
stations.
Removal of
ballot papers
from polling
station to be
an offence.
Offence of
booth
capturing.
Other
offences and
penalties
therefor.
Power to make
rules.
25

(bb) the manner of allocation of equitable sharing of time on the cable television
network and other electronic media;
* * * * *
(f) the procedure as to voting to be followed at elections held in accordance
with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable
vote;
* * * * *
(gg) the procedure as to counting of votes recorded by means of voting
machines;
* * * * *
(hh) the material to be supplied by the Government to the candidates of
recognised political parties at any election to be held for the purposes of constituting
the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State.
* * * * *
26

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951
—————
(Dr. Thol. Thirumaavalavan, M.P.)