41 of 1958. 
As INTRODUCED IN Lol[ SABRA ON 
Bill No. 93 oll~ 
THE SUPREME COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF 
SERVICE) AMENDMENT BILL, 1970 
A 
:BILL 
to amend the Supreme C01.Lrt Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic. 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions Short titre 
of Service) Amendment Act, 1970. and com-
mence-
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government ment. 
10 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 3 of the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) ~hlend­
Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub..section ment of 
1 section 3. (1), for clause (a), the following clause sha I be substituted, namely:-
"(a) leave on full allowances (including commuted leave on half 
allowances into leave on full allowances on medical certificate); or". 
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3). lor the words Amend 
"The maximum period of leave which may be granted", the words, ment of 
brackets, figures and letter "Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) section 5. 
IS of section 5A, the maximum period of leave which may be granted" shall 
be substituted. 

mertion 
.taew 
section 
iA. 
Commut-
ation of 
leave on 
half 
allow-
ances 
into 
leave on 
full allow-
ances. 
4. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, na,m.e~Y;-
"SA. (1) Notwithstanding ~ything contaiRed in sub-section (2) 
of section 5, a Judge may be pennitted to com~te leave on half 
allowances into lc'l-,C on f1tH allowances on medical certicate up to 5 
a maximum of three months during the whole period of his service 
as a Judge. 
(2) In computing the maximum period of leave on full allowances 
which may be granted at one time to a Judge under sub-section (3) 
of section 5, the amount of commuted leave permitted to ibim under 10 
tbis section shall not be taken into account.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Supreme Court Judges (C<mditions of Service) Act, 1956, 
when a Judge of the Supreme Court avails of leave on full allowances, 
he is entitled to full salary (equal to monthly rate of pay) for the first 
45 days and leave allowance at the rate of Rs. 2,220 per month for the 
rest ·Jf such leave. The maximum period of leave on full allowances 
which may be granted at one time is five months. Consequently, if a 
Judge is forced to take long leave for reasons of ill-health, he has to avail 
of leave on half allowances during which period he is entitled to an allow-
ance at the rate of Rs. 1,110 per month only. To give some relief in such 
cases, it is proposed to extend to t.he Judges of the Supreme Court the 
facility of commuting leave on half allowances into leave on full allow-
ances on medical certificate up to a maximum period of three mooths 
during the entire service as Judge, on the analogy of the provision for 
"commuted leave" obtaining in the case of Central Government empioyees. 
2. The Bill seeks too amend the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of 
'Service) Act, 1958 to achieve the a')'we objective. 
NEW DELHI; RAM NIWAS MIRDHA. 
'The 12th August, 1970. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDL\ 
[Copy of letter No. 19/3/69-Judl.III (iii), dated the 13th August, 1970 
from Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the Sup-
reme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill, 1970, recom-
mends the introduction and consideration of the Bill in the Lok Sabha 
under article 117 (1) and 117 (3) of the Constitution of India. 

,.. ,-., , ',rr· 
FINANCIAL MEMORANI>U~ 
, . 
Clause 4 of the Bill makes provision enabUng a Supreme Court JJ,l~e-
to co~mute leave on half allowances into leave on full allowances c>n 
medical ·certificate. up to' a maximum period of three months during the· 
whole period of his service as a Judge. 
2. The monthly rate of allowance payable to a Judge while on leave on 
half allowances is Rs. 1,110. During leave on full allowances a Judg~ is 
~titled to draw full sal~ry (~qual to monthly rate. of pay) for the first 
45 days and leave allowance at the rate of Rs. 2,220 per month for the 
rest of such leave. If commuted leave is taken in spells of less than~5 
days, the monthly allowance will be Rs. 5,000 for Chief Justice and 
Rs. 4,000 for any other Judge. Since only six months of leave on half 
allowances can be converted into leave on full allowances, the addition,al 
expenditure per Judge, other than the Chief Justice, would be Rs. 4,000 
minus Rs. 2,220, i.e., Rs. 1,780 for each rponth of commuted leave or 
Rs. 5,340 far the entire period of 3 months commuted leave. Assumi:t:lg 
that all the 12 Judges of the Supreme Court will avail of commuted 
leave, the total expenditure will be of the order of Rs. 64,080. The 
average period of service of a Supreme Court Judge being 8 years, the-
annual recurring expenditure will be about Rs. 8,000. 
3. 'I'here will be no non-recurring expenditure. 
4 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SUPREME COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF SavJc&) 
ACT, 1958 
(41 OF 1958) 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER II 
LEAVE 
3. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, leave granted to a Judge Kinds of 
may be at h· s option either- leave 
(a) leave on fun allowances; or 
• • • 
5. (1) • • • 
• • 
• • 
admia-
aibJetoa 
Jue. 
Alire-
pte 
(3) The maximum period of leave which may be granted at one time amount of 
shall be, in the case of leave on full allowances, five months and in the leave 
case of leave with allowances of allY kind, sixteen months. :::. 
· . . . . ~~ 

LOK SABHA 
It. 
BILL 
to amend the Supreme Court Judges (Caaditions of Service) Act, 1958. 
(Shri Ram NirDas Mirdh~ 
Minister of Stale in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs. ' 