\ Bill No. 92 of 1992
——

THE INFANT MILK SUBSTITUTES, FEEDING BOTTLES AND
JNFANT FOODS (REGULATION OF PRODUCTION, SUPPLY AND
DISTRIBUTION) BILL, 1992

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CLAUSES

1. Short title, extent and commencement.

2. Definitions. |

3. Certain prohibitions in relation to infant milk substitutes, feeding
bottles and infant foods.

4, Prohibition of incentives for the use or sale of infant milk
substitutes or feeding bottles.

5, Donations of infant milk substitutes or feeding bottles or equip-
ment or materials relating thereto. |

6. Information on containers and labels of infant milk substitutes
or infant foods.
7, Educational and other materials relating to feeding of infants to
contain certain particulars.
8, Health care system. |
9. Inducement to health worker for promoting use of infant milk
substitutes, etc.
10, Special provision relating to employees of person who produces,
supplies, distributes or sell infant milk substitutes, ete.
11. Standards of infant milk substitutes, feeding bottles or infant
foods.
42, Powers of entry and search.
13. Power to seize infant milk substitutes, etc., or containers
thereof.
14. Confiscation. |
15. Power to give option to pay cost in Heu of confiscation,
16, Confiscation not to interfere with other punishments. °
17. Adjudication. |
18, Giving of opportunity to the owner of the seized infant milk
substitute or feeding bottle or infant food or container thereof.
19, Appeal.
20, Penalty. ॥
21. Cognizance of offences.
22. Offences by companies.
23. Offences to be cognizable and pailable.
24, Protection of action taken in good faith.
25, Application of Act 37 of 1954 not barred.
26. Power to make rules. |


i | Bill No. 92 of 1992
——— ना...

\
| é
THE INFANT MILK SUBSTITUTES, FEEDING BOTTLES AND
% INFANT FOODS (REGULATION OF PRODUCTION, SUPPLY AND
DISTRIBUTION) BILL, 1992
a

BILL i
to provide for the regulation of production, supply and distribution
of infant milk substitutes, feeding bottles and infant foods with 4
view to the protection and promotion of beast-feeding and ensur-
ing the proper use of infant foods and. for matters connected

therewith or incidental thereto.

Bp it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:— ~
1, @) This Act may be called the Infant Milk Substitutes, Feeding
Bottles and Infant Foods (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distri-
bution) Act, 1992.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(8) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —

(a) “advertisement” includes any notice, circular. Jabel, wrapper
and other documents and also includes any visible representation or
announcement made by means of any light, sound, smoke or gas;

(b) “container” means @ ox, bottle, casket, tin, can, barrel,
case, tube, receptacle, sack, wrapper or other thing in which any

Short
title,
extent
and com-
menece-
ment.

tions.


Certain
prohibi-

relation

é 2

infant milk substitute, feeding bottle or infant food is placed
Packed for sale or distribution; \

(c) “feeding bottle” means. any bottle or receptacle ysed |
the purpose of feeding infant milk substitutes, and includes a teat and
a valve attached or capable of being attached to such bottle ०
Teceptacle;

(१) “health care system” means an institution or organisation
engaged, either directly or indirectly, in health care for mothers,
infants or pregnant women, and includes a health worker in private
Practice, but does not include a pharmacy or drug store;

(e) “health worker” means a person engaged in health care for
mothers, infants or pregnant women;

(9) “infant milk substitute” means any food being marketed or
otherwise represented as a partial or total replacement for mother’s
milk, whether or not it is suitable for such replacement;

(h) “label” means 3. display of written, marked, stamped,
Printed or graphic matter affixed to, or appearing upon, any container;

6) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act,

(2) Any reference in this Act to any other enactment or any provi-
sion thereof, shall, in Telation to an area in which such enactment or
such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corres.
Ponding Jaw or the relevant provision of the of
in force in that area,

3: No person shall—

ment, for the distribution,
or feeding bottles: or

(b) give an impression or create a belief in any manner that
feeding of infant milk substitutes is equivalent to, or better than,
mother’s milk; or i

(० take part in the Promotion of use or sale of infant milk 3
substitutes or feeding bottles or infant foods otherwise than in
accordance with the Provisions of this Act,

4. No person shall

(@) supply or distribute samples of infant milk substitutes or
feeding bottles or gifts of utensils or other articles; or

(0) contact any pregnant woman or the mother of an infant; or
(०) offer inducement of any other kind, ’

for the purpose of Promoting the use or sale of infant milk substitutes
or feeding bottles. 1


3

; Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 8, no person.
‘shall donate or distribute—

(a) infant milk substitutes or feeding bottles to any other person
except to an orphanage;

(6) any informational or educational equipment or material
relating to infant milk substitutes or feeding bottles:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the donation
or distribution, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may
pe prescribed, of such equipment or material through the health care
system. 4

6. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Prevention ‘of Food
Adulteration Act, 1954 and the rules made thereunder, no person shall
“produce, supply or distribute any infant milk substitute or infant food

unless every container thereof or any label affixed thereto indicates in
5 a clear, conspicuous and in an easily readable and understandable
manner, the words “important notice” in capital letters in such language
‘as may be prescribed and indicating thereunder — the following parti-
culars in the same language, namely:—

(a) a statement “mother’s milk is best for your baby” in capital
letters;

(b) a statement that infant milk substitute or infant food should
be used only on the advice of a health worker as to the need for its
use and the proper method of its use; i

(c) a warning that infant milk substitute or infant food is not
the sole source of nourishment of an infant;

(d) the instructions for its appropriate preparation. and a warn-
ing against the health hazards of its inappropriate preparation;
(e) the ingredients used;

(f) the composition or analysis;

(9) the storage conditions required;

(७) the batch number, date of its manufacture and the date
before which it is to be consumed, taking into account the climatic
and storage conditions of the country;

i

(0) such other particulars as may be prescribed.

9 (2) No container or Jabel referred to in sub-section (1) relating to
infant milk substitute shall—

(a) have pictures of an infant or a woman or both; or
(b) have pictures or other graphic material or phrases designed
to inerease the saleability of infant milk substitute; or

(c) use on it the word “humanised” or “maternalised” or any
other similar word; or
(7) bear on it such other particulars as may be prescribed.

Donations
of infant
mill
substi-
tutes or
feeding
bottles or
equip-
ment or
materials
relating
thereto.

Informa-
tion on
contai-
ners and
labels of
infant
milk
substi-
tutes or
infant


Baduca-
tional and
other
materials
relating
to feeding
of infants
to contain
certain

Health

system.

+ se

. 7. (1) Every educational or other material, whether audio or vi:
dealing with pre-natal or post-natal care or with the feeding of an i t
and intended to reach pregnant women or mothers of infants shall in-
clude clear information relating to— i

(०) the benefits and superiority of breast-feeding;
(9) the preparation for, and the continuance of, breast-feeding;

(©) the harmful effects on breast-feeding due to the partial
adoption of bottle feeding:

(d) the difficulties in reverting to breast-feeding of infants after
a period of feeding by infant milk substitute;

(०) the financial and social implications in making use of infant
milk substitutes and feeding bottles;

(f) the health hazards of improper use of infant milk substitutes
and feeding bottles; 4

(g) such other matters as may be prescribed,

(2) No material referred to in sub-section (1) shall be utilised to
Promote the use or sale of infant milk substitutes or feeding bottles:

8. (1) No person shall use any health care system for the display of
placards or posters relating to, or for the distribution of, materials for
the purpose of promoting the use or sale of infant milk substitutes or
feeding bottles or infant foods: |

Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to—

(०) the donation or distribution of informational or educational |
equipment or material made in accordance with the proviso to clause:
(b) of section 5; and 2:

(b) the dissemination of information to a health worker about
the scientific and factual matters relating to the use of infant milk
substitutes or feeding bottles or infant foods along with the infor-
mation specified in sub-section (1) of section 7.

(2) No person who produces, supplies, distributes or sells infant
mill substitutes or feeding hottles or infant foods shall make any pay
ment to sny person who works in the health care system for the purpose
of promoting the use or sale of such substitutes or bottles or foods.

(3) No person, other than a health worker, shal] demonstrate feeding ;
with infant milk substitutes or infant foods to a mother of an infant
or to any member of her family and such health worker shall also
clearly explain to such mother or such other member the hazards of
improper use of infant milk substitutes or feeding bottles or infant foods,

(4) No person, other than an institution or organisation, engaged
in health care for mothers, infants or pregnant women, shall distribute 40
infant milk substitutes or feeding bottles to a mother who cannot resort —
to breast-feeding and who cannot afford to purchase infant milk sub-
stitutes or feeding bottles,

(5) An orphanage may purchase infant milk substitutes or feeding —
Lottles at a price lower than their sale price for the purpose of utilising 4:
them in the said orphanage: i


5.
the purposes of this sub-section such purchases

181] not amount to an inducement for promoting the use or sale of
infant milk substitutes or feeding bottles,

9. (1) No person who produces, supplies, distributes or sells infant
milk substitutes or feeding bottles or infant foods shall offer or give,
‘directly or indirectly, any financial inducements or gifts to a health
worker or to any member of his family for the purpose of promoting the
use of such substitutes or bottles or foods.

(2) Where such person makes any contribution to, or incurs any
lexpenditure on, a health worker, either directly or indirectly, such
_ person and such health worker shall disclose the same to the institution
or organisation to which such health worker is attached.

" 10. (1) No person who produces, supplies, distributes or sells infant

_ milk substitutes or feeding bottles or infant foods shall fix the remunera-

| tion of any of his employees or give any commission to such employees

"on the basis of the volume of sale of such substitutes or bottles or foods
made by such employees.

(2) The employees of such person shall not perform any function
_ which relates to educating a pregnant woman or mother of an infant on
pre-natal or post-natal care of the infant.

वा. (1) No person shall sell or otherwise distribute any infant milk
substitute or infant food unless it conforms to the standards, specified
for such substitute or food under the Prevention of Food Adulteration
" Act, 1954, and the rules made thereunder and the container thereof has the
25 relevant Standard Mark specified by the Bureau of Indian Standards
established under section 3 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986
to indicate that the infant milk substitute or intant food conforms to such
standards.
.. Provided that where no standards have been specified for any infant
30 milk substitute or infant food under the Prevention of Food Adulteration
Act, 1954, no person shall sell or otherwise distribute such substitute
or food unless he has obtained the approval of the Central Government in
relation to such substitute or food and the label affixed to the container
thereof under the rules made under that Act.

35 (2) No person shall sell or otherwise distribute any feeding bottle
unless it conforms to the Standard Mark specified by the Bureau of
Indian Standards referred to in sub-section (1) for feeding bottles and
such mark is affixed on its container.

12. (1) Any food inspector appointed under section 9 of the Preven-
40 tion of Food Adulteration A'ct, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the food
inspector) or any officer not below the rank of a Class I officer _ autho-
tised in this behalf by the State Government (hereinafter referred to as
the authorised officer) may, if he has any reason to believe that any
provision of section 6 or section 11 has been or is being contravened,
45 enter and search at any reasonable time any factory, building, business

provision
relating
to emplo-
yees of
person
who pro-
duces,
supplies,
distri-
butes or
sells
infant
milk
substi-
tutes,
ete.

Stan-
dards of
infant
mille
substi-
tutes,
feeding
bottles or
infant
foods,

Powers
of entry
and

search.


Power to
seize
infant
milk
substi_

tutes, ete.

‘or con-
tainers
thereof,

Confis-
cation,

Power to
give
option

to pay

lieu of
confis-
cation,

Confis-
cation
not to
interfere
with
other
Punish.
ments,
Adjudi«

cation,

6

premises or any other place where any trade or commerce in infant milk
substitutes or feeding bottles or infant foods is carried on or such sub-
stitutes or bottles or foods and produced, supplied or distributed
(2) The provision of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating
to searches and seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search
or seiztre made under this Act, i 1
13. (1) If any food inspector or authorised officer has reason to bes
lieve that in respect of any infant milk substitute or feeding bottle or
intant food or container thereof, the provisions of this Act haye heen or are
being contravened, he may seize such substitute or bottle or food or con-
tainer, 4
(2) No such substitute or food or bottle or container shall be retained
by any food inspector or authorised officer for a period exceeding ninety
days from the date of its seizure unless the approval of the District Judge, 5
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such seizure has been made,
has been obtained for such retention. -
34. Any infant milk substitute or feeding bottle or infant food or
container thereof, in respect of which any provision of this Act has been
or is being contravened, shall be liable to confiscation:

Provided that where it is established to the satisfaction of the court 20
adjudging the confiscation that the person in whose possession, power
or control any such substitute or bottle or food or container is found is
not responsible for the contravention of the provisions of this Act, the
court may, instead of making an order for the confiscation of such sub-
stitute or bottle or food or container, make such other order authorised 2819
by this Act against the person guilty of the breach of the provisions of
this Act as it may think fit.

45. (1) Whenever any confiscation is authorised by this Act, the
court adjudging it may, subject to such conditions 88 may be specified
in the order adjudging the confiscation, give to the owner thereof an
option to pay in lieu of confiscation such cost not exceeding the value
of the infant mill substitute or feeding bottle or infant food or container
thereof in respect of which the confiscation is authorised as the court
thinks fit.

(2) On payment of the cost ordered by the court the seized infant 35
milk substitute or feeding bottle or infant food or container shall be
feturned to the person from whom it was seized on the condition that
such person shall, before making any distribution, sale or supply of such
substitute or bottle or food or container, give effect to the provisions of
this Act.

16. No confiscation made or cost ordered to be paid under this Act
shall prevent the infliction of any punishment to which the person.
affected thereby is liable under the provisions of this Act or under any
other law.

17. Any confiscation may be adjudged or costs may be ordered to be 45.1
paid— |
(@) without any limit, by the principal civil court of original
jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such confis-
cation has been made or costs have been ordered to be paid, as the
case may be; "50


aon
[ 1

(b) subject to such limits as may be specified by the Central
Government in this behalf, by such other court, not below a civil
court having pecuniary jurisdiction exceeding five thousand rupees,
as the Ceniral Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, authorise in this behalf.

48, (1) No order adjudicating confiscation ot directing payment of
“costs shall be mado unless the owner of the infant mille substitute or
eding bottle or infant food or container thereof has been given a notice
writing informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to con-
10 ascate such substitute or bottle or food or container and giving him a res-
sonable opportunity of making a representation in writing, within such
‘reasonable time as may be specified in the notice, against the confiscation
‘and if he so desires, of being heard in the matter:

Provided that where no such notice is given within a period of
15 ninety days from the date of the seizure of the infant milk substitute or
feeding bottle or infant food or container thereof, such substitute or
‘bottle or food or container shall be returned after the expiry of, that
‘period to the person from whose possession it was seized.

(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall, so far as may be, apply to
every proceeding referred to in sub-section (1).

७ 19. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the court adjudica-
ting a confiscation or ordering the payment of costs may prefer an ap-
peal to the court to which an appeal lies from the decision of such
Scourt. | x

(2) The appellate court may, after giving the appellant an opportu-
nity of being heard, pass such order as if thinks Ait confirming, modifying
or revising the decision or order appealed against or may send back the
ease with such directions as it may think fit for a fresh decision or ad-
30 judication, as the case may be, after taking additional evidence if neces-
sary:

Provided that an order enhancing any fine in lieu of confiscation or
for confiscating goods of greater value shall not be made under this
section unless the appellant “has had an opportunity of making a re-
presentation and if he so desires of being heard in his defence.

(8) No further appeal shal] lie against. the order of the court made
‘under sub-section (2).

20. (1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section
3,4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 or sub-section (2) of section 11 shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.

(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 6 or sub-
section (1) of section 1! shall be punishable with imprisonment for 3
term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to
5 three years and with fine which shall not be jess than two thousand

Tupeesi |

Giving
of r
opportumity,
to the
owner

of the
seized
infant

milk
substi-

tute or
feeding
bottle

or

infant

food or
container
thereof.

2५:

Appeal.

Penalty


Cogniz-
ance of
offences.

Offences

by com-
panies.

8 = f

Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons |
be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than three months but which may extend

to two years and with fine which shall not be less than one thousand
rupees,

21, (1) Save as otherwise provided in section 173 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, no court shall take cognizance of any offence
Punishable under this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by—

(०) 8 person authorised in this behalf under sub-section (1) of
section 20 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954: or

(0) an officer not below the rank of a Class I officer authorised
in this behalf, by general or special order, by the Government; or

(०) a representative of such voluntary organisation engaged in
the field of child welfare and development and child nutrition as
the Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, au- 1,
thorise in this behalf,

(2) Where a complaint has been made by a representative of the
voluntary organisation authorised under clause (८) of sub-section (1)
and the court has issued a summons or, as the case may be, a warrant
under sub-section (1) of section 204 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, the Assistant Public Prosecutor for that court shall take charge of
the case and conduct the prosecution.

22, (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 2:
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to

be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 30
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence,

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where —
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it —
is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or con. 35
nivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director,
manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that

offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 1
accordingly, हे

Explanation—For the purposes of this section —

(०) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or
other association of individuals; and

(०) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a

partner in the 45
firm,


g 9
23. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973, an offence punishable under this Act shall be,—
(a) bailable;
(७) cognizable.
24, No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against
‘the Central Govelmment or any State Government or any officer of the

Central Government or of any State Government for anything which
js in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.

25. The provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be
in addit:on to, and not in derogation of, the Prevention of Food Adultera-
ion Act, 1954, or the rules made thereunder.

26. (1) The Central Government may, by notification jn the Official
“Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.

| (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
IS foxego:ng power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following

matters, namely: —

(a) the conditions and restrictions subject to which educational
equipment and other material may be donated or distributed under
the proviso to clause (b) of section 5;

(0) the language in which the notice and other particulars
shall be indicated under sub-section (1) of section 6;

(०) the particulars which are to be indicated under clause (i) of
sub-section (1) of section 6; |

(8) the particulars which a container or label shall not bear
under clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 6;

(० the matters to be included in the information which reaches
pregnant women or mothers of infants under clause (g) of sub-
section (1) of section 7; f

(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. {

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
jn two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
ion immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
oth Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
reafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,
88 the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annul-
ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously

done under that rule. पे #

Offences
न
cogniza-

bailable.

Protect-
ion of
action
taken

in good
faith.

Applica-
tion of
Act 37
of 1954
not
barred.

Power to
make
vules,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Every child has a right to be adequately nourished as a m
attaining and maintaining health. Infant malnutrition is a major ¢on
cutory cause of high incidence of infant mortality and physical
mental handicaps. The health of infants and young children cannot
isolated from the health and nutrition of women. The mother and h
infant form a biological unit. Breast-feeding is an integral part of 1
reproductive process. It is the natural and ideal way of feeding the in
and provides a unique biological and emotional basis for healthy
development. The anti-infective properties of mother's milk protect i
against diseases. The effect of bireast-feeding on child spacing, on
health and well-being of the mother, on family health and on nai
economy is well-recognised, Breast-feeding is, therefore, a key
of self-reliance and primary health care. It is, therefore, essenti
protect and promote breast-feeding and to protect pregnant women al
nursing mothers from any influence that could disrupt it. 7

Inappropriate feeding practices lead to infantmainutrition,
bidity ana mortality in our children. Promotion of infant milk subs
and related products like feeding bottles and teats do constitute a he

“hazard. Promotion of infant milk substitutes and related products
been more extensive and pervasive, than the dissemination of informa
concerning the advantages of mother’s milk and breast-feeding and ‘01
tributes to decline in breast-feeding. In the absence of strong inter
tions designed to protect, promote and support breast-feeding
decline can assume dangerous proportions. subjecting millions of i
to greater risks of infections, malnutrition and death.

3. In the light of the foregoing consideration’ and in view of
vulnerability of infants in the early months of life to the aforesaid
and the risks involved in inappropriate feeding practices including
unnecessury and improper use of infant milk substitutes, feeding a
sories und infant foods, it has become necessary to regulate the mm
ing’of such products. For the proper nutrition and health of the w
‘children, the World Health Assembly adopted in May, 1981 an Inter
tional Code for Marketing of Breast Milk Substitutes. The Gove!
of India recognised this Code and adopted the “Indian National Code
Protection and Promotion of Breast-Feeding” (hereinafter referr
as the Code) in December, 1983. ५

. 4, The Code envisages that there shal] be no advertising or ५
form of sales promotion of infant milk substitutes, feeding bottles:
teats. The Code, in accordance, with this general principle enjoins thi
health authorities to encourage and protect breast-feeding and
prescribes several measures to eontrol the marketing and promotion of
infant milk substitutes, feeding bottles, teats and infant foods.

10


. : il

5, The Bill proposes to give effect to the principles and aims of the
ee , it prohibits advertisements of infant milk substitutes

‘and feeding bottles and also 97९8९ 1568 measures to ensure that in the
marketing of infant milk substitutes no impression is given that feeding
or better than, breast-feeding. The

of these products is equivalent to,
d quality control of infant millx sub-

“provisions relating to labelling an

stitutes, feeding bottles and infant foods are proposed to be implemented
through the concerned Departments in the State Governments and
Union territory administrations under the overall control of the Minis-
try of Health and Family Welfare. Contravention of the provisions of
the Bill will be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees, or with both. However, the contravention of certain provisions
of the Bill relating to Jabelling or quality control of ‘such substitutes or
“foods will be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
je 1653 than six months but which may extend to three years and with
fine which shall not pe less than two thousand rupees.

6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects:

New DELHI; ARJUN SINGH.

4 The 27th April, 1992.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM a

“
४ Clause 12 of the Bill provides that any food inspector appo
under section 9 of the Prevention of Food Adultetration Act, 1954, or
officer not below the rank ofa Class 1 officer authorised by the State
ernment may, if he has any reason to believe that any provision of.
6 or clause 11, has been or is being contravened, enter and search
reasonable time any factory, building, business premises, ete.,
such contravention has been or is being done.

2. Clause 13 of the Bill empowelrs any food inspector or the offi

*: authorised to seize any infant milk substitute or feeding bottle or i
© f6od. or container thereof in respect of which the provisions of #
have been er are being contravened and. retain it for a peri

' exceeding ‘ninety days from the date of the seizure under that cl:

8. The implementation of the above provisions of the Bill will r
require any additional staff by the Central Government, since the
provisions will be implemented through the machinery ayailable in tl

“ concerned States and Union territories and dealing with the administ
tion of the Prevention of Food Adultelation Act, 1954.

4. The provisions of the Bill, therefore, do not involve any additi
expenditure of a recurring or non-recurring nature.

12


REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules, by notification in the Official Gazette, to carry out the provisions
of the proposed legislation. The rules may be made, inter clia, to pres-
cribe the conditions and restrictions subject to nich educational
equipment and other material relating to infant milk substitute of
infant food may be donated or distributed, the language in which the
notice and other particulars shall be indicated on a container of infant
milk substitute or any label affixed thereto, the particulars which should
be indicated on such container or the label affixed thereto, the particu-

Jars which such container or Jabel shall not bear and the matters to be
included in the information which reaches pregnant women or mothers

ef infants.

made under clause

n respect of which rules may be
delegation of

atters of detail or procedure. The
therefore, of a normal character.

© 2, The matters 1
96 are essentially mi
legislative power is,

13



cgi? LOK SABHA ; | q

A
BILL

to provide for the regulation of production, supply and distril
of infant milk substitutes, feeding bottles and infant foods with
view to the protection and promotion of breast-feeding and
ing the proper use of infant foods and for matters
therewith or incidental thereto,