THE SPECIFIC RELIEF BILL, 1960 
(To BE INTRODUCBD IN LoIC SABRA) 

THE SPECIFIC RELIEF BILL, 1960 
CLAUSIlS 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
PART I 
PltEt.IMmAfty 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Savings. 
4. Specific relief to be granted only for enforcing individual civil 
!i.ghts and not for enforeing penal laws. 
PART IT 
SPECIFIC RELIEF 
CHAPl'ER I 
RECOVDING POSSESSION OF PROPERTY' 
5. Recovl'!'lj" of specific immovable property. 
6. Recovery of specific movable property. " 
7. Liability of 'person in possession, not as owner, to deliver to 
persons entitled to immediate possession. 
CHAPI'ER IT 
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS 
•. Defences respecting suits for relief based on contract. 
CONTRACTS WHICH CAN BE SPECIFICALLY ENFORCED 
9. Cases in which specific performance of contract enforceable. 
10. Cases in which specific performance of contracts connected 
with tnlSts enforceable. 
11. Specific performance of part of contract. 
12. Rights of purchaser or lessee against person with no title or 
imperfect title. 
CONTRACTS WHICH CANNOT BE SPECIFICALLY BNI'ORCBD 
13. Contracts not specifically enforceable. 
1582 (B) LS-l ) 

ii 
PsRsONS FOR OR AGAINST WHOM CONTRACTS MAY .1: SPBCD'ICALLY 
ENFORCED 
CLAUSES 
14. Who may dbtaifl speci1ic-perfOl'lltlttlce. 
15. Personal bars to relief. 
16. Contract to sell or let property by one wno has no title, not 
specifically enforceable. 
17. Non-enforcement except rih variation. 
18. Relief against parties and p8l'aoas claiming under them by 
subsequent title. 
DISCRE'IlON ANI) POWERS OF COVRT 
19. Discretion as to decreeing specific performance. 
20. Power to award compensation in certain cases. 
'!t. PdW'e'l' to gtaI'it 'teltef fO't ~siOfl, pattlttbn, 1"!ftmd of 
earnest money, etc. 
22. Liquidation of damages Not • ~&r to specific performance. 
23. Bar of suit for compeaatten fM b~ach after dismissal of 8uit 
for specific perfolmamee. 
EJrPORCEMENT OF AWAIIDIi .um DJaKTlOHS TOUBCOTI!i &B'l'TI.&1IIEN'I 
24~ Application of preeediftg sections to eertlatn awards awd tellla-
me~ directioRs to ~x.ecute settlemema. 
CHAPTER III 
REcTIFICATION OF INSTRUMENTS 
25. When instrument may be rectified. 
CHAPTER IV 
RuclSSIO)l' OP CONTRACTS 
28. When l'IIIIdBII'iDn may be adjudged or retbed. 
27. Rescission in certain circumstances of contracts for the sale 
or lease of mlItlcwable property, th~ ~elftc per10rmanee 
of whiea has been decreed. . 
28. Alternative prayer for rescission in suit for specific perfor-
maJ'Ift. 
29. Court may require 1Jftties reseinding to- do equtty. 

iii 
CHAPTER V 
CANCELLATION 01' INSTRUMENTI 
CLAUSM ; 
30. When oancellation may be ordered. 
31. What instruments may be partially cancelled. 
32. Power to require benefit to be restored or compensation to 
be made when instrument is cancelled or is successfully 
resisted as being void or voidable. 
CHAPI'ER VI 
DECLARATORY DECREES 
33. Discretion of court as to declaration of status or right. 
34. E1feet of declaration. 
PART III 
PREvENTIVE RELIEF 
CHAPTER VII 
INJ'UNCTIONS GENERALLY 
35. Preventive relief how granted. 
36. Temporary end perpetual inj unctions. 
CHAPTER VIII 
PERPETUAL INJUNCTIONS 
37. Perpetual injunction when granted. 
38. Mandatory injunctions. 
39. Damages in lieu of, or in addition to, injunction. 
40. Injunction when refused. 
41. Injunction to perform negative agreement. 
42. Amendment of Act 10 of 1940. 
43. Repeal. 

3 of I8h. 
BID No. ,a of Itfe 
T1lli SPECIFIC RELIEF BILL, I¢o 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to define and amend the law relating to certain kinds of specijU! 
relief. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Repub-
Hc: of India as follows:-
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Specific Relief Act, 1960. Short title. 
10 
IS 
20 
. extent IDd (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu CODlDlCQce-
and Kashmir. meat. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Ddlnitfonl. 
(a) "obligation" includes every duty enforceable by law; 
(b) "settlement" means an instrument (other than a will 
or codicil as defined by the Indian Succession Act, 1925) 
whereby the destination or devolution of successive interests in 
movable or immovable property is disposed of or is agreed to 
be disposed of; 
(c) Cltrust" has the same meaning as in section 3 of ~e 
Indian Trusts Act, 1882, end includes an obligation in the nature 
of a trust within the meaning of Chapter IX of that Act; 
(d) "trustee" includes every person holding property in 
trust; 
(e) all other words and expressions used herein but not 
deftned, and defined in the Indian Contract Act, 1872, have, the 
meaninas respectively assigned to them in that Act. . . 

1 
3. Except as otherwise provided herein, nothing in this Act shall 
be deemed-
(a) to deprive any person of any right. to relief, other than 
specific performance, which he may have under any contractj or 
(b) to affect the operatkm of the Indian Registration Act, 5 
1908, on documents. 
Ipecific: ~ 4. Specific relief can be 2ranted only for the purpose of enforc-
lief to be • • d··d 1 . il . ht -d t f h f f armted only mg m lVl ua CIV rIg s an no or t e mere purpose 0 en orc-
for enforcing in~ a .......... 1 .law. 
iDdividual - I:'~ 
civil rights 
ad DOt for 
enforclq 
peullawa. 
PART II 10 
SPECIFIC RELIEF 
CHAPTElt I 
RBcOYl!llt!)fOPOSUSSIOl( 011' PROl'lE1U'V 
Recovery of 5. A person entitled to the possession af specific immovable pro-
specific im- perty may recover it in the manner provided by the Code of Civil IS movableJ property. Procedure, 1908. 
Re~17 ... f 6. A person entitled to the possession of specific movable pro-
:'~e,.... perty -may :recover it iJl the manRe'r provided by the Code of 'Civil 
perty. Procedure, 1908. 
Explanation I.-A trustee may sue under this section for the 30 
possession of movable property to the beneficial interest in which 
the person for whom he is trustee is entitled. 
E%pbcmation 2.-A special or temporary right to the present pos-
selllioD of movable property is sufficient to suf,lpCH't 'a luit \Wlder this 
section. 25 
Liability of 7. Any person having the possession or control of a particular 
::~~i~ll. article of mavable property, of which he is not the owner, Ulay be 
aot ",owner. compelled specifically to deliver it to the person entitled to its 
to deliver to immediate possession, in any of the following cases:-persons 
~~a: (a) when the thing claimed is held by the .defendant as the 30 
pellenion. agent or trustee of the plaintiff; 
(b) when compensation in money would not affox'd the 
plaintiff adequate relief for the loss of the thing claimed; 
"c) when it would be extremely difficult to ascertain the 
actual damaaecaused by its lOll; 3' 

3 
~ wilen the JIOSNIIJi<m of'theth!ng claimed bu '8tMIJ 
~ 1Ira~ 'from the' plaintiff. 
Explanation.-Unless and until the contrary is proved, the court 
shall, in respect of any article of movable property claimed under 
S 'dsuse tot OT 'clause (c) of this section, presmne--
(a) that compensation in money would not afford thp. plain-
tiff adequate relief for the loss of the thing claimed, or, 8&. the 
case may be; 
(b) that it would be extremely difficult to ascertaia the 
10 actual damage caused by its loss. 
CHAPTER II 
• SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS 
t. Except as othel'wise provided herein, where any relief I. Defences 
claimed _der this Chapter in respect of a contract, the person agaiMt r~~ing 
IS whom the relief is claimed may plead by way of defence any ground ::li:f b~aed 
whi<m is available to him under any law relating to contracts. on contract. 
COlf'l'llACTS wmCH CAN BE SPECIFICALLY ENFORCED 
.. ElGCept as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the specific per- Casel in 
formance of any contract may, in the discretion of the court. be flwhichtispeci-cper orm-
20 enforced- ance of 
contract 
enforceable. 
(a.) when there exists no standard for ascertaiDing the 
actaal damage caused by the non-performance of the act agreed 
to IDe done; or 
(b) when the act agreed to be done is such that eompensa-
loS tron in money for iti non-performance would not afford adequate 
relief. 
35 
J::rplO1lation.-Unless and until the contrary is p1'O'V1I!Cl the tourt 
.ull pr8lGJlle-
(i) that the breach of a contract 10 transfer immovable 
~ty oannot be adequately relieved by compensation in 
meney; and 
{U) that the ·breach of a contract to t{ansfer monble pro-
perty can be 10 relieved except in the follOWing cases:-
(a) where the property is not an ordinary article of 
cmmnerce, or ts of special vahle c:Jr Interest to the plaintiff, 
cr C!Oaust. of gGods whkh are not easily obtainable in 1I1e 
martfet; 
(b) where the property is held by the defendallt .. 
the agent or trustee of the plafntift. 

, 4 
C~ in .. 18. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, speciftc per-
:~~~;!:~- formanee of 6 contract may, in the discretion of the court, be 
anee or enforced when the act agreed to be done is in the performance 
contracts h 11 I f connected W 0 Y or part y 0 a trust. 
with truat. 
enforceable. (2) A contract made by a trustee in excess of his powers or in S 
breach of trust cannot be specifically enforced. 
Specific 11. (1) Except as otherwise hereinafter provided in this section, performance of part of the court shall not direct the specific performance of a part of a 
coatract. contract. 
(2) Where a party to a contract is unable to perform the whole 10 
of his part at it, but the part which must be left unperformed bears 
only a small proportion to the whole in value and admits of com-
pensation in money, the court may, at the suit of either party, 
direct the specific performance ctf so much of the contract as can b. 
performed, and award compensation in money for the deficiency. IS 
(3) Where a party to a contract is unable to perform the whole 
of his part of it, and the part which must be left unperfu'rmed 
either-
(a) forms a considerable part of the whole, though admit-
ting of compensation in money; or 20 
(b) does not admit of compensation in money; 
he is not entitled to obtain a decree for specific performance; but 
the court may, at the suit of the other party, dlirect the party in 
default to perform specifically so much of his part of the contract 
as he can perform, if the other party- ~S 
(i) in a case falling under clause (a), pays or has paid the 
agreed consideration for the whole of the contract reduced by 
the Cdnsideration for the part which must be left unperformed 
and in a case falling under clause (b), the consideration for the 
whole of the contract without any abatement; and 30 
(ii) in either case, relinquishes all claims to the performance 
of the remaining part of the contract and all right to compen-
sation, either for the deficiency or for the loss or damage sus-
tained by him through the default of the defendant. 
(4) When a part of a contract which, taken by itself, can and 35 
ought to be specifically performed, stands on a separate and indepen-
dent footing from another part of the same contract which cannot 
or ought riot to be specifically performed, the court may direct 
speclftc performance of the former part. 

; 
Eipicncmon..-For the purposes(1fthll secttoftj .. 1Wty~to,*, aoa-' 
tract shall be deemed to be unabletoperfotm the'whole 'Of, his part 
of it if a portion of its subject-matter exiisting at the date of'the---
contract has ceased to exist at the time of its performance. 
S 12. (1) Where a person contracts to sell or let certain immov- Rigbu of 
able property having no title or only an imperfect title, the ~ur- r:.~~~ 
chaser or lessee (subject to the other provisions of this chapter), ~Il with 
has the following rights, namely: - t;:~r 
tltJC. 
(a) if the vendor fir lessor has subsequently to the contraet' 
10 acquired any interest in the property, the purchaser or leSIee' ;, 
may compel him to make good the contract out of such interest;~" ,,' 
(b) where the concurrence of other persons ; is i nemsil!1 I ... "? 
for validating the title, and they are bound toconcur';at"the'lI,r. 
request ctf the vendor or lessor, the purchaser '01' lessee' lna'Y 'rl"'" 
IS compel him to procure such concurrence, and when a convey-
ance by other persons is riecessary' to' validate the title and they , 
are bound to convey at the request of the vendor or lessor, the 
purchaser or lessee may compel him to procure such convey-
ance; 
20 
30 
(c) where the vendor professes to' sen urtencutn beted pro-
perty, but the property is mortgage8 'foran' amount- not'-exceed-
ing the purchase money and the vendor has in: fact only a right 
to redeem it, the purchaser may compel him to redeem the 
mOrtgage and to obtaill a valid discharge, and, where necessary, 
also a 'conveyance from the mortgagee; 
(d) where the vendor or lessor sues for specific" perform-
ance of the contract and the suit is dismissed on the ground of 
his absence of title or imperfect title, the defendant has a right to 
a return of his deposit, if any, with interest 'thereon; to 'his costs 
of the suit, and toa lien for such deposit, interest ahd, costs, on 
the interest, if any. of -the vendor or lessor in theptopettY Wbich 
is the subject-matter of the contract. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (JJ' shallallO' apply, as far .. 
may be, to contracts for the sale or hire of movable property. 
35 CONTRACTS WHICH CANNOT BI: sPECIPICALLY EKFOftCll) , I ',' 
13. (1) The following contracts cannot be specificall,.+'ertfOreea;~=_ 
namely: _ cally en-forceable. 
(a) a contract for the non-performance of which compen-
satlon--in'money is an adequate relief; '. 
40 (b) a ~traet"-wh1ch' tuhs int? such ~ute orn.umerous 
details or which laSO dependent on the personal qualifications 
1682 (B) ~ 

6 
ftr volition of the parties, or otherwise from its nature is such, 
that the court cannot enforce specific performance of its mate-
rial term .. : 
(c) a contract which is in its nature determinable; 
(d) a contract the performance of which involves the per- S 
formance of a continuous duty which the court cannot super-
vise. 
\2) Save as provided by the Arbitration Act, 1940, no contract 
to refer present or future differences to arbitration shall be speci1i-
cally enforced; but if any person who has made such e contract 10 
(other than an arbitration agreement to which the provisions of the 
said Act apply) and has refused to perform it, sues in respect of any 
subject which he has contracted to refer, the existence of such 
contract shall bar the suit. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause, (a) or clause IS 
(c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1), the court may enfcxrce specific 
performance in the following cases:-
(a) where the suit is for the enforcement of a contract,-
(i) to execute a mortgage or furnish any other security 
for secwing the repayment 'Of any loan which the borrower 20 
is willing to repay at once: 
~rovided that where only a part cf the loan has been 
advanced the lender is willing to advance the remaining 
pan of the loan in terms of the con~ract;' or 
(ii) a contract to take up and pay for any debentures 25 
of a company; 
(b) where the suit is for,-
(il the execution of a formal deed of partnership, the 
parties having commenced to carry on the business of the 
partnership; or 
(ii) for the purchase of a share of a partner in a firm; 30 
(c) where the suit is for the' enforc~ent of a contract or 
the construction of any building or the execution of any other 
work on land: 
Provided that the following conditions are ful1Uled, 
namely:- 35 
(i) the building or other work is described in the 
eontnct in terms suftlciently precise to enable the court to 
determine the exact natlfe of the building or work; 

7 
(U) the plaintift baa • IUbstantial interest in the per-
formance of the contract and the interest 11 of such a nature 
that co~pensation in money for non-performance of the 
contract is not an adequate relief; and 
, (iii) the defendant has, in pursuance of the contract, 
10 
obtained possession of the whole or any part of the, land on 
which the building is to be constructed or other work is to 
be executed. 
PI:RsoNS FOR OB AGAINST WHOM COKTlAC'1'S MAY n SPICD'ICALLY 
ENFOBCED 
t' 
U. Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, the speciftc Who ma, 
obtaia performance of a contract may be obtained by- .~ 
perform-
(a) any party thereto; 1Il<:e. 
(b) the representative in interest or the principal, of any 
I, party thereto: 
Provided that, where the learning, skill, solvency m' any 
personal quality of such party, is a material IOgredient in the 
contract, or where the cont,ract provides thlt his interest shall 
!'lot be assigned, his representative in interest or his principal 
shall not be entitled to specific performance of the contr~ct, 
unless such party has already performed his part of the contract, 
or the performance thereof by his representative in interest, or 
his principal, has been accepted by the other party; 
(c) where the contract is a settlement on marriage, or a 
a, compromIse of doubtful Ifights between members of the same 
family, any person beneficially entitled thereunder; 
(d) where the contract has been entered into by a tenant 
for life in due exercise of a power, the remainderman; 
(e) a reversioner in possession, where the agreement'is a ' 
eOvfmant entered into with his predecessor !n title and the re-
versioner is entitled to the benefit of such covenant; 
(f) a reversioner in remainder, where the agreement is 
such a covenant, and the reversioner is entitled to thr- ben~tit 
thereof and will sustain material injury by reason of its breach; 
35 (g) when a company has entered into a contract and sub-
sequently becomes amalgamated with another company, the 
Dew company which arises out of the, amal~amatfon; 

g 
... --EfI)·when ·th&··pPOftloters of·+-eompany have, before its 
- " -ineerporation, -entered into a ·contraet for the >purposes of the 
-eempany, and such contraet is warranted by the terms of the 
incorporation, the· company: 
. . ,PfQvidt;d that the . company b~,a~<!ep.tedthe contract and S 
hNiCOIPPl\lP.icat.eO. SJJ~h: ~c:ceptanceto .the otl).er party to the 
contract. 
:::Ureliet.f ',~M..$Jl~·jPMf~Mc .. ok~ ... \f)OntlfMLc8Allot-:~· ,.orced in 
favour of a person-
(a) who would. not. be entitled to recover cOn;!.peJlsation for 10 
. its breach; or 
(b) who has become incapable of performing, or violates 
any essential term of, the aantract that on his part remains to 
I be per.fon;n~ or .acts in. fraud of the CQntr,ac~, .or wilfully acts 
at variance with, or in subversion of, the relatiQR intended to I' 
be established by the contract; or 
,(e) who faile to aver and prove that he has performed or 
'.. -hu. 'alway. been reedy ·and willing to perform the essential 
. terms ,of the contract which are to be pell'formed by him, other 
than tenns the performance ·of which has been prevented er ~ 
1<· waived by 1he defendant. 
i' ~'R4tioft.-For ijlepurposes ·of . clause (c)' ,-
.(1.) .where a contract involves the payment of money, 
it is not essential for th~. plainti1f to actually' tender te the 
defendant or to deposit it) C01.lrt any money except when so a~ 
. directed. by the court; 
(ii) the plaintiff must aver performance of, or readiness 
ad willingness to perform, the contract according to its 
true coastruction. ' 
CoJlU'M:t to'f' ~1t; :{1) A contract to sell.. ar Jet ~ny jmmov~bl~ pr.op~ cannot 30 
~os:Jtb1,""e[lpeciftcaUy' enforced in favour of a vendor. P( lessor- . 
one who baa 
~t , (a) who, .kn.owini,plmself not to have :0.:11 title to the pro-
eDforceabfe. . perty, bascont:racted. to sell or let theP~P)rty; 
(b) who, though he entered into the contract believing that 
he had a good ~itle. to tl}.er proper-ty" oannot·-at·.the time filled by 35 
the parties or .. by J~ court for· the :-eompl~n"of the .ale or 
'let~Jpg, g.ive. ~be.,PJI~ha,sE\r .. Qr .. le~!.. title·..free f ... reuonable 
doubt. 

9 
(2) The provisions ·'of· sub-section (I) shall also apply, as far .. 
may be, to contracts for the sale or hire oI mowble property. 
17. Where a plaintiff seeks specific performance of a contract··m,.NoD-eD-
writing, to which the defendant sets up a variation, the plaintiff =':~ 
5 cannot obtain the performance sought, except with the :variation so variation; 
set up, in the following cases, namely:-
(a) where by fraud, mistake of fact or mis-representation, 
the written contract of which performance is sought is' in its 
'. terms. Qr effect different from what the parties agreed to, or does 
JOnQt contain alI the terms agreed to between the :parties on the 
basis of. which the defendant entered .into the contract; 
(b)-' where the object· of the parties was to produce a certain 
legal result which the contract as· framed is not calculated to 
hp"-oducej 
15 (c) where.the parties have, ,subsequently to tb~. execution 
of the contract, varied its terms. 
18. Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, specific per- Relief 
..... inst formance ofa contract may be enforced agamst- p;trea IQd 
penon. 
(a) either party thereto; claiming . under them 
(b) any othe,r person claiming ul1d~ him by. a titl,e, arising ~k:: title 
subsequently to the contract, except a transferee for valu.e who 
has paid .his money in good faith amt withou.t notice, of the 
original contract; 
(c) any person claiming under a title which, though prior 
2Stothe ·contract and· known to the plaintiff, might have been 
displaced by the defendant; 
30 
I, ,'t 
.. (d) when a eomp811Y has entered into a CQntract . .and sub-
o seqwently becomes. amalgamated with. .a.nothet company,t!le new 
company which arises out of the amalgamation; 
" (e) wb~n the, promoters of a. comp~r" have" "before its 
jnc,orporatioa,entered into a contract f"r·,.he purpose ··of the 
comp@y .,and such contract is wan-anted;· by the -terms ··of the 
incorporation, the company: 
.' ,. : ·Pl'Ovided that· ·the- company has accepted the centract and 
35'" ,communicated such acceptance to the other· party to the coo-
tract. 

10 
DlscBETION .urn POWERS OF COURT 
Diac:rction 19. (1) The jurisdiction to decree specific performance is discre-
~=- tionary, and the court is not bound to grant such relie·f merely 
peri'onwmcc. because it is lawful to do so; but the discretion of the court is not 
arbitrary but sound and reasonable, guided by judicial principles and 5 
capable of correction by a court of appeal. 
(2) The following are cases in which the court may properl,. 
exercise discretion not to decree specific performance-
(a) where the terms of the contract or the conduct of the 
parties at the time of entering into the contract or the other 10 
circumstances under which the contract was entered into are 
such that the contract, though not voidable, gives the plaintiff 
an unfair advantaie over the defendant; or 
(b) where the performance of the contract would involve 
some hardship on the defendant which he did not foresee, IS 
whereas its non-performance would involve no such hardship 
on the plaintiff; 
(c) where the defendant entered into the contract under 
circumstances which though not rendering the contract voidable, 
makes it inequitable to enforce specific performance. 20 
Explanation. t.-Mere inadequacy of consideration, or the mere 
fact that the contract is onerous to the defendant or improvident in 
its nature, shall not be deemed to constitute an unfair advantage 
within the meaning of clause (a) or hardship within the meaning of 
clause (b). ~2' 
Explanation 2.-The question whether the performance of a 
contract would involve hardship on the defendant within the 
meaning of clause (b) shall, except in cases where the hardship hal 
resulted from any act of the plaintift subsequent to the contract, be 
determined with reference to the circumstances existing at the time 30 
of the contract. . 
(3) The court may properly exercise discretion to decree speclftc 
performance in any case where the plaintift has done substantial 
actl or suffered losses in consequence of a contract capable Clf 
specific performance. 35 
(4) The court shall not refuse to any party specific performance 
of a contract merely on the ground that the contract is not enforce-
able at the instance of the other party. 

11 
20. (1) In a suit for specific performance of a contract, the'ower to 
1 . t:tlI! 1ft l' f . f . b aWird CC)IB-p am .Ill may a...,o c aim or compensation or Its reach, either in pen'ation In 
addition to, or in substitution of, such performance. certaio Wei. 
(2) If, in any such suit, the court decides that specific perform-
S ance ought not to be granted, but that there is a contract between 
the parties which has been broken by the defendant, and that the 
plaintiff is entitled to compensation for that breach, it shall award 
him such compensation accordingly. 
(3) If, in any such suit, the court decides that specific perform-
10 ance ought to be granted, but that it is not sufficient to satisfy the 
justice of the case, and that some compensation for breach of the 
contract should also be made to the plaintiff, it shall award him 
such compensation accordingly. 
(4) In determining the amount of any compensation awarded 
15 under this section, the court shall be guided by the principles 
9 of x11a. specified in section 73 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. 
(5) No compensation shall be awarded under this section unless 
the plaintiff has claimed such compensation in his plaint: 
Provided that where the plaintiff has not claimed any su"-
20 compensation in the plaint, the court shall, at any stage of the pro-
ceeding, allow him to amend the plaint on such terms as may be 
just, for including a claim for such compensation. 
Explanation.-The circumstances that the contract has become 
incapable of specific performance does not preclude the court from 
25 exercising the jurisdiction conferred by this section. 
21. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Power tl(l 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, any person suing for the specific t~ 
performance of a contract for the transfer of immovable property lion, pard-. lion, refuJld 
may, in an approprIate case, ask for- of carnett 
(a) possession, or partition and separate possession, of the lDODCy,eco. 
property, in addition to such performance; or 
(b) any other relief to which he may be entitled, including 
the refund of any earnest money or deposit paid or made to 
him, in case his claim for specific performance is refused. 
3' (2) No relief under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
shall be granted by the court unless it has been specifically claimed: 
Provided that where the plaintiff has not claimed any such 
relief in the plaint, the court shall, at any stage of the proceeding, 
allow him to amend the plaint on such terms as may be just for 
40 including a claim for such relief. 

it '. 
. ~) The power;ot~the court togrmt relief under clause (b) of 
sub-seetion (1) shall be without prejudice to its powers ;to award" 
co,oipensation under section 20. 
Liquidation 22. (1) A contract, otherwise proper to be specifically enforced; 
~t~e:o may be so enfo:rced, though a sum be named in it as the amounttos 
~cmc per- be paid in case of its breach and the party in default is willing to . 
nDlDCCo pay the same, if the court, having regard to the terms of the contract 
and other attending circumstances, is satisfied that the sum was 
named only for the purpose of securing performance of the contract 
and not for the purpose of giving to the party in default an option 10 
of paying money in lieu of specific performance. 
(2) When enforcing specific performance under this section, the 
court shall not also decree payment of the sum so named in the 
contract. 
Bar of IUit 
i»r compcn-
lation for 
breacb after 
diaminal of 
IUit for 
specific per-
formance. 
23. The dismissal of a suit for specific performance of a contract 15 
or part thereof shall bar the plaintiff's right to sue for compensation 
for the breach of such contract or part, as the case may be, but 
shall not bar his right to sue for any other relief to which he may 
be entitled, by reason of such breach. 
ENFORCEMENT OF AWARDS AND DIllECTIONS TO EXECUTE SETTLEMENTS %0 
~plication 24. The provisions of this Chapter as to contracts shall 
. :eJ:~~~DI apply to awards to which the Arbitration Act, 1940, does not apply 
certaIn and to directions in a will or codicil to execute a particular settle-awarciR and 
testamentary ment. 
directions to 
czecute _tlcmeal:W.J .'..j'''I(, CHAPTER lIt 2S 
RECTIFICATION OF INSTRUMENTS 
10 of 19400 
When.u.: . 25. (1) When. through fraud or a mutual mi8take of the partiel, ,,; 
~~-aeohtract or other instrument in writing (not being the articles 
of association of a company to which the Companies Act, 1956. I of 1956. 
applies) does not express their real intention. then- 30 
(4) either party or his representative in interesf may 
institute a suit to have the inltrument rectified; or 
(b) the plaintiff m.ay, in any suit in which any right arising' 
under the instrument is in issue, claim in his pleading that. the 
instrument be rectified; or 3S 
(c) a defendant in' any suit as is . referred to· in clause: 1 
(b), may, in addition to any other defence open to, him, ask far 
rectificatfon of the instrument. 

(2) If, in any suit in which a contract or other instrument II 
sought to be rectified under sub-section (1), the court finds that the 
instrument, through fraud or mistake, does not express the real 
intention of the parties, the court may, in its discretion, direct 
5 rt:Ctification of the instrument so as to express that intention, so far 
as this can be done ~ithout prejudice to rights acquired by third 
persons in good faith and for value. 
(3) A contract in writing may first be rectified, and then if the 
party claiming rectification has se prayed in 'his pleading and the 
10 court thinks fit, may be specifically enfo:rced. 
(4) No relief for the rectification of an instrument shall be 
granted to any party under this section unless it has been specifically 
claimed: 
Provided that where a party has not claimed any such relief in 
IS his pleading, the court shall, at any stage of the proceeding, allow 
him to amend the pleading on such terms as may be just for includ-
ing such claim. 
CHAPTER IV 
REsCISSION OF CONTRACTS 
26. (1) Any person interested in a contract may sue to have it ~~ re-
20 1'escinded, and such rescission may be adjudged by the court in any :~~o:~ 
3S 
uf the following cases, namely:- or refused. 
(a) where the contract is voidable or terminable by the 
plainti.tJ; 
(lb) where the contract is unlawful for causes not apparent 
on its face and the defendant is more to blame than the plaintiff. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
court may refuse to rescind the contract-
(a) where the plaintiff has expressly or impliedly rati1led 
the contract; or 
(b) where, owing to the change of circumstances which 
has taken place since the making of the contract (not being 
due to any act of the defendant himself), the parties cannot be 
substantially restored to the position in which they stood when 
the contract was made; or 
(c) where third parties have, during the subsistence of the 
contract, acquired rights in good faith without notice and for 
value; or 
150 (B)~. 

1'4 
. '(d) where only a part of the contract is'sought fo be reScfnd-
'ed and such part is not severable ft~m·the'rest:ofthe·cQtitrlict, 
Explanation.-In this section "contract", in relation to the terri-
tories to which the Transfer of Pl"operty Act, 1882, does not extend, .. OfI8'a. 
.. means a contract in writing. S 
Redssion in 21. (1) Where in any suit a decree for specific perfonnance of a 
certain dr- contract for the sale or lease of immovable property has been made cumstanccs 
of contracts and the purchaser or lessee does not, within the period allowed by 
~rl~ ~l the decree or such further period as the court may allow, pay the 
immovable pUTchase money or other sum which. the court has ordered him to 10 
~h~P;:~ffi.c pay, the vendor or lessor may apply in the same suit In which the 
performance decree is made, to have the contract rescinded ahd on such applica-of which hal been tion the court may, by order, rescind the contract either so far as 
decreed. regards the party in default or altogether, as the justice of the case 
may require. . _ _ IS 
(2) Where the contract is rescinded under sub-section (1), the 
court-
(a) shall direct the purchaser or the lessee, if he has ob a:ned 
possession of the property under the contract, to restore such 
po&se1iliion to the vendor or lessor. and 
(b) may direct payment to the vendor or lessor of all the 
rents and profits which have accrued in respect of the property 
from the date on which possession was so obtained by the 
purchaser or lessee until restoration of possession to the vendor 
20 
or lessor, and, if the justice of the case so requires, the refund 2S 
of any sum paid by the vendee or lessee as earnest money or 
deposit in connection with the contract. 
(3) If the purchaser or lessee pays the purchase money or other 
sum which he is ordered to pay under the decree within the period 
referred to in sub-section (1), the court may, on application made 33 
in the same suit, award the purchaser or lessee such further relief 
as he may be entitled to, including in appropriate cases all or any 
of the following reliefs, namely:-
(a) the execution of a proper conveyance or lease by 
vendor or lessor; 
the 
(b) the delivery of possession, or partition and separate 
possession, of the property on the execution of such conveyance 
<r lease. 
35 

IS 
(4) No separate suit in respect of any relief which may be claimed 
under this section shall lie at the instance of a vendor, pUEhaser,' 
lessor or lessee, as the case may be. 
(5) The costs of any proceedings under this section shall be in 
S the discretion of the court. 
28. A plaintiff instituting a suit for the specific performance of a Alternati"e 
contract in writing may pray in the alternative that, i1 the contract ~~~:s~:riD 
cannot be specifically enforced, it may be rescinded and delivered up suit for 
to be cancelled; and the court, if it refuses to enforce the contract ~!~~r-
10 specifically, may direct it to be rescinded and delivered up accord .. 
ingly. 
29. On adjudging the rescission of a contract, the court may Q)ur:t maJ 
require the party to whom such relief is granted to restore, so far as ;-:::cre_ 
may be, any benefit which he may have received from the other party acindi1lJ to 
15 and to make any compensation to him which justice may require. do eqUity. 
'CHAPTER V 
CANCELLATION OF INSTRt1KENTS 
30. (1) Any person against whom a written instrument is void or When can-
voidable, and who has reasonable apprehension that such instrument, ~:~n 
20 if left outstanding may cause him serious injury, may sue to have it ordered. 
adjudged void or voidable; and the court may. in its discrt"tion: so 
adjudge it and order it to be delivered up and cancelled. 
(2) If the instrument has been registered under the Indian Regis-
116 or 1901. tration Act, 1908, the court shall also send a copy of its decree to the 
2S officer in whose office the instrument has been so registered; and such 
officer shah note on the copy of the instrument contained in his books 
the fact of its cancellation. 
31. Where an instrument is evidence of different rights or different What iDs-
. . . 1 't . t d trumcntB obl1gatIons, the court may, In a proper case, cance I m par an may be 
iO allow it to stand for the residue.~~~. 
32. (1) On adjudging the cancellation of an instrument, the court Po~r to 
h 1· f . ted to t require may require the party to whom suc re Ie 15 gran , res ore, so benefit to be 
far as may be any benefit which he may have received from the restored or 
. him h' h j . compensa-other party and to make any compensatIon to W IC usbce tion to be 
• made when 
3S may requIre. instrument i. 
(2) Where a defendant successfully resists any suit on the ~ceUcd or IS success-
. ground- fully resisted • . as being 
(a) that the instrument sought to be enforced agamst him m void or 
the suit Is voidable, the court may, if the defendant has received YOJdabie. 

Discretion 
of c;ourt as 
to detlara-
doli of 
ltatUl or 
npt. 
Bffect of 
declantion. 
Preventive 
relief how 
,ranted. 
Temporary 
and per-
pena.1 in-
lWlction" 
18 
any benefit under the instrument from the other party, require 
• him to restore, so far as may be, such benefit to that party or to 
make compensation for it; 
(b) that the agreement sought to be enforced against him in 
the suit is void by reason of his not having been competent to S 
contract under section 11 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, the 9 of 117.· 
court may, if the defendant has received any benefit under the 
agreement from the other party, require him to restore, so far as 
may be, such benefit to that party, to the extent to which he or 
his estate has benefited thereby. . 10 
CHAPTER VI 
DECLARATORY DECREES 
33. Any person -entitled to any legal cmracter, or to any right as to 
any property, may institute a suit against any person denying, or 
interested to deny, his title to such character or right, and the court IS 
may in its discretion make therein a declaration that he is so entitled, 
and the pleintiff need not in such suit ask for any further relief: 
Provided that no court shall make any such declaration wh~re 
the plaintiff, being able to seek further relief than a mere declaro-
tion of title, omits to do so. 20 
Explanation.-A trustee of property is a "person interested to 
deny" a title adverse to the title of some one who is not in existence, 
end for whom, if in existence, he would be a trustee. 
34. A declaration made under this Chapter is binding only on the 
parties to the suit, persons claiming through them respectively, and,25 
where any of the parties are trustees, on the persons for whom, if 
in existence at the date of the declaration, such parties would be 
trustees. 
PART III 
PREvENTIvE RELIEF 
CHAPTER VII 
INJUNCTIONS GENERALLY 
35. Preventive relief is granted at the discretion of the court by 
"injunction, temporary or perpetual. 
30 
36. (1) Temporary injunctions are such as are to continue until a 3S 
specified time, or until the further order of the court, and they may 
be granted at any stage of a suit, and are regulated by the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908. , of 1901· 
(2) A perpetual injunction can only be granted by the decree 
made at the hearing and upon the merits of the suit; the defendant 40 
is thereby perpetually enjoined from the assertion of a right, or from 
the commission of an act, which would be contrary to the rights of 
the plaintiff. 

17 
CHAPTER VIn 
PERPETUAL INJUNCTIONS 
37. (1) Subject to the other provisions contained in or referred Perpetual 
to by this Chapter, a perpetual injunction may be granted to the injunctIon 
5 plaintiff to prevent the breach of an obligation existing in his favour, ;r~~ed. 
whether expressly or by implication. 
(2) When any such obligation arises from contract, the court 
shall be guided by the rules and provisions contained in Chapter II 
(3) When the defendant invades or threatens to invade the plain-
10 tiff's right to, or enjoyment of, property, the court may grant a per-
petual injunction in the following cases, namely:-
(a) where the defendant is trustee of the property for the 
plaintiff; 
(b) where there exists no standard for ascertaining the 
IS actual damage caused, or likely to be caused, by the invasion; 
(c) where the invasion is such that compensation in money 
would not afford adequate relief; 
(d) where the injunction is necessary to prevent a multipli-
city of judicial proceedings. 
20 38. When, to prevent the breach of an obligation, it is necessary ~andl~ory 
to compel the performance of certain acts which the court is capable InJunctions. 
of enforcing, the court may in its discretion grant an injunction to 
prevent the breach complained of, and also to compel performance 
of the requisite acts. 
25 39. (1) The plaintiff in a suit for perpetual injunction under I?amales in 
. 3 d t ., t' d t' 38 I' laeu of, or sectIon 7, or man a ory lnJunc Ion un er sec Ion , may c aIm in addition 
damages either in addition to, or in substitution for, such injunc- t? injunc-
tion and the court may, if it thinks fit, award such damages. tlon. 
(2) No relief for damages shall be granted under this section 
30 unless the plaintiff has claimed such relief in his plaint: 
Provided that where no such damages have been claimed in 
the plaint, the court shall, at any stage of the proceeding, allow 
the plaintiff to amend the plaint on such terms as may be just for 
inc]uding such claim. 
35 (3) The dismissal of a suit to prevent the breach of an obliga-
tion existing in favour of the plaintiff shall bar his right to sue 
for damaaes for such breach. 

InjUnction 
when 
refused. 
40. An injunction cannot be granted-
(a) to restrain any person from prosecuting a judicial 
proceeding pending at 1he institution of the suit in which the 
injunction is sought, unless such restraint is necessary to 
prevent a multiplicity of proceedings; S 
(b) to restrain any person from instituting or prosecuting 
any proceeding in a court not subordinate to that from which 
the injunction is sought; 
(c) to restrain any person from applying to any legislative 
body; 10 
(d) to restrain MY person from instituting or prosecuting 
any proceeding in a criminal matter; 
(e) to prevent the breach of a contract the performance of 
which would not be specifically enforced; 
(f) to prevent, on the ground of nuisance, an act of which IS 
it is not reasonably clear that it will be a nuisance; 
(g) to prevent a continuing breach in which the plaintiff 
has acquiesced; 
(h) when equally efficacious relief can certainly be obtained 
by any other usual mode of proceeding except in case of breach 20 
of trust; 
(i) when the conduct of the plaintiff or his agents has been 
such as to disentiUe him to the assistance of the court; 
(j) when the plaintiff has no personal interest in the matter: 
Injunction to 41. Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (e) of section 25 
perform 40, where a contract comprises an affirmative agreement to do a 
~=~:nt. certain act, coupled with a negative agreement, express or implied, 
not to do a certain act, the circumstances that the court is unable 
to compel specific performance of the affirmative agreement shall 
not preclude it from granting an injunction to perform the negative 30 
agreement: 
Provided that the plaintiff has not failed to perform the contract 
so far as it is binding on him. 
Amendment 42. In section 32 of the Arbitration Act, 1940, after the words "nor 
of Act JO of shall any arbitration, agreement or award be", the word "enforced" 3S 
1940 • shall be inserted. 
Repeal. 43. The Specific Relief Act, 1877. is hereby repealed, I of 1811' 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AN'D'R::EASONS 
This Bill seeks to implement the recommendations of the Law 
Conunission contained in its Ninth Report on the Specific Relief Act, 
1877, except in regard to section 42 which is being retained as it now 
stands. The notes on clauses, extracted from the Report of the Law 
COQUllission, explain the changes made in the existing Act. 
ASOKE K. SEN. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 3rd DecembeT, 1960. 

Notes on ciauses 
Clause 2.-The definition of trust in the existing Act is not sa~ 
factory inasmuch as it refers to express, implied QIld constructive 
trusts without defining them. The expression is now being defined 
as in the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, as there should be parity between 
the two enactments. Consequential changes have been made in the 
definition of trustee. 
Clause 3. (Existing section 4) .-Clause (a) of existing section 4 
has been omitted as unnecessary. Under section 2(h) of the Indian 
Contract Act, 1872, only an agreement enforceable by law is a 
contract. A mere agreement is not enforceable in law. In view of 
clause 2 (e) of the Bill, clause (a) of section 4 is unnecessary. (See 
also notes under clause 8). 
The existing sedions 5 and 6 have been omitted as being too ele-
mentary. Section 9 has been omitted foe the reasons given in para-
graph 16 of the Report of the Law Commission. 
Clause 4. (Existing section 7) .-Instead of being cast in the nega-
tive form as at present, the revised clBuse brings out the principle 
more clearly by saying that specific relief being a civil remedy, the 
plaintiff must show some individual right to it in every case. 
Clauses 5 and 6 reproduce existing sections 8 and 10 with the 
SUbstitution of the word "provided" for the word "prescribed" in 
both the sections. 
Clause 7. (Existing section 11) .-An Explanation modelled on the 
Explanation to the existing section 12, is added whereby the burden 
of proving tbat the case does not fall within clause (b) or clause (c) 
is laid on the defendant. In such cases it should be for the defen-
dant to prove that the article in respect of which possession is 
claimed is an ordinary article of commerce having no special value or 
interest to the plaintiff or that the damage is assessable in money. 
Clause 8.-This is new. In India the defences that are available 
under the law of contract, such as, inoapacity of parties, absence of 
a concluded contract, the uncertainty of the contract, coercion, 
fraud, mis-representation, mistake, illegality or want of authority are 
all dealt with under the Contract Act. Clause 8 prescribes in a 
compendious way all the defences that are open to a defendant; and 
incidentally makes the existing section 4 (a), which has now been 
omitted, all the more unnecessary. 

21 
Clause 9. (Existing section 12) .-Clause <a> of existing sect10n 12 
which refers to an obligation arising out of a trust is now being 
incorporated in clause 10 with the other provision relating to trusts 
now to be found in section 21 (e) . 
Clause (d) of the existing section 12 seems to sanction the doubt-
ful doctrine that insolvency of the defendant is a ground for decree-
ing specific performance. It is totally inconsistent with the principle 
followed in the grant of specific relief, namely, the non-existence or 
inadequacy of the remedy 6t law, but not merely the impractica-
bility of enforcing such a remedy. It is,therefore, being omitted. 
The Explanation is being amended so as to specify the exceptional 
cases where courts in India and in England grant specific perfor-
mance of contracts to transfer movable property on the presump-
tion that damages would not in such cases give adequate relief. 
The exception as respects goods not easily obtainable in the market 
has been engrafted from American law where courts have enforced 
specific performance of contracts to furnish gas, water or other 
necessary materials to a manufacturing establishment where the 
thing contra-::ted for is not immediately available from other sources 
and a breach of contract would stop the operations of the plaintiff's 
esooblishment. 
Clause lO.-The provisions relating to trusts now found in section 
12 (a) and section 21 (e) are being grouped together. Section 12(a) 
is out of place in that section as that section relates to executory 
contracts where'.ls in the case of an obligation arising out of a trust 
it arises out of an executed contract. 
Clause ll.--Sections 14 to 17 deal with .claims for specific relief 
of a port of a contract and section 13 enshrines a principle generally 
applicable to cases falling within sections 14 to 17. All these sections 
have now been grouped together. 
Sub-clause (1) corresponds to section 17. 
Sub-clause (2) corresponds to section 14. 
Sub-clause (3) corresponds to section 15. 
But one importr.mt change which has been made in sub-clause (3) is 
that when the purt which must be left unperformed forms a cons1-
derable portion of the whole but admits of compensation in money, 
the plaintiff is allowed a proportionate abatement of the consideration 
when he is to relinquish all claims to further performance or any 
further compensation for the breach. In this respect the existing 
position is inequitable. 
1582 (B) UJ.....4. 

22 
Sub-clause (4) corresponds to section 16. 
The Explanation reproduces section 13 with verbal changes. 
(:'lause 12.-This is section 18' of the existing Act with the follow-
ing amendments:-
(a) it is made clear that this clause applies also to absence 
of title; 
(b) by inserting the words "subject to the other provisions 
of this Chapter", it is made clear that other provisions of this 
Chapter, like clause 11, apply to cases under sub-clause (a); 
(c) in sub-clause (a), for the words "sale or lease", the word 
"contract" has been substituted so that it is made clear that the 
sub-clause applies only to contracts to sell, lease or hire; 
'(d) sub-clause (b) is modified so that a plaintiff would also 
be enabled to require a vendor to get a conveyance from a per-
son who is bound to convey at the request of the vendor; 
(e) in sub-clause (c) the addition of the words "wherever 
necessary" makes it clear that a re-conveyance need be obtained 
only when it is required under law. 
Clause 13.-This is section 21 of the existing Act with the follow-
ing amendments:-
(i) in sub-clause (1), clause (c) of section 21 has been omit-
ted as unnecessary in view of section 29 of the Indian Contract 
Act, 1872; 
, 
(ii) clause (f) of section 21 has been omitted in view of 
clause 8 of the Bill; 
(iii) in item (d), the word 'determinable' has been substitut-
ed for the word 'revocable' as the expression 'revocable contract' 
is not accurate; 
(iv) clause (e) of section 21 has been incorporated in clause 
12 of the Bill; 
(v) in item (d) [clause (g) of section 21] the limit of three 
years, which is artificial and arbitrary, has been omitted, and 
the proper rule applicable in such cases substituted; 
(vi) sub-clause (3) is new and incorporates the exceptional 
oases in which specific performance is granted, notwithstanding 
the provisions of sub-clause (1). 

23 
C!q.1U~ 1 •. ~Tbis c14use ret?roduces section 23 "!ith the followinl 
m~cat1ons- . -; , 
(1) in sub-clause (b) it is made clear that, in a contract of a 
personal nature, performance by a third party is not to be 
imposed on the other party to the contract except where he has 
accepted such substituted performance; 
(it) sub-clauses (c), (d), (e) and (f) could be substituted by 
a simple provision providing that a third party· to a contract who 
is entitled to a benefit thereunder or has an interest therein 
may sue on the contract subject to certain limitations. This 
Bubstitution would, however, have to await a suitable· amend-
ment being made in this behalf in the Contract Act, and the 
clauses have been reprodced as they stand for the time· be~ng; 
(iii) in sub-clauses (g) and (h) the word 'public' has been 
omitted since the nature of these provisions is such that they 
should apply to all companies. Further in sub-clause (h) it is 
provided that the contract would be enforceable by or ag'alnst 
a company only if it has accepted the con.tract and has sfgnified 
its acceptance to the other party to the contract. . 
Clause 15.-This is section 24 of the existing Act with the follow-
ing modlftcations:-
(i) in sub-clause (a) for the words "is not entitled", the 
words "would not be entitled" have been substituted in order to 
make the meaning cl~ar; . 
(Ii) in sub-clause (b), following the principles enunciated by 
case-law, it has been provided that specific performance cannot 
be enforced where the plaintiff has acted in fraud of the con-
tract or acts at vari~nce with or in subversion of the relation$h!p 
intended to be established by the contract; 
(iii) clause (c) of section 24 has been omitted as unnecessary 
in view of Order II, r. 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; 
(iv) claus; (d) of existing section 24 ~ves effect to .a l?!ovi-
lion of English law as it stood under a Statute of the. slxt~~th 
century but the law has since been changed. A pnor se e-
In,ent of property would divest the title of thehsettl°trtlinun:; thereafter from t e se or dlately and any conveyance' d t' would'be ineffective to +h if it be for conSI era lon, ana" er, even . i . 's therefore totally unneces-.... y title. This prov SIan 1 1 . _ ...... ' convey _ 
ury; 

24 
(V) lub-clause (C) is a new provision which incorporates the 
principles laid down by case-law that in a suit for specific per-
formance the plaintiff must show that all conditions precedent 
have been fulfilled and also allege and prove a continuous readi-
ness and willingness to perform the contract on his part from. 
the date of the contract to the time of hearing of the suit. The 
plaintiff, however, need not prove performance of or over-readi-
ness or willingness to perform non-essential terms; 
(vi) by an Explanation it is made clear that it is not essen-
tial that the plaintiff should tender money payable under a con-
tract, say, for sale to the defendant or to deposit it in court 
except when so directed. Further, the plaintiff should be 
entitled to specific performance if he avers performance or 
readiness or willingness to perform the contract according to its 
true construction. 
Clause 16.-This is section 25 of the existing Act with the follow-
ing modifications:-
Clause (c) of section 25 is omitted for the reasons given 
against clause 15 in respect of the omission of clause (d) of 
section 24. 
Although section 25 refers to both movable and immovable 
property, it is not clear how far sections 18 and 25 apply to 
contracts for the letting of movable property. Sub-clause (1) 
is therefore confined to immovable property, but sub-clause (2) 
provides [as in the case of clause 12 (2)]. that the provisions of 
sub-clause (1) will also apply to movable property in so far as 
such application is possible. 
Clause 17.-Clause 17 is section 26 with the following changes:-
(i) sub-clause (a) amalgamates clauses (a), (b) and (c) of 
lection 26; 
.il) in sub-clause, (c) for the words "contracted to vary", the 
words "varied its terms" have been substituted as a drafting 
change. . 
Clause 18 is section 27 of the existing Act with the following 
ehanges:- ! 
(i) in sub-clause (d), the word "public" bas been omitted 
as this pr0vi8ion should apply to all companies; 
(li) sub-clause (e) has been modified on ·the lines proposed 
in respect of section 23 (b) . [See notes under clause 14 (h) ]. 

25 
Cla'IUe 19.-This elaU.!e reprodu\!es section 22 of the Act with the 
tollowblg modification&-
(.i). su?-Section (2) (a) is item I of section 22. The eXisting 
proVIsIOn IS somewhat vague. There are circumstances in which 
a court of equity refuses to decree specific performance on the 
ground of unfairness even though in law the circumstances are 
not such as to render the contract voidable. The scope of this 
sub-clause is therefore widened to provide that the unfair ad-
vantage m.ay be due to circumstances which may not be suffi-
cient to render the contract voidable; 
(it) the two Explanations based on case-law seek to explain 
in what cases unfair advantage or hardship shall not be presum-
ed and with reference to what circumstances hardship should 
ordinarily be determined; 
(iii) the doctrine that a contract to be specifically enforce-
able must as a general rule be mutual has now very little scope 
for application in India. That doctrine is now being abolished 
and in its place, the following principle is laid down, namely, 
that the fact that the remedy of specific enforcement is not 
available to one party is not a sufficient :reason for refusing 
it to the other party. 
Sub-clause (4) gives effect to this new principle. 
Clause 20.-This is section 19 of the existing Act with the follow-
ing changes:-
(i) sub-clause (4) makes it clear that the compensation to 
be awarded is to be de~~rmined on the basis of section 73 of the 
Indian Contract Act, 1872; 
(ii) it is provided in sub-clause (5) that compensation has 
to be specifically asked for before it can be granted, and that the 
court should allow the plaintiff to amend his plaint at any stage 
of the proceeding for the purpose. 
Clause 21.-Clause 21 is new. Sub-clause (1) (a) introduces a 
rule now settled by judicial decisions, that in order to avoid a 
multiplicity of proceedings the plaintiff may claim a dcc~e for pos-
session in a suit for specific performance. even thoug~ strIctly speak-
ing the right to possession accrues only when specIfic performance 
is decreed. 
In some cases it has been held that the court may, in a suit for 
specific perfonnance, direct a refund of earnest money while refusing 

36 
speciftc performanCe if the facta disclose a case for sua a ref'UluL 
Sub-clause (b) gives effect to this and also pennita the p.1a.t.nw! tq. 
claim any other relief. 
It is, however, provided that any luch relief will not be granted 
l1!iless a claim in that behalf is made by the plaintiff either init1ally 
dt' by an amendment at a kiter stage, but that does not preju~ee 
his right to compensation under clause 20. 
Clause 22.--:..This is section 20 of the existing Act amplifi.ed 110 U 
to codify the law on the subject. In applying section 20 courts have 
tried to ascertain the intention of the parties, that is, whether the 
party bound to performance has an alternative choice given to him 
by the contract, to perform or to pay the agreed sum; or whether he 
is bound to do a certain thing, with a penal sum or sum by way of 
liquidated damages attached as security. In the latter case, the 
court, notwithstanding the penal clause, enforces performance if the 
contract be such that without the penal clause it would have been 
proper to enforce specific performance. 
Clause 23 is section 29 of the existing Act. Provisions have been 
included in the Bill enabling the plaintiff to ask for reliefs such as 
refund of earnest money, etc., and by way of abundant caution it is 
made clear in this clause that the dismissal of a suit for specific per-
formance shall not bar a suit for any relief other than damages. 
Clame 24 is section 30 of the existing Act. After the passing of 
the Arbitration Act, 1940, the provisions of this clause should be 
confined to cases of arbitration under other laws the operation of 
which is saved by sections 46 and 47 of the Arbitration Act, 1940. AJJ 
respects cases to which the Arbitration Act, 1940, applies, that Act 
prescribes the procedure to be followed for their enforcement. 
Section 27 A of the existing Act is omitted lor the reason that 
suitable provision is being made in this behalf in the Registration 
Act and section 28 has been omitted for the reason the material 
provisions thereof have been incorporated in their appropriate places' 
in the Bill. 
Clause 25.-This is section 31 of the existing Act with the follow-
ing modifications:-
(i) under section 31 of the Companies Act, 1956, the articles 
of association of a company may be altered by the company by 
speclal resolution, and it is, therefore, advisable to exclude artl-
cles of association from the scope of this clause; 

27 
(li) it is provided in aub-clause (1) that the relief of.recttft-
cation may' be obtained not only in a suit specifically brought.for 
the purpose as at preseht, but also in a suit in which any right 
arising under the contract or other instrument is in issue. It is 
further provided that the relief will be open to either party but 
only if it is specifically asked for in his pleading whether initially 
or by amendment; 
(iii) section 32 of the existing Act has been omitted as it ,is 
ambiguous; and if it means that the court will not rectify an 
invalid instrument, it is not necessary; 
(iv) section 33 of the existing Act has been omitted as un-
necessary as this provision seeks to merely enjoin the court to 
discover the real intention of the parties. In any event, clause 
25 of the Bill renders this section unnecessary; 
(v) section 34 of the existing Act has been incorporated in 
sub-clause (3). 
Clause 26.-This is section 35 of the existing Act with the follow-
ing modifications:-
(i) section 35(c) of the existing Act and the two paragraphs 
succeeding it have been omitted in view of clause 27 of this Bill; 
otherwise sub-clause (1) is a reproduction of section 35; 
(li) sub-clause (2) codifies the prinCiples followed by courts 
in refusing to rescind a contract; 
(iii) the requirement of "writing at the beginning of section 
35 has been omitted by the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, in 
relation to territories where that Act is in force; Hence the 
Explanation. 
Clause 27.-This is new .. Under section 35 (c) of the existing 
Act, the vendor or lessor has the option of bringing a separate suit 
for the rescission of a contract or to apply for rescission in the same 
suit under the third paragraph of tbet section, but there is no reason 
why the vendor or lessor should be allowed to harass the other 
party in a separate proceeding when the relief of rescission can be 
. made available in the same suit. At the same time suitable reliefs 
should also be made available to the ,purchaser or lessee when he 
makes the payments due, but the vendor or lessor does not comply 
with the terms of the decree. The new clause therefore seeks to 
provide complete relief to both the parties in terms of the decree 
, "for specific' 'performance in the 'same suit without having to resort to 
,I 'aeparateproceed1i1p. 

21 
Section 36 of the existing Act has been omitted as it is in conflict 
with section 22 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, and doe. not 
appear to enshrine any sound principle. 
Clause 28.-Clause 28 is section 37 of the existing Act.. 
Clause 29.-This is section 38 of the existing Act amplified to pro-
vide that while decreeing rescission the court might direct not only 
payment of compensation to the defendant but also restoration of 
any benefit received by the plaintifi under the contract. 
Clause 30.-This is section 39 of the existing Act. 
Clause 3l.-This is section 40 of the existing Act. 
Clause 32.-Under section 41 of the existing Act 6 plaintiff who 
obtains cancellation of an instrument may be required to make com-
pensation to the defendant. This provision has been expanded to 
provide for the following matters:-
(i) the plaintifi may also have to restore any benefit which 
he may have obtained under the instrument: 
(ii) the above principle has been extended to apply in favour 
of a plaintiff in a case where the defendant successfully resists 
a suit on the ground that it is void or that it is voidable and he 
has avoided it; 
(iii) it is, however, provided that in the case of a contract, 
which is void by reason of the defendant being a minor or luna-
tic at the time of the contract, the defendant must restore any 
benefit, whether proprietary or monetary, which he has actually 
received under the contract. There is, however, no question of 
any liability for making compensation in such 8 case. 
Clause 33.-This is section 42 of the existing Act. 
Clause 34 is section 43 of ,the existing Act. 
Clause 35.-This reproduces section 52 of the existing Act. 
Clause 36.-This reproduces section 53 of the existing Act. 
Clause 37.-This Is section 54 of the existing Act with the follow-
ing changes:-
(1) for the word "applicant", the word "plainti1f" has been 
substituted as the fonner expression is inaccurate; 
(ii) section 54(d) of the Act has been. omitted for the reasons 
given against clause 9 in respect of the omission of section 12 (d) . 

29 
Clause 38.-This is section 55 of the existing Act. 
Clause 39.-This clause is new and gives effect to the principles 
already accepted that the court ean. in an action for injunction, exer-
cise its discretion to award damages either in addition to or in subs-
titution for an injunction. 
" Clause 40.-This is section 56 of the existing Act with the follow-
blg changes:-
(i) the expression "to stay proceedings" in clauses (a), (b) 
and (c) of section 56 has given rise to a controversy as to whe-
ther any injunction can be directed against the court itself before 
which the proceeding is pending. An injunction is a remedy in 
personam which is directed against the litigant and this is now 
made clear; 
(ii) section 56 (d) has been omitted; the first part of it is 
inconsistent with article 361 (1) of th.e Constitution, and the second 
part is wmecessary. 
Clause 41.-This is section 57 of the existing Act. 
Clause 42.-This clause makes e consequential amendment in the 
Arbitration Act, 1940. 

Bar to suits 
contesting 
arbitration 
agreement 
or award. 
• 
-, 
ANNEXURE 
EX~T FROM THE AaarlRATION Am, 1MB 
(i~ ciP'lf4tt) 
• • • • 
32. NotwithStanding any law for tlie time being in foroe, ~ 
suit shall lie on any ground whatsoever for a decision Upon the 
exlstenee, dteCt or vaiitHtY of aD lri-b't'trattori a~ment· or award, 
riar-shall any arbitration aift!e!m~ilt or award be 'set uid~, aiiiended, 
modffled or in any way aft&:teci oihemse trim as provided til thil 
Act. 
• • • • • 
30 

LOt< sAfnt~ 
A 
BILL 
to define and amend the law relating to certain kinds of specific 
relief. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sill, 
Minister of LarD.) 