ai" HOe 92 01 1'5' 
THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT 
(SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

DIU No. 9Z of 19S' 
THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT (SECOND AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABRA) 
A 
Bll.L 
further to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as followa:-
1. This Act may be called the Central Excises and Salt (Second Short tide. 
Amendment) Act, 1956. 
S 2. After section 3 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, the Inserti~ of 
following section shall be inserted: - ~r- SectlOD 
10 
20 
"3A. (1) Where, in respect of any excisable goods, the Emergency 
Central Government is satisfied that the duty of excise leviable ~ower.r~ 
thereon should be increased and that circumstances exist which ve:ent ro 
render it necessary that immediate action should be taken, the ~ease f 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official ~:. () 
Gazette, direct an amendment of the First Schedule to be 
made so as to provide for an increase in the duty of excise 
leviable: 
Provided that such increase shall not exceed fifty per cent. 
of the duty of excise leviable on the goods immediately before 
the issue of the notification. 
(2) Every such notification shall be laid before Parliament, 
if it is sitting, as soon as may be after the issue of the notifica-
tion, and if it is not sitting, within seven days of its reassembly, 

32 of 19340 
2 
and the Central Government shall seek the approval of Parlia-
ment to the notification by a resolution moved within a period 
of fifteen days beginning with the day on which the notifica-
tion is so laid before it; and, if Parliament makes any 
modification in the notification or directs that the notification S 
should cease to have effect, the notification shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be, but without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done thereunder. 
(3) Where, under any notification issued under this section 10 
the duty of excise leviable on any excisable goods is increased, 
for so long as the notification is in force there shall be levied 
and collected in respect of any like goods when imported into 
India as an addition to and in the same manner as the duty of 
customs leviable thereon under the First Schedule to the IS 
Indian Tariff Act, 1934, an amount which is equivalent to the 
additional duty of excise leviable in pursuance of any such 
notification. 
(4) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that 
any notification approved by Parliament, whether with or 
without modifications, may be rescinded by the Central 20 
Government at any time by notification in the Official Gazette." 
(5) This section shall cease to have effect on the thirty-first 
day of December, 1957, but such cesser shall not affect the con-
tinuance of any notification approved by Parliament and in 25 
operation at the time of such cesser. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the present price situation, it may be necessary both for 
encouraging exports and for mopping off excessive profits to make 
quick changes in excise duties. The object of the Bill is to give 
powers to Government to raise, by notification, existing exci~e 
duties subject to a maximum of 50 per cent. of the existing rates. 
Where excise duties are so raised, the import duties will also be 
increased correspondingly. The· notifications so issued will be 
placed before Parliament for subsequent approval. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 12th December, 1956. 
3 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article I I 7 and 
clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, 
recommended to Lok Sabha, the introduction of the Bill. 
.. GIPD-LSI-:u28 LS-I4-I2-S6-I7S0. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri T.T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Finance) 