8m :110. n at ~ .~).~ 
I'HE ESTATE :DUTY BILL, 1952. ~~.:,.,;,.~,., 
(As INTRODUCED IN THB HOUSB 01' TBB. PBOPLB) 
A 
BILL 
to pro1ridl! lor the l • .,y and ooll.otion 01 an utGte d'ld!l. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows :-
PART I.-PuLIJIINARY 
1. Short title, ateD, IUd aommeacemeat.-tl) This Act may be called 
the Estate Duty Act, 1952. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on Buch date as the Qentral Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoin~. 
2, DelDltlou.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.-
(1) "affidavit of valuation" meaus the aaidavit· of valuation made 
under section 19·1 of th~ Court·fees Act. 1870 (VII of 1870). in 
connection with an application for the grant of representation ; 
(2) "Board" means th,e Central Board of Revenue constituted 
under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924 (IV of 19.u); 
(3) "company" incl udes any body corporate WDere80ever 
incorporated; 
(4) "controlled company" means a company whioh is deem~ to 
be controlled by virtue of the rules made under sub-section (4) of 
section 17 ; 
(5) "Controller" means a person appointed to be a Controller of 
Estate Duty under section 4 and includes a person appointed to be a 
Deputy Controller of Estate Duty or an Assistant Controller of Estate 
Duty; 
(6) "deceased pe4" and "the deceased" m~an a' perlOn dying 
after the commencement of this Act; , 
(7) "estate duty" means estate duty under this Act; 
(8) .. executor" means the executor or administrator of a deceased 
person and includes, as regards any obligation under this Act, any 
person who takes possession of, or intermeddles ~ith, the estate of • 
deceased person or any part thereof; 
(9) "general power" includes eV,ery power or authority enabling 
the donee or other holder thereof to appoint or dispose of prop,erty as 
he thinks fit, whether exercisable by instrument inter vivos or I:y 
will or both, but exclusive of aPly power exercisable in a fiduoiary 
oapacity under a disposition not made by himself or exercisable as 
mortgagee; 
(10) "incumbrances" includes mortgages and terminable charges; 
(11) "interest in expectancy" includes an estate in remainder at 
reversion and every other future interelt whether vested or oontingent, 
but does not include reversioDs expectant upon the determination of 
le.leI; 
10 
15 
20 
25 

5 
10 
15 
20 
26 
30 
2 
(1.11) "legal representative" meaDS a person who in law represents 
the estate of a deceased person, and includes any person who inter-
meddles with tbeestate of tb~ deceased, and also includes, in the case 
where the deceased was a coparcener of a Hindu family, the manager 
for the iime being of the family; 
(13) "power to appoint property" meaDS power to determine the 
disposition of property of which the person invested with the power is 
Dot the owner; 
(14) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(15) "property" inoludes any interest in property, movable or 
immovable, and the proceeds of sale thereof and any money or invest-
ment for the time being repre~nting the proceeds of sale: 
E~planation 1.-Tlie creation by a person or with his consent of a 
debt or other right enforceable against him personally or against pro-
perty which he was or migbt· become competent to dispose of, or to 
charge or burden for his own benefit, shan be deemed to have been 
a disposition made by that person, and in ,elation to such a. disposi-
tion the expression "property" shall include the debt or right created. 
E~planation e.-The extinguishment at the expen~ of the 
deceased of 8 debt or other right shall be deemed to have been a dis-
position made by the deceased in favour of the person for whose benefit 
the debt or right was extinguished, and in relation to suoh a dis-
position the expression "property" shall include the benefit con felTed 
by the extinguishment of the debt or right; 
(16) ··property passing on the death" includes property passing 
either immediately on the death or after any interval, either certainly 
or contingently, and either originally or by way of substitutive 
limitation, and "on the death" includes "at a period ascertainable 
only by reference to the death"; 
(17) "representation" meatls probate of a will or letters of 
administration; 
(18) .. "settled property" means prop,&ty which stands limited to, 
or in trust for, any persons, natural or j1lPldical, by way of sucoession, 
whether the Bett~ement took eRect· before or after the commencement 
of this Act; and "settl.ement" means any disposition, including a 
deaication or endowment, whereby property is settled; 
(19) "Valuer" means 8 Valuer appointed under section 4. 
8. InterpretatiOn.-(l) For the purposes of this Act-
(a) a person shall be d~emed competent to dispose of property 
i,f he has suoh an estate or interest therein or luch general power as 
would, if be were .ui JUTi., ~mable him to dispose of the property; 
(b) a. person shall be deemed to diapoae of property to whloh he 
bas acquired title, even if he hal acquired title to it· in one form and 
disposes of it in another; 
(0) a disposition "kine effect out of the imerest of the deoeaaed 
,hall b.e deemed to have been made by him, whether the concurrence 
of aD,. other pelIOn was or wa. DO' required ; 
<Ii) morey which a p8l'11OD h ... a general power to oharge on the 
property of another person shall be deemed to be an interest in .ut 
proper1ly of whioh the former has power to dispose ; 

8 
(a) the domicile of a person shall be det,ermined as if the 
provisions of the Indian Succession Act. 1925 (XXXIX of 1925). on the 
subject applied to him. 
(2) In Parts II and DI of 'this Act, any referenc,e to, any interest dis-
posed of, policy of insurance effected, annuity or other interest purchased " 
or provided or to any gift. setth,ment, disposition or transfer of property 
made, shall be construed as including any such interest, policy, annuity. 
gift, settlement or disposition, as the case may be. whether it was disposed 
of, effected, purchased or provided, or made before or after the commence- 10 
ment of this Act. 
t.. _,tate dUty autborm ... -(l) There Khnll btl the following nuthori· 
tips for the IJllrpoRes of this Ac·t,. namely:-
(0) the Board. 
(b) Controllers of Estate Duty. 
(0) Valuers. 15 
(g) The Central Government may appoint as many Controllers of 
Estate Duty as it thinks fit and they shall. subject. to the control of the 
Board, perform their functions in respect of such estates or classes of 
estates and such areas IlS are assigned to them by the Board. 
(8) The Central Government shall. within twelve months after the com· 20 
men cement, of this Act and may thereafter, from time to time, appoint a 
sufficient number of qualified persons to aot 8S Valuers for the purposes 
of this Act and shall fix a scale of charges for the remuneration of such 
persoDFI. 
(4) Subject to the rules nnd orders of the C.entral Government regulating 25 
the conditions of service of per80ns in public services and posts, a 
Controller may appoint such executive or ministerial staff as may be 
necessary to assist him in the execution of his functions. 
(';) All officers and persons employed in the exeoution of thill Act. 
other than Valuers. shall observe and follow the orders. instructions and 30 
directions of the Board. 
PART n.-IMPOSITION OF ESTATE DUTY 
E2:tant of ohaTga 
5. Levy of .... te du',.-(l) In the case of every person dying after 
tIre commencement" of this Act. there shall, save as hereinafter expressly 35 
provided, be levied Bnd paid upon the principal value asoertained 8S 
hereinafter provided of all property, settled or not settled. including 
agricultural land situate in the States specified in the Schedule to this 
Act, wJ!ich passes on the death of such person. a duty cRlled "estate 
duty" at the rates tixed in accordance with section 34. fO 
(g) The Central Government may, by notification in the OfBolal 
Gazette, add the names of any other States to Ule Schedule in respect 
whereof resolutions have been paesed by the Legislatures of "those States 
that Parliament may legislate in respect. of estate duty on agrioultural 
lands situate in those States, and on th,e iSllue of any luch notifioation the 45 
States so added .hall be deemed to be States spedfled in the Schedule 
within the meaning of, ,aub.seotioD(l). 
Property Wlllioh i. tU,,,.,d to ?GI' 
I. Iftperty wlUdD d' .... DI eapaclty.-Property which the deceased 
was at the time of his death competent to dispose of shall be deemed to 50 
pass on his death. ' 

10 
20 
30 
*!l'fl*' 
7. lllteru" ceulJl& oa deaUl.-(l) Subject to the provlSlons of this 
section, property in whioh the deceased or any other person had an 
interest ceasing on the death of the deceased shall be deemed to pass on 
the deceased's death to the extent to whioh a benefit accmes or &rises 
by the cessor of such inter.est, including, in partioular, a coparcenary 
interest in the joint family property of a Hindu family governed bJ the 
Mitakshara, Marumakkattayam or AliY88&ntana law. 
(B) If a member of a Hindu coparcenary governed by the Mitakshara 
school of law dies, then tbe provisions of sub-section (.I) shall not apply 
with respect to the interest of the deceased in the coparcenary property 
unless the deceased had completed his eighteenth year, or unless, at the 
time of his death, bis father or other male ascendant in tlte male line was 
not a coparcener of the same family. 
Ezplana.tion.-Wbere tbe deceased was also a member of a sub-copar-
cenary (within the coparcenary) possessing separate property of its own, 
the provisions of this sub-section shall have eftect separately in respect of 
the coparcenary and the sub-ooparcenary. 
(3) If a member of any taTWad or tava.hi governed by the Maru-
makkattayam rule of inheritance or a member of a kutumba or kavaru 
governed by the Aliyasantana rule of inheritance dies, then the provisio:18 
of Rub,spction (1) shall not apply with respeot to the interest of tbe 
deceased in tbe property of the ta.rwa.d, tava.hi, kutumba or kallaru, as 
the case may be, unless the deceased bad completed his eighteenth year. 
(4) The provisions of sub-seotion (1) shall not apply to the property in 
which the deceased or any other person had an interest only as holder of 
8n office or recipient of the benefits of a charity, or a8 a corporation sob. 
8. Gila mortiB cauBa.-Property taken as a gift made in contemplatioll 
of death shall be deemed to PRSS on the donor'~ death. 
Eeplana.tion.-In this section, the exp~ssion "gift made in oontem-
plation Qf death" bas the same meaning as in section 191 of the Indian 
Suooession Aot, 1925 (XXXIX of 1925). 
9. GUt. WlWD a cenabL' period before ~ath.-Property taken under a. 
disposition made by the deceased purporting to operate as an immediate 
gift inter lIi1l08 whether by way of transfer, delivery, declaration of t1'lllt, 
s(!ttiement upon persons in 8uccession, or otherwise, which shall not ha.ve 
been bona fide mad~ two years or more before the death of the deceased 
shall be deemed to pass on the death: 
Provided tbat in the eBBe of gifta made for publio charitable purposel 
the period shall be six months. -
10. GUm wh ...... made wilen doIlor DOt IIlUrely aclucled.-Pro-
perty taken under any gift, whenever made, shall be deemed to poss on 
the donor's death to the extent that bona fide p08seuion and enjoyment 
of it was not immedia.tely assumed by the donee and thenceforward re-
tained toO the entire exclusion of the donor or of any benefit to him by COll-
tract or otberwise: • 
Provided that the property shall not b'i! deemed to pass by reason only 
that it was not, 88 from tihe date of the gift, exclUSively retained. al 
atGresaid, if, by means of the Iurrender of the reserved benefit or other-
wise, it is lubsequently enjoyed to the entire exclusion of the donor or of 
any benefit to him lor at least two years before the death. 
11. LImited lDtereN d'9*'4 of WlWD .. certalD period before 
deatll.-{l) Subject to the provisionl of .hil section, where an interest 
limited to cease qn a death has been ·d~poaed of or hal deteriliDed 

whether by surrender, aSlurarute, ciivelting, forieiture or in any otker 
manDor (except by the expiration of a fixed period at the expiration of 
whicn the interest was limited to cease), whether wholly or partly, aud 
whether for value or not, after becoming an interesi in posseasiOD,-
(0) if apart from the dilposition or detennination the property in 5 
which the interest subsisted would have p8BBed on the death under 
section 5, that property shall be deemed by virtue of this section to 
be included 8S to the whole thereof in the property passing on tIM 
dE:8th; or 
(h) if apart from the disposition or ietermination the property 10 
in whieh the interest subsisted would have been deemed by virtue 
of .. ection 7 to be included to a partticular extent in the property 
passing on the death, the property in whioh the interest subsisted 
shall be deemed by virtue of this section to be included to that extent 
in the property passing on the death. llS 
(2) Where the relevant disposition or determinatiOn was bona fide 
effected or sutJered not less than two years before the death (or, if it 
W8S effected or suffered for public charitable purposes, not less than six 
months before the death), the preceding But1-section shan not have etJect--
(a) if bona fide possession and enjoyment of the property in 20 
which the interest subsisted was assumed immediately thereafter 
by the person becoming entitled by virtue .of or upon the disposition , 
or determination and thenceforward retained to the entire exclusion 
of the person who had the interest and of any benefit to him by 
contract or otherwise: or U 
(b) in the case of a partial determination, if *he conditions 
specified in the preceding paragraph were not satisfied by reBson only 
of the retention or enjoyment by the deceased of possession of some 
part of the property, Or of some benefit, by virtue of the provisions 
of the instrument under which he had the interest: . 30 
Provided that nothing in this Bub-section shall be oonstrued a8 afteotiug 
any charge of estat,e duty arising otherwise than by virtue ot the provisions 
of the preceding sub-sect·ion. 
(3) In the application of sub-section (1) to ~ case in which an incum-
brance on the property hi which the interest in question subsisted has 35 
been created by associated operations (as hereinafter defined in section 
26) which included a disposition of tilat interest, references to that 
property shall be construed BS references to that property free from ~e 
incumbrano,e, except in a oaae in which the incumbrance was oreated for 
consideration in money or money's worth which WB8 appUed for pur- '0 
poses calculated to maintain or increase the value of that property, and, 
in that case, shall be construed as references ~ that property subjeot to 
the incumbrance to the extent to which the consideration was 80 applied. 
12. SettleiDeDbi with reiervatiOll.-Property passing under any 
settlement made by the deceased by deed or any other instrument not 4i 
taking etJect as a will whereby an interest in such property for life or any 
other period determinable by reference to death is reserved either express-
ly or by implioation to the settlor or whereby the settlor may have re-
served to himself the right by the exercise.of any power, to r,estdre to 
himself or to reclaim tile absolute interest in such property shall be 50 
deemed to pass on the settlor's death. 
E~planation.-A settlor reserving an interest in the s,ettled property for 
the maintenance of any .ef his relatives (as defined in section ~6) or of 
himself and anv of his relatives shall be deemed to 1I8serve an interest 
for himself within the meaning of this 8eotion. 55 

5 
10 
1~ 
,20 
30 
35 
40 
55 
6 
13. Joint lDv.tmeDtI.-Where B persolJ, having been absolutely en· 
titled to any property or to the funds with which any property wal 
purchased, has caused it to be transferred to or vested in himself and any 
other perSon jointly, whether by . disposition or otherwise, either by him· 
self alone, or in concert, or by arrangement, with any other person SO 
that the beneficial interest in some part of that property paSses or accrues 
by survivorship on his death to the other person, the whole of that pro· 
perty shall be deemed to pass on the death. 
14. PallCiel kept up lor a donee.-(l) .Moncy received under a policy 
of insurance eftect.ed by a.ny person on his life, where the policy is wholly 
kept up by him for the benefit of a donee, whether nominee or assignee. 
or 11 part of such money i~ proportion to the premiums paid by him, where 
the policy is partiaUy kept up by him for such benefit, shall be deemed to 
pass 011 the death of the u!;sured. 
E~lanation.-A policy of insurance on the life of a deoeased person 
eJiected by virtue or in consequence of a settlement made by the deceased 
shall be treated as having been effected by the deceased. 
(2) ]<'or the purposes of sub-section (1), SO much of the premiums paid 
on any policy of insurance as was, by virtue or in consequence of a settle· 
ment made by the delleased, paid out of property, whether or not provided 
by the deceased, comprhwd in the settlement or out of income, whether 
or not provided by the deceased, arising under the settlement, shall be 
treated 8S having been paid by the deceased: 
, Provided that any payments which were not made either out of pro-
perty provided directly or indirectly by the deceased for the purposes of 
the settlement, or out of property repres,enting that property, or out of 
income provided directly or indirectly by the deceased whether arising 
from such property or otherwise, shall not be treated as having been made 
by the deceBsed if the Controller is satisfied that those payments were 
not made as part of any reciprocal arrangements between the deoeased 
and auy other person. 
(3) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) the expression "settlement" includes any disposition,trullt, 
covenant, agreement or arrangement; Illld 
(b) a person shall be deemed to have made a settlement if he 
has made or entered into the settlement directly or indirectly, and in 
particular (but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
words of this clause) if h~ has provided or undertaken to provide funds 
direotly or indireotly for the purposes of the settlement, or has made 
with any other person a reeiproca.l arrangement for that other person 
to make or enter into the settlement. 
115. AJmulty or otber lDtenlt purchued or provided by the deceued.-
Any annuity or other interest, including moneys payable under a policy of 
life assuranoe, purchased or provided by the deceas,ed, either by himself 
alone or in COllcert or by arrangement with any other persOD shall be 
deemed to pass on his death to th.e extent of the beneficial interest accru-
ing or arising, by survivorship or otherwise, on his death. 
B:eplanation.-The extent of the beneficial interest must be asc'erta:l\ed 
without regard toO any interest in expectancy which the beneficiary may 
have had therein before the death. 
18. ADnu1ty or other lDterelt purchue4 or provided out of propertJ 
del'lved from the deceased.-(I) Section 15 shall have effect in relation 
to any annuity or other interest that was purcbased or provided wholly 
or in part by Blly person who was at any time entitled to, or amongst 
whose resources there was at any time included, any property derived 

7 
from the deceased, as if that annuity or other interest had been provided 
by the deceased, or, if it is proved to the ,satisfaction of the Controller 
that the application of all the property derived from the deceased would 
have been insufticient to provide the whole of that annuity or other intereat, 
as if a similar annuity or interest of an amountzeduced to an extent pro- I 
portionate to the insuffic~ency proved had been provided by the deceased: 
Provided that for the purpose of determining whether there would 
have been any such insuffioiency as aforesaid. and the extent thereof, 
there shall be excluded from the property derived from the deoeased any 
part thereof as to which it is proved to th,e satisfaction oi the Controller 10 
that the disposition of which it, or the property which it represented, was 
the subject-matter, was not mad.e with reference to, or with a view to 
enabling or facilitating, the purchase or provision of the annuity or other 
interest, or the recoupment in any manner of the cost thereof. 
(2) In this section the following expressions have the meanings hereby 11 
assigned to them respectively, namely :-
(a) •• property derived from the decea!l~d" means allY property 
which was the subject-matter of a disposition made by the deceased, 
either by himself alone or in concert or by arrangement with' any 
other person, otherwise than for full consideration in money or 10 
money's worth paid to him for his own use or benefit, or which 
represented any of the subj,ect-matter of such a disposition, whether 
directly or indirectly, and whether by virtue of one or more interme-
diate dispositions and whether any such intermediate disposition was 
or WRR not for full, or partial consideration: aa 
Provided that where the first-mentioned disposition was for 
full consideration in money or money's worth paid to the deceased 
for his own lise or benefit and it is proved to the satisfaction of the 
Controller that the disposition was not part of associated operations 
which included- 3() 
(a) a disposition by the deceased, either by himself alone or 
in concert or by arrang.ement with any other person, otherwise 
than for full consideration in money or money's worth paid to 
the deceased for his own use or benefit ; or 
(b) a disposition by any other person operating to reduce the aa 
yalue of the property of the deceased ; , 
thell, in considering whether estate duty should be charged the said 
first. mentioned disposition shall be left out of aceount a8 if this pro-
vision did not apply in relation to it.; 
(b) "disposition" includes any trust, covenant, agreement or 40 
arrangement ; and 
(c;) "subject-matter" includes, in relation to any dispositioll, any 
anllual or periodical payment made or payable under .or by virtue 
of the disposition. 
(3) }'or the purpose of section sa the deceased shall be deemed to 44 
have had an interest in any property included by virtue of this section 
in the property passing on the death of the deceased. 
Special p,of)isiom ,elating to t,a.ns!era to ~ompanies 
17. Property traDaferred to a controlled compa.ny.-(l) Where the 
deceased has made to n controlled oompany 8. transfer of any property 50 
(other than an interest limited to cease onbia death or property which he 
transferred in a fiduciary capacity), and any beneflts a~cruing to the 
deceased from the company accrued to him In the three years ending with 
biB death, the asse. of the complP.ny shall be deemed for the purposes of 

10 
15 
40 
50 
~ 
.. tate duty to be inoluded in the property passing on his death to an 
utenll detJermined in accordanoe with IlIb·section (2). 
(2)" The edent to whioh the allek of the compaOf are to be d.eemed 
to be included 8S aforesaid shall be the proportion asoertained by oom-
pariug the aggnwate amount of the benefits acoruing to the deceased from 
the company in the last three acoounting .,.ears wJlth the a'ggregate amount 
of the net inoome of the company for the .aid yean : 
Provided that-
(ca) where, in any of the .aid accounting yed, the oompany 
sustained a loss, the amount of that loss shall be deducted in 
.. certaining the said ~ggregate net income of the company; 
(b) where the company oame into enstenoe in the I .... year bub 
one, or in the last, of the said acoounting years, the referenoes in this 
sub-aeotion to the said accounting years shall be construed as 
references to the last two, or, as the CS8e may he, the last, of those-
years. 
(3) The assets of the company which are deeme6 to be included in the 
property passing on the d.eath of the deceased by Tirtue of thi. aectioll 
shall include any assets thereof wlaich have been disposed of or diatributed 
by the company at any time betw.een the beginning of the first of the 
8ctlOunting years aforesaid arid the death of the deceased either-
(a) in or towards satisfaction of rlghtaattaching to share. in or 
debentures of the company, or 
(b) otherwise howsoever except as follows, that ia to say, by way 
of sale for full oonsideration in money or money's worth received by 
the company for ik own use and benefit, or in or towards disoharge 
of taxes or rates ot other liability imposed by or under an enactment, 
or in or towards discharge of a fine or penalty or a liability for tort 
inourred without collusion with the injured party, including assets 
which have been so disposed of or distributed in a winding up, whether 
continuing at or completed before the death: 
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to assets dispoaed of 
or distributed by way of payments from which income-tax was deductible, 
or which were ass,essable to iuoome-tax, of amounts not exceeding in t,he 
aggregate, RS respects payments made in any accounting year or iu the 
period between the end of the last acoounting year and the death of the 
deoeased, the amount of the income of the company for that year or 
period. 
(4) The Board may make rules-
(a) preSCribing the class of companies which shall be deemed to 
be controlled companies and the class of dispositions or operations 
which shall be deemed to be transfers; 
(b) prescribing the matters to be treated 88 benefits accruing to 
the deceased from 8uch a company, 'he manner in which thpir 
amount is to be detennined, and the time at which they are to be 
treated as accruing; 
(e) prescribing the manner in which the net income and the 
value of the assets of such a company are to be determined; 
(d) prescribing the manner in which the aeoountJing year is to 
be reckoned; 
(e) prescribing the manner in wlftch the _res and 4ebentures 
·of lIuch a company pR8Sing upon tJhe death of the dec(>88ed Bre to 
be valued for estate dut,.; 

g 
(j) pre.cribing the conditions upon which and the ex .... 
whioh transactiont in the name of sueb a. company thall be de.mell 
to be bona fide tranaaotions for full contideratllon; and 
(g) generally for the purpose of checking the avoidance ot est. .. 
duty through the machinery of such a eomRany: i 
Provided that aU rules made under thia sub·section shall be laid be-
fore the House of the People not less than fifteen days before the date 
of their final publication. 
\6) For the purposes of section 83 the deceased shall be ~emecl 
to have had an inter81t in the prope"y deemed by virtue of this section It 
ta be included in the property passing on hie deB·th. 
18. Daty of OODlpaDJ and otIlcen of comp., to liv. blformaUon to 
OoatroUer on de&th of t.r&Uferor.-(l) Whore the deeeased has made a 
transfer of property to a controlled. company BS described in section W 
the company shall be under obligation to inform the Controller within ] IS 
one month from the date of the deaflh of the deceased, of the death, of 
the fact that the deceased made a transfer of property to the company, 
and of the fact that benefits accrued to the deceased from the company, 
anti every person who was an officer of the company at that date, or if 
the company has been wound up and dissolved before that date, who 20 
'!Vas an officer of the company at any time, shalt be under the like ob· 
ligation as respeots such of the facts aforesaid as are within his knowledge, 
unless he knows, or has reasonable cause for -believing, that the infor. 
mation in question has already been given to the Controller by the 
compllny or lome other person. 25 
(9) If the company or any such person as aforesaid who is under 
obligation by virtue of the preceding sub.section to give a·ny information 
to the Cont~oller makes default in the performance of that obligation, the 
Controtlel" may impose upon the defaulter a penRlty not exceeding one 
thousand rupees. SO 
It. Oollection aDd lDc1deace of "at, UDder aectlOD 17.-(1) The 
following persons shall be accountable for tbe duty payable 00 the death of 
the deceased by virtue of section 17, namely:-
(II) the company; 
(b) any person (other than a boaa fidl! purchaser for full con· 35 
sideration in money or money's worth received by the company for 
its own use and benefit) who receives, whether directly from the 
company or otherwise, or disposel of, any Msets whioh the companJ 
had, whether as capital or as income, at the death w at any time 
thereafter;' . '0 
(c) any person who received anf distributed assets of the IiOIIP 
pony on their distribution: 
Provided that a person shall not,-
(I) by vit1ue of clause (b), be acoountable in respect of a~ Msets 
for any duty in excess of the TOlue of those MBets, or '5 
(ia:) by viriue of claus8 (c), be accountable in respect of any 
aSBets for more than a part of the duty bearing to the whole thereof 
the same proportion as the value of the distribution of those assets 
bears to the principal value of the assets of the company paHing 
on the death by virtue of seotion 17. 50 

10 
15 
10 
Ezp14nation ........ For the purposes of this sub-section the expressions "dis-
tributed a8sets" and .. assets of the compiWy passing on the death" do 110t 
. ~clude any distributed assets of the company which the deceased received 
on their distribution; and a person who, having receivsdany distributed 
88sets of the company I hae died b~fore the deceased shall be deemed to 
have been a person aocountable by virtue of. clause (~). 
(2) Where a compau) inC<¥"porated outaide the territories to which 
this Act extends is accountable for any duty by virtu~ of the preceding 
sub-section or of this sub-section, every person who is a member of that 
company at the death shall also be accountable for a rateable part of th.t· 
duty in proportion to the value of his interest in that compllny. 
(3) A person accountable for any duty by virtue of this section shall. 
for the purpose of raisiug Rnd paying the duty, have all the powers con-
. ferred 011 acoowltable parties. 
(4) On a winding up of the COlnpany. sub-section (1) of seotion 280 fA. 
the Indian Cornpanies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913). shall have efJect 8S if 
~ele were included in olause (a) of that sub-section a reference to any 
duty payable in respect of assets of the company plAssing On a death by 
virtue of section 16 of this Act, and section 129 of the Indian CompanIes 
Act, 1913, shall have eff~ct !iCCOl'dingly. 
(6) The duty payable on the death of . the deceased by virtue of 
section 17 shall be a Drst charge by way of floating security on the 6ssets 
which the company had at the death or has .at allY time thereafter, and 
any part of the duty for which by virtue of clause (c) of sub-section 
(1) any person is acoountable in respeot of any distributea assets shall be 
a -first charge also on those assets: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall operate to make any 
property chargeable as against a bona fide purchaser thereof fil' valuable 
l'onsideration without notice. 
30 (6) Where any duty bas beeD-
(a) paia by a person accountable therefor by virtue only of clauR8 
(0) of Bub-seotion (1); or 
(b) raiBed by virtue of Bub-B.ection (5) out of any distributed assets 
charged therewith; 
that person or, as the case may be. the person who was entitled to those 
assets subject to the charge, may (without prejudice to any right of l'on-
tribution or indemnity which be may have apart from this Rub.Rection) 
recover the amount of the duty so paid or raiRed as aforesaid from any 
person who is accountable therefor otherwise than by virtue of the said 
clause (0). 
(7) No part of the duty paid by the ~ompany shall be reooverable by , 
it from any person on the ground only that he is entitled to any interest 
in. or to any S\lm charged on, the Rssets which the company bad at the 
death of the deceased .. 
45 (8) -Th~ provisions of sub-sections (1) and (8) of section 50 shall Dot 
have effect in relation to the duty payable by virtue of section 17. 

11 
PART lII.-ExCEPTlONS FROM TUB CHARGE OF DUTY 
20. I'orelp prop8rtJ.-(l) There shaH Hot be iucluued ill the property 
pilI' sing on the death of the deceased- ' , . 
(a) immovable property situated outside the territories to whioh 
this Act extends or immovable property consisting of agricultural land 5 
!!itu8ted in auy State other than the States speoified in the Schedule 
to this Act; • 
(b) movable property situated outside the territories to whioh 
this Act extends at the time of the death unless-
(I) in the oase of any property. whethpr settled or not, the 10 
deoeased was domiciled ill the said t.erritories at the time of his 
death; or 
(ii) in the case of settled property of which the deceased was.. 
a life tenant, the settlor was domiciled in the said territoriel 
at the dat,e the settlement took effect. 15 
(2) The Board may make rules reguIuting the manner in which the 
nature and locality of ditlerent classes of assets shall be determined for 
the purposes of this seotion. 
21. Property held by the d.ceue4 u trutee.-Property p688ing on the 
deltth of the deceased shall not be deemed to include property held by 20 
the deoeased as trustee for &nOtbel' person under a disposition not made 
by the deceased or under Q disposition made by the deceased where 
(whether by virtue of the original disposition or of a subsequent surrender 
of any benefit originally r,eserved to the deceased or otherwise) possession 
Imd enjo.,'ment of the property was bona fide Rssumed by the beneficir.ry J5 
at least tWlr years before the death and thellceforward retained by him to 
the entire exclusion of the deceased or of allY benefit to the deceased by 
contract or otherwise. 
22. IDterelt ftJIlDa before beOOllliDg an m .... t III po ..... oa.-In the 
CBse of settle,l property where the interest of any persoil under the settle- 30 
ment f'lils or determines by reason of his death before it becomes an 
interest in po8llession, and on~ or more subsequent limitations under the 
Bettlement continue to subsist, the property shall not be deemed to pass 
un his denth by reason only of the failure or determination of that inter,est. 
Explanation I.-Where property is settled by .. person on himself for as 
life and aft,er his" death on Ilny other person, with an ultimate reversion of 
an ahsolute interest or absolute power of disposition to the Bettlor, the 
property shall not be deemed to pass to the settlor on the death of such 
other person by reason only that the settlor being then in possession' of 
the property as tena~t for life beoomes, 'in consequenoe of suoh deatb, 40 
entitled to the immediate reversion or acquires 8n absolute power to dis-
pose of the whole property. ' 
EJJplallation .e.-Where the interest of a person in.settled property 
consists of an interest in the residue or part of the residue of all estate 
of a testator or intestate and the said estate continues to be under admi- 4:5 
nil;tration until the death of the person, the said interest of the person in the 
residue or part of the residue shall be deemed to have become at! interest 
in posf'lession on the date as from which the income from the residue or 
part of the residue would have been attributabl~ to that interest if the 
reRidue had been ascertained immediately after the death of the testator 50 
or intestllte. 

10 
1.; 
35 
4.0 
45 
12 
II. Proptrt1 rtYerUq to diIponer.--(l) Where by • disposition. of an,. 
property an interest ill conferred on any perllon, other than the disponer, 
for the life of such ptlnon or determinable on his death and 8?ch person 
enters into possession of the interest, and thenceforward retatns poss~s­
aion of it to the entire exclusion of the disponer or of any benefit to him 
by contract or otherwis~, and the 'onl! benefit whi~h the ~isponer retains 
in the property, is iublect to such hfe or det,ermmable mterellt and no 
ot~r interest, even contingent, is created by the disposition, then, on· 
the death of such p~rson, the property shall not be deemed to pass by 
reason only of its reveljter to the disponer in his life time. 
(2i Where tty a disposition of any property any such interest a~ is 
. mentioned in sub· section (1) is oonferred on two or more persons eltaer 
severally or jointly or in sucoession, sub·section (1) shall apply in like 
manner 8& where the interest is conferred on one per9Cm: 
Provided that 8ub.seotion(1) shall not apply wher,e such pS'BOn or 
persons taking the 8aid life or determinable interest had lUi Blly time prior 
to the disposition been hiDlself or themselves competent to dispose ot- the 
said property. 
2f. Income or .. tUed property aoquired OD death of .poue,-Where a 
husband or wife is entitled, either solely or jointly with the other, to the 
income of any property settled by the other under a disposition which took 
effect before the commencement of this Act and on his or her death the 
survivor becomes entitled to the incom,e of the property (8.8 ~istinguished 
from the propeIif itself) settled by such lIurvivor, estate duty shall not be 
payable in respeot of that property until the death of that survivor. 
I 
26. Property paaIDg bJ rellOD or a bona fide parellas. for full or 
partial coDlideratioD in mone,.-(1) Subject to the provisions of sedion 2G 
and section 44 estate duty shall not be p8yable in respect' of property pas· 
sing on the death of the deceased by reason only of a bona fide purchase 
from the person under whose disposition tbe property passes, nor in res· 
pect of the falling into possession of the reversion on any lease for lives, nor 
in respect of the determiDation of any annuity fbr lives, where sucb purcbase. 
was made, or such lease or annuity gran~d, for full consideration in money 
or money'R worth paid to the vendor or grantor for his own use or benefit, 
or in the case of a lease for the use or benefit of any person for whom the 
grantor was B trustee. 
(2) Where any such purchase was made, or lease or annuity granted, for 
partial consideration in money or money's worth paid to the vendor or 
grantor for his own use or benefit, or in the case of 8 leaae for the use or 
benefit of any person for whom the grantor was a trustee, the value of the 
eonsideration shall be allowed 88 a deduction from the value of the pro-
flerty for the purpose of estate duty. 
28. DlIpOlitlOu III !aV01l1' of relatlYu.-(l) Where a person dying after 
thil commenoement of this Act has made a disposition of property in favour 
of a relative of his, the creation or disposition in favour of the dece8sed of 
an annuity or otlher interest limited to cease on the death of the deoeased or 
of any other person shall not be treated for the purpos88 of section 25 or 
Rec,ion 42 ail considerat,ion for the disposition made by the deceAsed. 
(!) If the deceased bas made in favour of a controlled company a. dis· 
position which, if i, had been made in favour of 8 rel8tive of his, would have 
fallen within sU~'ieotion (1), thil. section shaH have effect in like me.nner as 

if the disposition had beeo made in favour of a relative of his, unless it is 
.hown to the satisfaction of the Controller that no relative of the deceased 
was, at the time of the disposition or subsequently during the life of the 
deceased, a member of the company. 
E~pl4nation.-For the purposes of this sub·section a person who is, Or 5 
ia deemed by virtue of this provision to be, a lIlember of a controlled 
company which is a member of another such oompany shall be deemed to 
be a member of that other oompany. 
(3) Where there have been associated operations efteoted with reference 
to the receiving by the deceased of any payment in respect of suoh an &nnui., 10 
or other interest as is mentioned in sub·section (1), or efleeted with a view 
to enabling him to receive or to facilitating the receipt by him of any such 
payment, this seotion shall have eflect in relation to each of those associated 
operations 88 it has eflectin relation to the creation or disposition in favour 
• of the deoeased of such an annuity or other interest. 15 
(4) In this section-
(I) "relative" means, in relation to the deceased,-
(a) the wife or husband of the deceased, 
(b~ the father, mother, children, uncles, and aunts, of the 
deceased, and 20 
(0) any issue of any person falling within either of the 
preceding sub-clauses and the other party to a marriage with any 
such person or issue; 
(ia) reference to "children" and "issue" include referenoe to 
illegitimate children and to adopted children; 26 
(iii) "annuity" inoludes any series of payments, whether inter·COll. 
nected or not, whether of the same or of varying amounts, and 
whether payable at regular intervals or otherwise, and payments of 
dividends or int'!!rests on shares in or debentures of a company shall 
be treated for the purposes of this section as a series of payments 30 
constituting an annuity limited to oeaBe on a death if the payments 
are liable to cellse on the death, or the amounts thereof are liable to 
be reduced on the death, by reason directly or indirectly of the extin· 
guishment or any alteration of rights attaching to, or of the issue of 
any shares in or debentures of a company; 86 
(it!) "a8Bociated operations" means any two or more operations of 
any kind being,-
(a) operations which aflect the same property, or on6'of whioh 
aftect. lOme property and the other or 'others of which affect pro· 
perty which represents, whether direotly or indirectly, that· pro- 40 
perty, or income arising from that property, or any property reo 
presenting accumulations of any suoh income; or 
(b) any two operations of whioh ODe is effected with referenoe 
to the other, or with a view to enabling it to be eflected or to facio 
litating its being effected, and any third operation having a like 4/S 
relation to either of those two. and any fourth operation having a 
like relation to any of thOle three. and so on; , 
whether those operations are effeoted by the same person or by difle· 
t'ent persons, wheth.er they are connected otherwise than as aforesaid 
or not, and whether they are contemporaneous or any of them precede. 50 
or follows any other. 

14 
27 •• fleet of new. or Inerelled. ratel of duty on ceHalD prior AlII &D4 
mon, .... -Where an interest in expectancy it' any property hilS, 
whether before or after the eommenccment of this Act, been bona fide said 
or mortgaged for full consideration in money or money's worth,8nd the 
I) rates of estate duty in force in the case of a person dying when the interesb 
falls into possession are higher than the rates in force, if any, in the case of 
a l'erson dying at the time of the sale or mortgage, then- • 
10 
15 
(a) no other duty on that property shall be payable by the p,* 
chaYAr or mortgagee when the interest falls into possession than the 
duty, if any, which would have been payable if the ratelof estate duty 
app1icable had been the rates in force, if any, in the case of a person 
dying at the time of the sale, or mortgage, and 
(b) in the case of a mortgage, any higher duty payable by the 
mortgagor shall rank as a charge subsequent to that of the mortgagee. 
IS. Settled property In n.pect of which ace the date of tile _t\lemen' 
lltate duty has been paid on the death of the deceuecl'. 1pOUIe.-If esta1le 
duty has already been paid in respeot of any sett.led property since the 
date of the settlement, on the death of one of the parties to a marriage, 
20 the estate duty shall not be pnyable ill respect there01 on the death of the 
other party to the marriage, unless the latter was at the time of his death, 
or had been at any time during the continuance of the settlement, com· 
petent to dispose of such property, and, if on his death subsequent limita" 
tions under the settlement toke effect in respeot of Buch property, was 
'25 
sui juri, at the time of his death, or had been sui juris at any time while 
80 competent to dispose of the property. 
29. Aireement tor .YOid&llC~ or reD.! of double tuatlon wtib reapect to 
.. tate duty.-The Central Government may enter 'into an agreement with 
the Government of any reciprocating country for the a_voiaance or relief of 
double taxation with respect to estate duty leviable under this Act Qnd 
30 under the corresponding law in force in the reciprooating country and may, 
by notification in the Officiol Gazette, make such provision liS mo;\' he 
necesssry for implementing the agreement. 
Ezplanation.-The expression "reciprocating oountry" for the purposes 
of this Act means any country whioh the Central Government' may, by 
30 notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a reciprocating country. 
30 • .&UowUCI for qulok 1UC0II1Il0ll to IaDd or a ........... -Where the 
Board is satisfied that estate duty has become payable on any property 
ccn"isting of land or on R businesll (not being a. buainell8 carried on by • 
cC'mpany) or uny interest in such land Or business passing upon the deailh 
40 of any person, and that subsequently within five years estate duty has 
again bl:'come payable on the same property or any part thereof passing on 
the death of the person to whom the property passed on the tirst death, 
tbe amount of estate duty payable on the second death in respect of the 
property 110 pusing shall he reduced 8s folloW8:--
46 Where the seMnd death OCCllrs within one year of the ftrst deaflh, 
by 60 per cent.; 
Where the seoond death occurs withi~two years of the firs' 
death, by 40 per cent.; , 
Where'the second death occurs within three y •• ra of tile ftrafl 
d •• th, by 80 per oell'.; 

1:; . 
Wht"re the second death occurs within four yean of the first 
dca.th, \;y 20 per oAnt. ; 
Where the second death occurs within five years of the first 
death, by 10 per cent. : 
l>rovided that where the value on which the duty is payable of the 5 
ploperty on the second death exceeds the value on whioh the duty wu 
payable of the property on the first death, the latter value shall be 
substituted for the fonner for the purpose of calculating the amount of 
duty on which the reduction under this section is to be calculated. 
81. JlzemptlOD of copM'C8DlIi1'J bltert8t of a BlDdu Widow dyfD& wlUlm ,0 
.even yean of ber busb&Dd'. de&tb.-Where on the death of 6 member of 
a Hindu copllrcenary, his interes.t in the copa.rcenary property has devolved 
on his widow, then, if the widow dies within seven years of her husband's 
death and the interest aforesaid devolves upon the members of the 
coparcenal'Y or any of them, no estate duty ~ha1\ be leviable in respect of 15 
the passing ot the interest afore98id on the death of the widow, if and in 
so fhr AS estate duty had been paid in respect of the passing of such 
int.erest 011 the death of her husband. 
82. I:x8mptiODI. redaotiOlll ad other lIIOdJaoatloD •• -The Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make any 20 
exemption, reduction in rate or other modification in respect of estate 
duty in favour of any clasR of property or the whole or any part of the 
property of Blly class of persons. 
PART IV.-.\OORROATION OF PROl'F.R'l'V AND HATES OF DUTY 
83. AggreratiOD.-(l) For determining the rate of estate duty to be 25 
paid on any property passing on the dea.th of ~he deceased, all property 
so pClfsing in respect of which estate duty is ~eviable shall be aggrega.ted 
so 8S to form one estate and the duty shall be' levied at the proper 
gl'aduRted rate on the principal value thereof: 
Pl'Cvided that any property so passing, in which the deceased never 30 
had Rll interest, not being a debt or right or benefit that i. treated .. 
property by virtue of the E:tplanations to clause (lO) of section 2, shall 
not be nggregnted with Rny other property, hut shall be au estate by itself 
and thil estate duty shall be leviable a,t ~he proper graduated rate on the 
principal vruue thereof. 35 
(2~ Ever:v estate shall include all income acorued upon the properfly 
included therein down to and outstanding at the date of the dea.th of the 
deceased. . 
(3) I'roperty pRSlling on any death shall not be aggregated more tha.n 
once nor shall elltate duty in reepflct thereof be levied more than· onoe 4D 
on the same dE'stb. 
34. Batu oJ • ., 10 be IoCOOI'&U.q 10 a_VII Act.-The rate. of estate 
duty shall be aC'cording to sucb scRle as m"y be fixed by an Act of 
Pal'liament. 
PART V.-VAI,UE CRAltOB"RLB 
ID. "'aOlpal fttae Jaow 10 be .. tImated.-(l) The prfuoipal value of 
any property shall be estimated to be the price which, in the opinion of 
the Controller it would fetch if sold in the open ma",et at the time of 
the dpceaaed's d.ath. 

(2) In estimating the principal value under this section the Controller 
shall fix the price of Ithe property according to the market prioe at the 
time of the deceased's death Rnd sh ... ll not make any reduction in the 
estima,t,e on account of the estimate being made on the assumption that 
the. whola property is to be placed on the market at one and the same 
time: 
Provided that where it is proved to the sa.tisfaction of the Controller 
that the value of the property has depreciated by r,eason of the death of 
the deceased, the depreciation shall be taken into account in fixing the 
10 price. 
38. Valuation of 1IIw_ In a private COIIlp&DJ where al1eDat1oD. II 
rlltrictAld.-Where the articles of association of Ii private company (lun-
tain restrictive provisiolls aa to the alienation of shares, the value of the 
shares, if not ascertllinable by reference to the value of the total assets 
15 of the company, shall be estimated to be what they would fetch if they 
could be sold in the open market on the terms of the purchaser being 
entitled to be registered as holder subje,ct to the articles, but the fact 
that a spAcia.1 buyer would for his own special reasons give Q. higher price 
than th<:: price in the open market shall be disregarded. 
20 87, ValuatiOD 01 Inter ... In Pp8Ct&DOJ.-Where an estate includes 
an interest in expectancy, estate duty in respect of that interest shall be 
paid, at the option of the person accountable for the duty, eithel' with 
the duty in respect of the rest of the estate or when the interest falls into 
possession, and if the duty is not paid with the estiate duty in respect of 
25 the rest of the estate, then-
(a) for the purpose of determining the rate of estate duty in 
respect of the rest of the estate, the value of the interest shall be its 
valUe} at the date of the death of the deceased; and 
(b) the rate of estate duty in respect of the interest when it falls 
30 into possession shall be calculated according to its value when it faUs 
into possession. together with the va.lue of the rest of the estate &1 
previously ascertained. 
88. Val1J&tlon 01 bandtl from Intereata celllDl OD 4eaUl.-The va.lue 
of thtl benefit accruing or arising from the cesser of an interest ceasing 
35 on thc death of the deceased sball-
(a) if the interest extended to the whole income of the prop~y, 
bo the principal value of that property; and 
(t.) if the interest extended to 1888 than the whole income of the pro-
perty. be the principal value of an addition to the property equal to ~e 
,0 income to. which the interest extended. 
39. Valuation to be made bJ the OoDtfa!lIer.-Subjeot to the provisioDB 
of this Act, the value of any property for the purpose of 'estate duty shall 
be ascerta.ined by the Controlleriu luch manner and by IUob means &1 he 
thinks tit and if he authorises a person to inspect any property and to 
~ l'eport the value thereof for the purposes of this Act, \hat person may 
enter upon the property and inspect it at such reasonable times os the Con-
troller considetB uecessary, 
00. 00ItI of valuat!oD.-Where the ControllerroQuil'ee, any pfU'1IOD to 
report on the value of any property for t.he purposes of this Act, the 
reasonable costs of such valuation shall be defrayed by the Controller. 

1ft 
&1. OoIlttoler ma, ~ '&lid certUr .au.tbl· ... · .................. e 
Controller on application from a pel'lOD accountable for the duty on any 
property forming part of an estate ahan, where he considera that it 
can convenif'ntly be done, oertify the amount of the valuation aoeeptecl 
by hiIr. for any alasa or description of property forming part of ~oh estate. a 
PART VI.-DEDUOTlolll'l 
•. lie..... faIlll'll- ape ..... 1DcI, wttlllOlDe uceptlolll, Mba aDd 
lncambrDCIII to be &1loWed for ID determbllDg clt.arpabll.... of 
• eltate.-In determining the value of an estate for the purpose of estate 
duty, allowance shall be made for reasonable funeral"expenses and for 10 
debts and incumbrances; but 1m allowance shall not be'made-
(0) for debts incurred by the deceased, or incumbrances crea.ted 
by a disposition ml&de by the deceased, unless, subject to the provisiona 
of section 26, lIuch debts or incumbrances were incurred or created 
bona fide for full consideration in money or money's worth wholly for US 
the d(!censed's own use and benefit and take effect out of his interest, 
or, 
(b) for any debt in respect wh,ereof there is a right to reimburse-
ment from any other estate or person, unleBB suah reimbursement 
C:U1110t ba obtailted, or, 20 
(0) more than once for the same debt or incumbrance charged 
upon m.erent porlions of the estate, 
aud any debt or incumbrance for whi(!h an anowance is made shall be 
deduc·ted from the value of the property liable thereto. 
ta. LlmltAt.Ioa Oil debit declucttbll.-Where a debt or incumbrance has 21 
been incurred or created in whole or in part for the purpose of or in consi-
deration for the purchase or acquisition or extinction, whether by operaaon 
of law or otherwise, of any interest in upeetRncy in any property passing 
or deemed to pap. Oft the death of the deceased and any person whose 
interest in expeotancy is so purchased, acquired, or extinguished becomes 30 
(under any disposition mad:~ or through develution of law from, or under 
the intestacy of, the dece ) entitled to any interest in that property, 
then in dctennining the value of the estate of the deceased for the purpose 
of estate duty no allowance shall be made in respect of such debt or in-
cumbrance, and any property charged with any such debt or incumbranCe 31 
,hall be deemed to paIB freed from that debt or incumbrance: ' 
Provided that-
(a) if pari only of such debt or incumbrance was incurred or 
created for Huch purpose or as such consideration as aforesaid, this 
provision shall apply to that pan of Buch debt or incumbrance only; 40 
and 
(b) if 8 pereon whose interest in expectancy in the property so 
purchased, aequired or extinguished becomes entitied to an intereRt 
in part only of that proper~, tllill ptovision shall apply onl1 ~ suell 
part of the debt or incumbrance 8a bears the same proportIon to tlu! oM 
wbole debt or incumbrance as the Talue of the part of the property 
to an interest In which he becomes entitled bears to the value of the 
. whole of that property. 

· 
10 
l ',,~ " u 
M. ~ ,1bDIut.loDJ.~1) Any allowance, which. but for ',tbiI, pro-
"Vision. would. be macle under aeotion 42 for a debt inourred by the deceued 
.. mentioned in clause (II) of, that 1e0UOD. or for au iDoumb~l.nce cre.,ted 
by a disposition made by the deceased.. therein mentioned, shall be 
subjeQ~ to abatement to aD extent proportionate to the value of ~ of 
th., consideration given therefor which consisted of:- ' 
(eI) property derived from the deceased; or 
(b) consideration not being such property as aforesaid, but given 
by any, perIOn who was at, any time entitl~d to, or amongst whose 
resources there was at aDy WIle included, any property derived. from 
the deoeaaed: 
Provided tha' if, wbere the whole or a part of the consideration given 
consisted of such consideration as is mflntioned in olaU88 (b) of this sub-
section, it is proved to the satisfaction of th~ Controller that the value of the 
15 consideration given, or of that part thereof, as the case may be, exceeded 
that which could have been rendered available by applioa~on of all the 
property derived from the deceased, other than such (if any) of that pro-
perty as iii included in the consideration given or as to whioh the like 
facts are proved in relation to the giving of the consideration as are men-
SO tion,ed in the proviso to Bub-section (1) of section 16 in relation to the 
purchase or provision of an annuity or other interest, no aba.tement shall 
be made in respect of the excess. ' 
(2) Money or money's worth paid or applied by the deceased iu or 
towa.rds satisfaction or dilJcharge of a debt or incumbrance in tIIle case of 
25 which sub-section (1) would have had effect on his death if the debt or 
iucumbrnnl'e had not been satisfied or discharged, Or in radu'!tinn of n debt 
or incumbrance in the case of whioh that sub-section has effect on his 
death, shaU, unless 80 paid or applied three years before the death, be 
treated as propf'rty deemed to be included in the property passing on the 
30 death and cstate duty shaU, notwithlJtanding anything in section 24, be 
payable in respect thereof accordingly. 
(.~) The provisions of sub-section (2) of section 16 shall have effect for 
the purposo of this section as they have effect for the purpose of that 
section. 
35 t5. Debts to perIODS resident out of India not to be ded,cted In Ilnt 
lDItance ezcept from duty-paid property outalde Indl&.-An allowance 
shall not be made in the first instance for dpbts due from the deceased to 
1'f'r~\'1l8 rt'sident out of the tUTitories to which this Aot e~tencls (IInh~As 
cOlltractecl to be paid in the I;Aid territories or chRrg"d on pr/)p,~rties 
40 situate within the snid territories), except out of the value of any property 
of t,he decellseil sihlllte out of the sRid territories in respe~,t of which cAtate 
duty is pflid ; and t.here shall be no repayment of estate duty in rcspect of any 
such debts, eX'3ept to the extent to which it is shown to the satisfaction 
of the Controller that the property of the deceRsed situate in the foreign 
45 cOl1l1try in which the person to whom such debts are due resides is in-
suffident for their r.aymElnt. 
68. Colt of re&Ua1D, or admlD1lttrlDc fortlp property may be allowed 
for Within certain llmltl.-Where the Controller is satisfied that any addi-
tional expense in administering or in realising property has been inourred 
60; by reason of the proPE.'rty being situate out of the territories to whic-h this 
Act extends. he. may mRke an allowance from the va.lue of the property 
00 aoC)Ount of suoh axpeose not eXc,Bediog in aoy oa88 five pel" cent. on' 
the value of the property. t, 

11 
67 . .&IIonDIe lor 411" peIcI III • .....,..JIfOC ..... ....,-W .... 
allY ptopeny pesaing on the dea~ of \b. deceM.dia li;ua\e in a l1on·reoi· 
prooating country and the ControUer Sa .. iliailed ,hail by reaaon· of IUch 
death any duty is payable in thai country in reapect of ~a. prop...,., 
he may make an allowance of the whole or any pan of ~e amount 
of that duty from the yalue of the proper'y. 
RzplIlMtioft.-In this aeotion., the e~reuion "non-reciprocating 
country" means any country other than India which has noil hean 
declared to be • reoiprocating couniry for the purposes of ~ia Aot. 
PABT vn.-coLLllCfio. OJ' 'I'Q Don 
fl. Ketb04 oJ caltaUoD of 4 ••• -E.,._ duty may be collected by 
luch means and in IUch mann.r .. the Board may preaoribe. 
'9. Pqmq\ of 4-, IDa, be IOOIIJ*4 III pnlCrlb14 Gcw .... , 
.curlt.ltl.-The Board may pres'll'ibe th.t Government seourities Ihall be 
10 
accepted in payment of eata*e du*, on such term. as it thinka At. 11 
&0. Penou, &CCo1Ultable, &Ild tillAr 411U" UICl lIabWUM.-(l) Where 
any propeny pUlel on the death of the deceated-
(II) every leg.l represen'.tive to whom ,UGh propert,' 10 p .. ael for 
any beneficial interest in poIseuion or In whom any interet' in the 
property 10 p888ing is a, an,. *lme vesW, 0 
(b) every trustee, guardian, committee or other penon in w1iom 
any interest in the p~perly 110 passing or the management thereof ia 
at any ~ime vested, and 
(e) every penon in whom any interet' in the property 80 pulinl 
is vested in posse98ion by alienation or other derivative ~t.1e, • 
thall be accountable for the whole of the estate duty on the property p88l. 
ing on the death but shall not be li.ble for any duty in exoess of the _. 
of the deceased whioh he actually reoeived or which, b'lt for hi, own neg-
lect or default, he might have received: 
Provided that nothing in this section shan render a person accountable 80 
for duty who acts merely as agent or bailift for another person in the 
management of property. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an 
heir-at-Inw proves to the satisfaction of the Controller that some other per-
son is in adverse possession of any 88sets of the deceased, tpe heir-at-Iaw 315 
shall not be accountable for the portion of \he estate duty payable in res-
pect of such assets: 
Provided that he shall beoome so accoun~ble if, and to Ule enent 
that, he subsequently recovers possessions of suoh 88sets. 
(8) Every person accountabltl for estate duty under the provisions of this '0 
seotion shall, within six months of the death of the deceased or such later 
\ime as th~_ Controller may allow. deliver to the Controller !WId verify to the 
best of his knowledge and belief, an accoun. of aU .he properly in respect 
of which estate duty is payable. 
(') Where' the person accountable knows of any property which he hu ., 
not inoluded in his aooount because he does not know its amount 01' value, 
he may Btatle that sucb property .xi"s, bu, be dO;es not know the amount 
or value thereof and that he undenakes, as soon as the amoun~ and value 

2G' 
are ~ flo briJag a Appleman.., aeooun. ,tberd IIlCl tID .,., ,bMh 
tb~ duiy for whicA he may be ,liable in re.pect cI. suchpropenyllDd aDY 
furiber du'Y payable by reMOD thereof for which l\e IDa)' be liable in 
reapeot of the property mentioned in the original aeoount. 
, (6) Where two or more penon., are accountable, whether In ~e nme 
capacity or in diJIerent. capeoitiea, 'fOr estate duty in respect of any pro-
peny pasaiQg on the death of the deceased, they shall b,e liable jointly 
and severally for the whole of the estate duty on the property 10 paeling. 
61 • ..., pIIIaL beIlmNl to be ill ~a" to 4ellver RMeIDIIl' of 
10 parUcularl of pl'Oper\y II required bJ Ooa.uoUer.-Every 'P61'BOll accountable 
for estate duty, every company t.o whioh, in the opinion of the Controller. 
a transfer of property has been mad~ by the deceased ae mentioned in 
section 17, every person who ia or was at any time an offioer « auditor 
of such a company, and every person whom the Controller believes to 
16 have taken poss,ession ot or administered any part of the estate in respeot 
of which duty ia leviable OR the d •• tll of t.he deceased. or of the income 
of any pan of such estate abell, if required by the Controller. deliver to 
him and verify. to the beat of hie knowledge and belief. a statement of 
such particulars together with s,uch accounts, documents, evidence or 
SO information as th,e Controller may require relating to any property whiob 
~ has reason to believe to form part of an estate in respect of which 
estate jut, it Itrrilible on the death of the deceaeed. 
H. PlIlIlty for del.alt.-Any person who without reuonable cauae hal 
failed to comp]y with the provisions of section 60 or aection 51 or has failed to 
i5 oomply wUh the said proviaionswithin the time allowed, shall be liable 
to pay a penalty of one thousand rupees or a sum equal to double the 
amount of estate duty. it any, ,r,emaining unpaid for which he is account-
able, aoooniing ae 'he Controller may direct: 
Provided that the Controller may reduce the penalty in any particular 
80 cue. 
a. lsecu_ to specafJ III cJaaraeabil propertr wWl dl4&vit oJ 
YllluUolL.-lD all cases In which a grant of representation is applied for 
- within six months of the death of the deceased-
(a) the executor of the deoeased ahall, to the beet of his know-
36 ledge and belief, sp~cify in an appropriate aooouot annesed to the 
affidavit of valuation filed in court under section 19-1 of the COurt·f .... 
Act. 1870 cv;n of 1870), .U the property- in ,reapect of which eaWe 
duty Is payable upon the death of the deceased and shall deliver a 
copy of the delavit with the aocount to the Controller. and 
• (b) no order entitling the applioant to the grant of 1'8preaentatioD 
.hall be made upon hit applioation until he baa deliver,ed the aooount 
presoribed in olaule (.) and baa produced a certificate from tbe Con-
troller under section 66 or section 61 that the estate duty payable in 
respect of the property included in the aocount has been or will be 
C5 paid, or that lI,one is due, as the ease may be. 
N •• nate 411" whlll a .. &lid how &114 WhtIl to be oeIItcted.-(l) 
Estate duty shall be due from the date of the ru,ath of the deceased and 
shall be oollected upon the account delivered under section 50 or olause 
(a) of section 68 or the account prepared under sub-section '(.9) of section 65. 
60 (I) When .my estate duty, pena.lty, in~reBt or any other 8um charge. 
able under thili Act haa been determined in consequence of any order 

.21 
passed under or iD pursWlooceof. this' ,A.~" the Col;I.trQ~ ~ '.tml ~D ~he 
person accountable a notice of .~eman,d ~ the. prescrIbed form BpeClry~., 
the Bum 80 p&:yable and the tlDle wlthm which and the pl~e at ,which 
it is payable. 
. n.. Da.ty &0 be paid OJ' MOm. .. paJDLtDt tunaIIhe4 ~ tillY.., 01 
acc01Ult aDd oa'Wlcate k) be arune4 tb~.-Upon delivery ~f ~e 
account under section 50 or clause (a.) of section 53, the person delivermg 
it shall pay to the Controller, or furnish security to ~h~satisiaetion of the 
Controller for the payment of, the estate duty, if e.ny, payable in respect 
of the property iDoluded in the aooount, and the Controll~ shalt ~ere­
upon grant him a ~rtifioate tha.i sllch duty bas been or will be paid, or 
that none is due, as the case may be. • 
H. OoIltraller'l powen m rtIpIct Of fttaaUoDl.'-{l) If the Conttol-
Jar is of opinion that the person delivering the account has under-estima-
ted the value 01. the property in respect of which estate duty ls p-.yallle 
(whether by placing too Iowa value on the property included in the 80· 
count or by omitting to include therein property that ought to have 
bean included), the Controller may inquire into the matt« in 3uoh 
manner Ilnd by such means ss he thinks fit and, if still of opinion that 
the value of the property haa been under-estimated, may require bim to 
amend the v~uation, e.nd if tha. penon doea not amend the ...-aluation 
to the satisfaction of the Controller, the Controller may determine the 
nluatio:l on the basis of wbicl.l estate duty is payable. 
(2) In any case where no account haa been d~vered 8S requiNd by 
section 50 or clause (a) of section 58, the Controller may cause aD ac-
count of the properly passing on the death of the decee.sedto be pre-
pared in such manner and by 8UOO means BI he thinks fit and may oall 
upon any person who in his opinion is accountable for the paymeot of 
estate duty ill respect of the properly to accep' such aocount, aud if ·thai! 
person does not accept the account· or his liability, the Controller may 
determine the estate duty payable by that person. 
67. AppeiJ aaaiUt d.eterm1Dat1C11l bJ' O~t.rolltr.-(l) Any person 
objecting to the valuation made or the estate duty determined by the 
Controller 01' denying bis liability to account for the duty payable in 
respect of any property, may, within ninety days of the receipt of the notice 
of deman1 under scetion 54. appeal to the Board in Ule prescribed form 
and verified in the prescribed manner. 
(2) The DOlll'd may admit an appeal after the expiry of ninety days re-
ferred to in sub-section (1) if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause 
for not presenting it within that period. . 
(3) The Board may, iD disposing Qf any appeal hold or oause to be 
held such further ,inquiry as it thinks fit, and after giving the appellant 
an opportunity of being heard, pass, subject to .he provisions of flUb-
.section (4) such orders thereon Be it thinks 1h and shall send a copy d 
such orders to the appellant and the Controller. 
(4) Where the dispute pertains to the valuation .of any property, the 
appellant may require the Board to refer the question of dispuW Talue 
to t.he arhitration (If the Valuers, and the cost of such arbitration shaU be 
paid by the appelllld;lt. : 
(5) NotwiUhstanding that an appeal bas been filed before tbe Board, 
so much of the estate duty as is notiD dispute shall be payable by the 
. appellant. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
50 

10 
15 
20 
30 
35 
• 
M. 1.,_., 01 c .. bJ tile .0lI\l to JII&1I. Ooan.-{l) Within n1ne~1 
a,. of the date upon which he t. sened with an order QDder lub·leCtion (3). 
of section 671 the penon &eCOuntable ma, present an application .~ the 
;Qoard in the prescribed form, r.ocompanied by a fee of be hundred 
rupMI •. requiring the Board·lO refer to ~e High CoUtt any ques_n of 
law .rilillg out 01 such· order;lIDd the Board .hall, it in its opinion D· 
qu.tion of law "ee out of .uch order, .tate the calle for \he opinion 
of the JIigh Coun: ' 
PrOTided thG' the Board may admit .uch an applioation after the expiry 
ot ninety day. if i. iI u.afied $hat there WM au8ioient cause Lor n?t 
presenting it within the. said period. 
(B) If, on an application made under .ub·section (1), ~e Board-
(a) refuses 1Jo st.te a case on the ground that no question of law 
arise. or 
(b) rejects it on 'he ground ~at it is time.barred, the 
person accountable may. within three months from the date ou which 
he is served with a. notice of refusal or rejection. as the caso n,ay be, 
apply to the High Court, and the High Court may, if it is not satis· 
fied with the correctnees of the decision of the Board, require the 
Board to state the case to the High Court and on receipt of sUl'h 
requisition the Board shall state the case: 
Provided that if, in any case where it has been required by ,. perllon 
aacountable to sta~ a case, the Board refuses to do 80 on the ground that 
no question of law arises, such person may within thirty days frem the 
data on which he receives notice of the refusal to state the case, with· 
draw his application and if he does so the fee paid by him under sub-
section (1) shaU be refunded. 
(3) Section 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1008 (IX of 10(8) shall 
apply to an applicatioo to the High Court under sub·section (2). 
(4) If, on an application made under sub·section (1), the Board is of 
opinion that either on account of the importance of any question of 
law involved in the case or on account of a con6ict in the decisions of 
different High Courts in respect of any particular question of law arising 
ther£lfrom, it is expedient that a case should be stated direct to the 
Supreme Court, the Board may state the case direct to the Supreme 
Court. 
(5) The case shall set forth the factis, the determination of the Board 
and th~ questions of law which arise out o~ the case. 
(6) It the High Court or the Supreme Court is not satisfied that the 
case as sta.ted is sufficient to enable it to determine the questions of law 
raised thereby, the Court may require the Eoard to make such addl. 
Mons thereto, or alterations therein, as it may direct in this behalf. 
(7) 1'he High Court or the Supreme Court upon hearing any suoh 
calle shall decide the question of law raised therein and in doing so may, 
if iii t.hink. fit, alter the form of the question of law and shall deliver i6s 
judgment thereon oontaining the ground on which such decision is found-
ed and shall send 8 copy of such judgment, under the seal of the Courii 
and the signature of the Registrar, to the Board which shall pass sucb 
orders as are neoeesary to diIpoae of the case conformably to sucb 
judpnent, . . 

'28' 
(8) The costs ol any refereneeto the"High Court or tc) the Supreme 
Court shall be in the discretion 'of ~lie Cour_. . 
: (9) Notwithstanding that a ~ferenc~ hal b"n'inade under thia aection to' 
*he Hiih Court or ,iI) ihe S!lp, .. ne Court, .. t.te du., ahall be payable in 
acoordanoe with 'the, determination made ,by th,e :Eoa.rd. is 
(10) For the purposes of this section ."High Court" means the High 
Court to whiGb, or to a court subordinate to which, an application for 
grant of representation haa been made. or where no such application 
h~ been made, the High Court which would have jurisdiction to enter-
tain such an applicatioD. 10 
59. Oue to be heard by Beochel of 1IlJb. Oourta aDd. appeal to lie In 
oertalD c .... to "'. Supreme Oovt.-(l) WheD a caee has beeD stated to 
the High Court UDder section 58, it shall be heard by a Bench of Dot leu 
than two Judges of the High Court, and .hall be decided in accordance 
with the opinion of such Judges or of the majority (if any) of such 15 
Judges: 
Provided that where there is no such majority, the Judges shall state 
the point of law upon which they differ, and the case shall then be heard 
UpOD that point only by one or more of the other Judges of the High 
Court, and such point shall be decided' according to the opinion of the 20 
majority of th~ Judges who ha.ve heard the case, including those who first 
heard it. 
(2) An appeal shall lie to ~he Supreme Court from any judgment of 
the High Court delivered 00 a case stated under section 58 in any ease 
which tho High Court certifies to be a fit one for appeal to the Supreme 25 
Court. • 
(3) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1008 (Act V of 
1908), relatintz to, appeals to the Supreme Court shall, so far 88 may bo, 
apply in the case of appeals under this section in like manner as they 
apply in the case of appeals from decrees of a High Court: ao 
Provided that nothing in the sub-seotion shall be deemed to affeot the 
provisions of sub-section (7) of section 58: 
Provided furthrr that the High Court may, on petition made for the 
execution of the order of the Supreme Court in respect of any costs award-
ed thereby, transmit the order for execution to Rny court subordinate to 95 
the High Court. 
(4) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or reversp.d in 
appeal under this section, effect shall be given to the order of the 
Suprem~ Court in the manner pr()Vided in sub-section (7) of section 58. 
60. Grant of reprel8ntatlon not to be delayed OIl reference to JiJp 40 
Oourt.-Whcre any grant of representat.ion has been applied for, it shall not 
be delayed by reRson of any re£eren'::e to a High Court under section 58. 
61. OerWlcate of paymeot of duty, &Ild penalty for DOo-paymeot,-
(1) Where the valuation is amended by the person accountable upon the 
Controller's requisition under sub-section (1) of section 56 or is enhanced 43 
by the High Court upon the Board's reference under seotion 58, aDd in 
any case where the original valuation has been discovered to be too low, 
such person shall, within one month .of the amendment or enhancement ()(' 
discovery, pay the deficit duty which is payable in respect of the property 
upon the amended or enhanced or full valuation aDd the Controller shU 50 
thereupon grant him a certificate accordingly. 

)0 
15 
I' 
(~) Where the valuation is reduced by the High Court on the Board's 
refe~nce under sectioIl 58. the Controller shall'refund to the person 
accountable any excess duty paid by him and shall grant to him a certi-
ti"atJe'that the full duty payable in respect of the ~roperty has been paid. 
(3) In any case where no account has been delivered as required by 
soction 50 or clause (a) of section 63 the person who is called upon to 
accept the account prepared by the Controller under sub-section (2) of 
section 55 shall. within one mouth of his acceptanoe or. as the case may 
bl3. of the final disposal of the reference made under sub-section (1) of 
section 58, pay the full duty payable in respect of the property and the 
Controller shall thereupon grant him a certifioate accordiugly. 
(4) ~f the person accountable does not pay the amo~t of duty due 
from hIm under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) within the period 
specified therein. he shall be liable to a penalty of one thousand rupees or 
a sum equal to five times the amount due according as the Controller may 
elect: 
Provided that the Controller may in any particular case reduce the 
penalty. 
(6) Where a person accountable for the eaute duty in respeot of any 
to property pal18ing on a death applies to the Controller at any time and 
delivers and verifies a full statement to ,the best of his knowledge and 
belief of aU property passing on auch death and the several persons en-
titled thereto. the Controller ma.y determine the estate 'duty payable in 
respect of the property and on payment of that duty. the Controller shall 
J6 ,give him a certificate accordingly. 
ag. OOmmutatloD of dU" lD ~ of latini, III apec&aDC)'.-Tbe 
Controller in his discretion may. upon application by a peraon entitled to 
an interest in expectancy. commute the estate duty which would or 
might. but for the commutation, become payable in r.espeot of luch In-
30 tereBt for a certain sum to be preeently paid. and. for determining that 
sum. shall cause a present value to be set upon such duty. regard being 
had to the contingencies affecting the liability to and rate. and amount of 
such duty. and interest being recko~ed at three per cent.; and on the 
receipt of luch sum the Controller shall give 8 certificate accordingly. 
36 88. .a.aament III compUoate4 caIU_ Where by 1'888On of the number 
of deaths upon which property has pnssed or of the complicated nature 
of the interests of different persons in property whioh hal passed on death. 
or from any other cause. it is difficult to as,certain exactly the amount- of 
estate duty payable in respect of any property or any interest therein or 
~ 0 so to ascertain the same without undue expense in proportion to the value 
of the property or interest, the BOBnl, on the application of any person 
aooountable for the duty and upon his giving to the Board all the informa-
tion in his power respecting the amount of the property and the several 
interests therpin and other circumstances of the case, may ,by way of 
'" composition for all or any of the dutiea payable in respect of the property 
or interest and the various interests therein or any of them, aSIieSS such 
lIum on the value of .the property or interest. &8 having regard to the 
oircumatancea appear. proper. ond may accept payment of thelUDl 80 
!tuessed in full payment of &11 claims for estate duty in reapeot of Buch 
r.o property or interest. and shall give a certUic"te a.ccordingt,r. 

J6 
M •. ~ 1M,. allow poHpoMPle .. t o! ,P'1JDIDt OIl termt.-Where 
, the Controller is I&tiafied that the e.~te duty leviable in respect of any 
property cannot, without excessh'e sacrifice, be raised at once, he Inay allow 
payment to be postponed for such period, to such extent, !l!ld on pa~ment 
, of luch interest not exoeeding four per oont. or any h~her mterest Yielded 
. by the property, and on such other terms as he may think tit. 
65. Board may remit duty uul lDtereat outatandlnl after tWIQt,. Jlara 
from deat.h.-If after the expiration of twenty years from a death upon 
which estate duty became leviable any suoh duty remains unpllid, -the 
, Board may, if it thinks fit. on the application of any person accountable or 
liable ~or such duty or interested in the property, remit the payment of 
such duty or any part thereof or any in~erest thereon. 
86. l'ol'llUl.-All affidavits, accounts, certificates, statements and forms 
llsed for .he purposes of thiB Part of this A~ shan be in suoh form and 
cont,ain suoh partioulars 8S may be prescribed by the Board and, if so re-
quired by the Board, shall be in duplicate and accounts and statement. 
shall be delivered and verified on oath and by produotion of books and docu-
ments ill the manner presoribed by the Board and any person who wilfully 
fails to comply with the provisions of this section shaU be liable to Ule 
peuolty mentioned in section 52. ' 
81 ••• very of chi" &Del paalttel.-~ny estate duty or deficit duty 
and any interest or penalty payable under this Act may, on the certl1ioate 
of the Controller, be recovered from the person liable flhereto 88 if it were an 
arrear of lanll revenue by any Collector in any State. 
PART VIII.-CRA'RGE OP ESTATB DUTY ON PaOPBBTY AND FACILITDlS )'oa 
LUSING IT 
68. _.ate dufly a Iret char,. on propen, Bailie tIlento.-(l) Subject to 
the provisions of section 19, the estate duty payable in respeot of property, 
movable or immovable, passing on the death of the deceased, shall be a 
first chat'ge on the immovable property so passing (including agricultural 
land) in whomsoever it may vest on his death after the debts and incum-
brances allowable under Part VI of this Act; and any private transfer Ol' 
delivery of auoh property shall be void against any claim in respect of such 
estate duty. 
(2) A rateable part of the estate duty on an eatate, in proportion to the 
value of any benefioialinterest in poS8e88ion in movable property which 
passes to any person (other than the legal representative of the deceased) 
on ,the deftth of 'the deceased shall be a first charge on such interest: 
Provided that the property shall not be so chargeable as against a bona 
fide purchaser thereof 'for valuable consideration without notioe. 
(3) The Board may release the whole or any part of any property, whe-
ther movable or immovable, from charge under this section in such cir-
oumstances and on such conditions as it thinks' fit. 
5 
10 
!5 
25 
30 
35 
40 
89. Dllchar,. from ,It&te dut1in certain cuel.-A certificate granted by 
the Controller under lIection 61, or ,by the Board under section 68, shall 45 
cftsobarge th .. property includ'ed therein and the grantee so far as regards 
that proIlerty from any further claim for estate duty, but ShAl} not discharge 
any person or property from estate duty in case of fraud or failure t.o 
disdose material fao~ and shall not "'~t the duty payable in respect (\f 

10 
15 
26 
30 
36 
26 
any ProPl\rtl afterwards shown to baTe paIHd on ~e d ... 'h Dor any further 
duty parable by reaSOD thereof in reaped of the property inoluded in the 
certificate: 
. . 
Provided nel'ertheleas that .. cert.ifioate purporting to be a discharge of 
ill.e whole estate duty payable in respeo. of any properly inoluded in thf" 
certificate shall exonerate a bona fide purchaser for valuable considtlration 
without noilice from the duty notwithstanding any such fraud or failure. 
70. Penon accountable to be repaid by truIt8eI &Del owners In ceftaID 
CIHI.-If a person accountable under se'Jtion 50 pays any part of the estate 
duty in respect of any property not passing to him, it shall, where aocasioD 
l'equires, be repaid to him by the trustees or owners of the property. 
71. J'acWLlea for paJiDI dUty or n.I.atDg &mOun, aLnad,. pald.-(l) A 
person authorised or required to pay estate duty in respect of any property 
shall, for the purposes of paying the duty, or raising tbe amount of the 
duty when already paid, have power, whether the property is or is not 
\"ested in him, to raise the amount of such duty and any interest and 
expenses properly paid or incurred by him in respect thereof, by the· sale 
or mortgage of or a terminable charge on that property or any part thereof. 
(2) A person having an interest in any property, who pays the estate 
duty in respect of that property, shall be entitled to the like oharge, as 
if the estate dut.y in respect of that property had been raised by means of Q 
mortgage to him. 
(3) Any money arising from the sale of property comprised in a settle-
Dlent 01' helJ 11pon trust to layout upon the trusts of a settlement may be 
expended in paying any estate duty in respect of property comprised in 
tho settlement and held upon the same trusts. 
PART IX.-MISCBLLANEOUS 
72. JuNdictloo of courts barred. live &I ezpreuly provtded.-Save as 
provided in this Act, nothing done or in good laith purporting to be done 
by any t'state duty authority under this Act shaH be called in question in 
(lny court. 
78. Dlaclonre of Information by a pubUc servant.-'rhe provisions of 
section 54 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (XI of 1922), shall apply 
t.('l &11 accounts, statements, documents, evidentJe or affidavits, given, pro-
duced or obtained in connection with or in the course of the proceedings 
under this Act: 
Prc:vided that not.hing in the said section 54 shall apply to the disclosure 
of nllV such partie ulliN to 8oI1y person acting in the execution of this Act 
or of' the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, where it is necessary or desirable 
tic disclose the same to him for the purposes of either this Act or the said 
Acfl. 
n ... Ule-maJdnc powers of the BOIld.-Subject to the condition of 
previous publi'lation, the Board may make rules not inconsistent with this 
~ct prescribing all ~atters which by this Act are required or permitted 
to be prescribed, or which are necessary or convenient to be presoribed for 
carrying out the purpoaea of or giving effect to this Act. 

27' 
THE "SCHEDULE 
(See section IS) 
8t4tn in which •• t.t. duty if Z",icabl. On .griculturd l.n4. 
Bombay. 
Orissa. 
Uttar Pradesh. 
Hyderabad. 
Rajasthan. 
Madhya Pradelh. 

• STATEMENT OF OBJECTS ANJ) REASONS 
The objeot of the Bill is to impose an estate duty on prop~rty paslling 
or deemed to pass on the death of a. person. Though the levy and ool1ec-
tion of iIJoome-tn at hiBh rt.. smoe lh,e W fir and the invenigation& 
undertaken by the Inoome-tax Investigation Commission in a number of 
important 08seS of tax evasion have, no doubt, prevented to some extent 
th,e further conoentration of wealth in the hands of those who are already 
wealthy, yet these do not amount to positive steps in the direction of 
reduoing tbe existing inequalities in tbe distribution of wealth. It is hoped 
tbat by tbe imposition of an estate duty such unequal distributions may 
be reotified to a large extent.' Suob a measure would also assist the States 
towards finanoing their development sohemes. In th,eir draft outline 
Report, the Planning Commission have, it will be reoalled, stressed the 
necessit.y of undertaking l,egislation to levy death duties in India as eMly 
ail possible. 
2. A Bill seeking to impose suob a duty was fint introduced in 1946 
and then re-introduoed in the provisional Parliament in 1948. Th3 latter 
BiJI after being considered by tbe Select Committee lapsed on the dis-
solutIon of that Parliament. The present Bill is practically a reproduction 
of that Bill as reported on by the Select Oommittee, but certain ohanges 
have been made, whicb are as follows;-
(1) When the earlier Bill was drafted, the Centre had no jurisdic-
tion to legislate in respeot of agricultural land, but now some States 
have passed the necessary resolutions Wider article 25!a of the Con-
stitution, and the Bill therefore applies also to agrioultural INlds in 
suoh States. As and when the remaining States pass the necessary 
resolutions, the Sch,edule will be amended by a Notification of the 
Central Government to include suoh States. 
(2) In respeot of the movable property of t,he deoeased, the let'y 
of duty will d,epend upon his domicile only. The alternative basis of 
residence in the Bill as amended by the Select Committee has been 
omitted. 
(8) As in the case of Income·tax law, the fixation of the rates 
of duty and of the maximum limite of exemption will be regulated bv 
the annual }I'inanoe Acts. • 
(4) For the sake of administrative oonvenience, th,e power to 
assess duty is assigned to the Controller of Estate Duty, 11 new 
authority which wlll funotion under the Central Board of Revenue. 
(5) App,eals from the orden of the Controller of Estate Duty will 
lie to the Central Board of Revenue, and, as in the Indian Income-
tax Act, 1922, references to the High Court may be made on question. 
of law. 
~. Under article 269 of th,e Constitution, the net proceeds of the 
,.tate duty will be assigned to the States on such prinoiples of distribu-
tion as Parliament may hereafter formulate. The appropriate estate duty 
00 agricultural land situa~ in a State wlll, of oourse, be assigned to 
that Mtate. 
C. D. DESHMUX'H., 
NEW DaLHI; 
Th, 2nd Augult, 19M. 

• Not" on craun. 
In tbe drafting of .the Bill includinB the de1inition aDd interpretation 
0laus8s (olauses 2 and 8) the O. X. Acts on the subjeCt have been followed 
as closely as po88ible so that the I;UJ8istance of the U. K. decisions may be 
avafiabte. 
OlatUl6 B.-The various sub-claules debe the terms used in the Bill. 
Sub-clauses (2). (S). (5). (6). (7). (10), (14), (17). (18) and (19) are self-expla-
natory . 
. Bub-claUB6 (l).-Under seotion 19-1 of ~be Court-fees Act. 1870, any 
person applying for the grsnt of a probate or letters of administration is 
required to file an affidavit in the prescribed form showing the valuation 
of tb" property and tbe credits which the deceased possessed or was entitled 
to at the time of his death aud which had come or ai'e likely to come in the 
hands of th.e applicant. This affidavit of valuation contains detiai1s of mov-
able and immovable property along with a schedule of debts. Succession 
certificates are issued by the Court o.n payment of requisite stamp duty en 
the basis of such affidavit of valuation. Under clause M of the Bill. aD 
executor is required to annex to the affidavit of valua-tion an account of all 
the property on whioh eatat~ duty is P"-YaWe and to send a copy thereof to 
the ControlJer of E.tJe Duty. 
8ub~r.'U8fl (4).-ln tlHl rules. to be frarlled under olause 17 (4) "controlled 
company" will be defined in practically the same manner a. in .action 58 
of thtl U.K. I-1nance Act, 1940. as amended from time to time. The te8,on 
why" controlled company" i. not beiDg defioed in the Bill itself is that tMse 
provisions have been undergoing changes from time to time. These oonataDt 
ehanges indicate the desirability of maki.ng the proviSions flexible so as to 
meet new methods of evasion; hence their relegation to rdles in the present 
Bnl. 
Bub-olau'41 (B).-The definition of "executor" has been made sufficiently 
elastio to include every person who u executor, nearest of kin. or creditor 
or otherwise interferes 'Yith or enters upon the posseBsion or management 
of the estate of the deceased with or without auy grant of representation. 
Bub-olause (9).-A person who has "general power" 8B defined in this 
sub-clause. is a person who is competent to dispose of property whether he 
is .ui 1-';' or not. 
"General power" means complete authority to dispose of a proparty in 
any manner by the holder thereof. 
Sub-olau.e (J1).-Interest in expectancy is in contrast with the interest 
whioh has fallen into posses.ion, but it does not mean that every interest 
not in poss~sRion is necessarily an interest in expectancy. An "interest in 
expectancy" is an interest which excludes its owner from the present bene-
ficial enjoyment, being contingent upon the happening of another avent. 
For instance if A bequeaths a property to B for life, Rnd on his denth 
to C then C's interest in the property is only nn "interest in expec-
"aney" whioh mayor may not ma.teria.lize. 
Sub-olau'6. (12).-The definition of "legal representative" was included 
by the SeJect Committee on the ~state Duty Bill of 1948. The·definitioh 
is on the lines of that oontained. in the Civil Procedure Code. 1908, but it. 
has been made cleat that 'Where the deceased is a co-parcener of 8 Hindu 

80 
1amily the expreealon would Include the manager for the time being of the 
'family. • 
Bub-cIG"" (13).-Thil is taken from ~he EzplaMtiota., I8Otion 6Q of the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925. 
8ub-cla"" (l5).-Ezp14Mtioftl (1) and (2) bring within the definitoion of 
"property" a debt or a right enforceable against a person when created by 
him or with his consent as also ~he benefit resulting from the extinguishment 
of a debt or: a right at the expense of a deceased person. 
Bub-cl/J"., (16).-Estate duty haa been made payable on property that 
pa88~S on death (see clause 5) and the definition of this expression has 
been so worded ... ~ include aU poasible rights and inj;erest. that; may 
pu. on death. 
Bub-cla"'B (19).-The main question of fact that may have to be deter-
mined in the impoeition of estate duty would be the marke_ value of proper. 
ty; it has therefore been provided that the person acoountable for estaie 
du.y would have the right to uk for the arbitration by a "Valuer" to be 
appointed by the Government. These valuers will be non-of!iclala like the 
Board of Referees under the Excess Profits Tax Aot. 
C!14U8B 3 . .....clauses (a), (c) and (d) of sub-clause (1) are adapted hom 
.eotlon 22(2), U. K. Fmanoe Aot, 1894. Clause (b) fa new. 
Property which a person Sa legally competent to dispose of is deemed to 
pau on his death (vid. clause 6) and is the 'property on which estate duty 
is leviable. 
Sub-clauses (a> to (d) describe the various types of properties over which 
a person is deemed to have power of disposition. These are-
(a) property over whloh a person has oomplete power of disposition, 
(b) property over which title is acquired in one form and it is dis_ 
posed of in another form, 
(e) a disposition taking effect ont of the person'B own intereBt, 
(d) money which a person is competent to charge on the property 
of another person. 
Sub-clause (2) is inBerted to remove the possibility of doubt as to the 
acope of the provisions contained in Parts II and III of the Bill. 
ClauBe 4.-This clause describes the various authorities for the purpoRe 
of administration of estate duty who will perform their functions under the 
control of the Central Bonrd of Revenue. 
Clause 5.-From section I, U.K. Finance Act, 1894. 
bee in thiB connection the definition of "property passing on the death" 
in clauBe 2(16). The "pasBing" may be immediately on the death, I\B wh£.re 
A B.ettles a fund upon himself for life, and ~hen upon B absolutely; or it 
may be after an interval or at any period asoertainable only by referenoe to 
death, as where there iB a trust for accumulation for a term aftdr A's 
death. The passing may be certain, 8B in the first example above; or it 
may be contingent, aB where A settles a fund upon himself for life, and 
then upon B, if and when B attains the age of 21 with aooumulat:onl. 
The pasBing may be original aB in the first example above; or it may be by 
way of Bubstitutive limitation, 8S where property iB limited to A lor life. 
remainder to B if liring at A's death and in default (which happens) to C. 
hi ,,11 these o".es estate duty Is ohargeable on A 'a death.· 

81 
ClGu" 6.-From seotion i (11(a), U. K. Finance Ac~, 1894. 
Property which the deceaaed was competent to dispoae of or wu 
deemed entitled to dispose of is deemed td pan on hi, death andeetat8 
dutS is payable thereon. 
Iltu.tr4tion •. -l. Property oomprlaed in a l'8yooable gift or H~UeD'.fIIl\ 
is cI,early property of whioh the donor or settler ,Is compe~nt to dl.pose, 
irt8spectin of whether the ~ or aeitlement wal actually reyoked 01 not. 
2. A devises a house to his son, subject to a power for A's wife by'deed 
or will to charge on it a sum of Re. 1 lakh. On the wife's death,eitate 
duty is leviable in respect of this lum 18 property of .mch she W18 com· 
pl'tent to dilpose and this Is so whether she exercised the power or not. 
L Ese clause 8 (d).] 
8. Under section 100 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925, a gift by will 
io th,e testator '8 child is preserved from lapsing wbere ~e bene401ary pff. 
deceases the testator provided that the benefioiary leaTeI issue liYing. at 
the testator's death. l.'he gift takes effect as if the benefiCiary had died 
immediately af~r the testator and .the property devolves under the 
beneficiary's will or intestaC'y. It is therefore property of which the 
beneficiary was competent to dispolle and is chargeable with estate duty 
in connection with his death as well" as in connection with the death of 
the testator, subject to any allowance for quick succession. 
Clau88 7.-From section 2 (1) (b), U" K. Finance ActJ, 1~. '-. 
8ub-ol4U1eB (2) and (3) were inserted by the Select Committee on th.e 
Estate Duty Bill, 1948, with other consequential modifications in sub· 
clause (1). . 
'rhe cesser of interest on the deceased's death is property deemed to 
pass on his death and hence estate duty is payable thereon. In the case of 
a joint family property governed by the Mitakshara, no member has & 
distinct and specified interest in the coparcenary property of which he is 
competent to dispose but OD the death of a member there is a ceaser of 
interest in the joint family property. The clause provides that such cesser 
of interest is only liable to estate duty if the deceased was ]8 ye8l's of age 
or if a minor no male ascendant of his was a co-parcener in the same family. 
'fhi!;1 provision is necessary 8S in Mitakshara family each chUd acquires 
interest in property and it would be aclministratively impossible to deter-
mine the quantum of interest on the death or birth of a child in the family. 
Other examples of cesser of interest are-
(1) A by will gives an annuity of Rs. 500 to B charged on house 
property worth Rs. 1,200 per annum and the house property itself, 
subject to the aforesaid charge, to C. On B's death the annuity Ceases 
and estates duty is therefore chargeable on the value of the benefit 
arising by the cesser. Thus if the house property is worth Rs. 24,000 
500 at B's death the value of the benefit would be 1,200 x 24.,000-10,000. 
(2) A is entitled to an a.nnuity of Re. 800 charged on certain house 
property and on A's death an annuity of Rs. 200 per annum beoomea 
charged on the property in favour of B. In this 08se, upon A'I death 

the owner of the property is chargeable to estate duty in respect ot 
the ceSler of the whole of A's anDuity of Rs. €M)() aDd not merely the 
cesser of Be. 600 per annum which is the difference between the two 
annuities. 
Cla1UJ6 8.,-From section. 2 (l)(c) , U. K. :Finance Act, 1894. 
As stated in the E2:planat'ion (~hieh WBe added by the S:elect Commit-
tee on the 1948 Bill) gifts made in eontemplailion of d~Bth are dealt with 
in section 191 of the Indian Succession Act, ~925. 
Clause 9.-From section 2 (l)(c), U. K. Finanoe Act, 1894, and 
section 59, U. K. Finance Act, 1910. , 
This clause brings under eha;rge gifts made inter vivo8 within a period 
of two years before death or in the case of gift so made for 8 public chl'lorit-
able purpose made within six months before death. The time limit of 
two years and six months for three years snd twelve months respectively 
was substituted by the Seleot Committee which also substituted the eXIJres· 
sion "public charitable purpose" for "public or charitable purposes". 
Clau8e 1O.~From section 2 (1) (c), U. K. FinanC"e Act, 1894, and 
section 59, U. K. Finance Act. 1910. 
This clause brings under charge property given in gift, but in which 
the donor r.etainl lOme interest by contract· or otherwise. Where the donor 
retain!! such interest in a part of the property only, estate duty is payable 
on that part only. But if such interest is surrendered two years be· 
fore death no eltate duty would be payable. , 
The right to pOSieSS under the terms of a gift is not pouession; and 
it is payment, and not the obligation to pay. which confers enjoyment. 
Clau,~ ll.-}c'rom section 48, U. K. Finance Act, 1940. 
This clause brings within the charge interest limited to cease on death 
which has been disposed of within two years of the death and which but 
for the disposition would have been caught by olause 5 as property passing 
on death, or &8 interest ceasing on death. However, if the interest is dis· 
J:OH€d of or determined in good faith two years before the death, no estate 
duty is payable. The provision is explained by the following illustration:-
A, a Hindu widow, having a Hindu woman's estate in house pro}!erty 
surrenders her estate to the reversioners two years before her death. The 
!>roperty in such a case cannot be said ~ pass to the reveraiouers on 
her death, since it actually P&8ses to them two years before. Therefore 
section 5 does not apply. Nor does section 7 apply, because the widow 
had, in the circumstances, no interest ceasing on her death: it had ceased 
two years previously. But, under sub-clause (1) the property is deemed to 
pass on her death and becomes chargeable to estate duty if the in~rest haq 
not been surrendered 2 years before death. Under sub-clauBe (8), allY 
artificial encumbrance created by the deceased is to be ignored. 
C'"1£,e 12.-From s.eetion 2 (1)(0), U. K. Finance Act, 1~. 
This clause brings under charge property under 1\ reVOCAble settl/lmont 
or property in whioh the deceased retained some beneficial interest for his 
own benefit or for the benefit of his relatives. 
Ctau,~ 13.-Determines the liability of property held jointly. The 
liability of the 'whole property to duty arises only in case where a person 
having been absolutely entitled to any property or to the funds with which 

88 
any property was purchased has caused it to be transferred to or vested in 
himself and in any person jointly so that the beneficial intereAt in some 
part of the property passes or accrues by survivorship on his death to the 
other person. This clause does not appJy to B case where the transferor 
was entitll'd only to a. portiOll of the property or of the funels with which 
the property was ptp'chased. 
OlauBB 14.-From section 2 (l1'(c) , u. K. Finanee Act, 1894 and 
seotion 76 of the U.K. Finance Act, 1948. 
This olause brings under charge the money received under a life 
insurance policy kept up by 1\ pm-son for the benefit of a donee. The 
premium may he payable by the person .out of any property settled by him 
or out of income arising under a scttlement made by him. Where only a 
part of the premium is so paid the proportionate amount received under 
the poncy will only be chargeable to duty. 
Olau8B 15.-From section 2 (1)(d), u. K. Finance Act, 1894. 
The general purpose of this provision is to prevent a. man from escaping 
estate duty by reducing his estate, during life, by money or money's worth 
paid ai premiums which, after his death, reappear in the form of a bene-
ficial interest accruing or arising on his death. 
(JlauBB 16.-From seotion 30, U. K. Finance Act, 1939, and seotion 26, 
U. K. Finance Act, 1948. 
The purpose of this provision is to extend liability t,o dllty to annuities 
and other interest which, though not dire('tly provided by the deceased. 
are in snbstanoe attributable partly or wholly to property dcrived from him. 
The following illustration shows how this provision would operate:-
The deceased gave his children Rs. 20,000 with which they acquire 
shares in a private company. The company then lends the decessed 
Rs. 20.000 and uses the interest to pay the premiums on 8 policy effected 
on the deceased's life. The "policy moneys would be considere(l under this 
provision to have been provided by the deceased. 
mauRB n.-From section 42. U. K. Finan(,A Act, 1940 and section 86, 
U. K. Finance Act, ]944. 
Bub-olauBBII (1), (.e) and (3).-The necessity fOr these provisions will 
be illustrated by the following example:-
A is the owner of an estste worth Rs. 12 lakhs in('Juding a residentil\I 
honse, and of stocks Bnd shA.l'es worth Rs. 8 lakhs. He forme a compllny 
with a nominal capital of RR. 20 IRkhs divided into 50,000 five per cent. 
preference RhareR Bnd 1,50,000 ordinary shares, nIl of Rs. 10 each. He 
RellB the estate and the securities to the company in consideration for the 
sharAs, of which 1)0.000 ordinary share!'! are allotted to him ani! t,he re!'!' 
f.() his wife and chi1dren. As part of the arrangement. hf" is a.ppointed 
~overning direCltor for life at 8 sBlary of Rs. 50,000 pElr :VAar Rnd ~he reRiden-
tiRl house. whose annuRI vRluA is Rs. !'i.nnn is let, to him 11!'1 r,'ovprnin~ 
rlireClt.or at 8 rent of Rs. 1,000 per YP.Br. On A'II denth more thnn two 
'YARrs JAtAr. PRtat,e dutv w(I1IM hut for fhp. prM,iRinflR of t1d.Q lIutinfl, tiA 
·nRvAhlp. onlv in reR'PMt of t.he 1)0.000 RhArAs whiClh hr. rpb\inAd. ThArp. WM 
110 e-ift to t}Ie comna.nv. fm' the ,..ompnn'Y gave f1111 conRidm·ntion. 'l'he only 
"ift "n'n!'1 A aift of thCl shRres to hill wife Rnd ohiMrp.n on(l that. !!ift WM NIt 
the F!lJhject tQ Bny reRervRtiQn. But Recording to thiR proviRiop f,h(' psf!\f,p 

84 
duty payable would be not on the market value of 60,000 ordinary ahares 
but Otl such proportion of the assets of the company as the aggregate 
amount of benefits accruing to the deceased for the three years endin~ with 
his death beur to the income of the company for the same three yelU's. 
Thus if the income of the company for the last three years were Rs. 3 
lakhs, and the dividend declared on ordinary shares is Re. 00,000, then the 
benefits enjoyed by the deceased are-
Salary as governing director 
Residential house less rent paid 
Dividend 
Bs. 
1,50,000 
12,000 
80,000 
1,92,000 
The aRsets which would be deemed to pass on his death would be of the 
value of-
!:: of 20 Iakha: 
or of Rs. 12,80,000 and not of Re. 5 lakhs only. 
Bub-olause (4).-There Me numerous provisions on this subject in the 
U. K. Finance Act, 1940, which had better be relegated to rules so I\S to 
make them flexible to meet new methodR of, evaRion. The oonsbmt 
changes made in the U. K. law in t.his behalf indicate that this course is 
preferable. 
The proviso to sub-clause (4) was added by the Select Committee on 
th~ Estate Duty Bill, 1948. 
Bub-claus6 (~.-From section 52, U. K. Finance Act, 1940. 
The effect of this sub-clause is that the value of s\lch property will be 
aggregated with other property of the deceased passing on his death. 
Clavse lB,-From section 58, U. K. Fine.nce Act, 1940. 
This clause lays the obligation on the company and it", ofticers to inform 
the Controller of Bny transfer of property or benefits that accrued to the 
deceased from the controlled company. 
ClaUl/6 19.-From section 54, U. K. Finance Act, 1940. 
This clause determines the persons who shall he accollntable for the pay-
ment of duty of It decea,sed on the denth of the deceased on property trBn,.. 
terrell to a controlled company, Rnd the powe1'8 conferred on the accountnble 
rartieR fOt' the purpose of raising Rnd paying the (luty. 
maUI/6 20.-From section 2 (2), U. K. Finance Act, 1894 and section 24-, 
U. K. Finance Act, ]936. 
In the originRI 'RillA of 1946 and of 1048 the liRbility to eAtate dut:v on 
rr.oveable property depended on the 'domicile' of the deceased. The 
Ei:alect Committee however altered this Rnd imposed the liability on nil 
perRons who are .rellidents in Jnllin., t,he deflnition of "resident" being 
more or If~RR the RRmp. as in thp. Income-tax Act. The preRent c}auAe 
reverts to thp. originAl proviAion thAt char~e on foreign moveable properi:v 
would be on the haRiR of domicile, Sub-clause (2) provides that the rules 

tegol'ding the nature and situs of the property will 6e framed by the 
liol1rd, and sUl:h rules will be framed with due regard to reasonabl~ 
double estate dut.:- relief arrangements which might be arrived at with 
the U. K. and U.b.A. 
Ol0fU86 21.-~'rom section 2 (3), u. K. ~'inance Act, 1894, and section 59, 
U.K. ~'inance Act, UHO. 
llluBtTationB.-l. A dies leaving property of which he was a trustee for B 
under a will left by C. The property is not chargeable to estate duty upon 
A's death. 
!d. A dies leaving property of which he was u. trustee for B under u. dt*ld 
oi settlement made by A himself not more than two years before his death. 
The property is chargeable to duty, for otherwise any person could evude the 
duty by making such a. trust shortly before his death and declaring thereby 
that he is a trustee for some named heir. 
8. A dies leaving property of which he was 0. trustee for B under 0. deed 
o.t. settlement made by A himself more than two years before his dauth, pos-
session and enjoyment having been assumed by H immediately upon the 
crt-ation of the trust and thenceforward retained to the entire exclusion of A. 
The property is not chargeable to duty upon A's death. 
4. A dies leaving propcrt:; of which he was a trustee for B under II. deed 
of settlement made by A himself more thun two years before his death, B 
having assumed possession immediately UpOll the creation of the trust, but 
being bound by un ugreement to give A a share of the profits until A's death. 
'l'he property is chargeable to duty upon A's death. ' 
Clause 22.-From section 5 (3), u. K. :Finance Act, 1894 and section 48, 
U. K'. Finance Act, W3S. 
Ezplanation (i) is derived from section 14, U. K. Finance Act, 1896. 
Ez hypothssi in the case put in the Explanation, the interest of the 
dsceailod in the settled property fails before it becomes an interest in 
posilossion lind in vicw of the decision in A.G. v Wood tha.t an absolute 
reversion ma.y be a limitation which continues to subsist, ~he E:z:planatioJ& 
is retained merely by way of abundant caution. 
E;z:plaMUoJ& (ii) is derived frbm section 47 of the U. K. Finanoe Act, 
1988, and was added by the Select C()IJllllittee in order to make it clear that 
a rcsidua.ry interest under reversion within an estate whose administration 
is Ilot complete will not be regarded 8S a case of failure of interest before 
becoming in'tercst in possession, but such interest would be deemed to have 
becomE; interest in potIsesalon on the date as from which the income of the 
residue would have been attributable to that interest if the residue had 
been determined immediately after the death of the testator Or intestate. 
Clau8e 23.-From seotion 15, U. K. Finance Act, ,1896. 
IUustTationll.-;1. A settles property on trust for B (usually a poor rola-
tion or an old servant) for life aud then for himself absolutely. No duty ia 
PSYl\.ble on B'8 death, if he diss ,before A. 
t. .\ aettles property on trust to pa.y an annuity thereout to himself and, 
subject thereto, for B for life, with remainder to A. Duty is payable on B's 
death, because it cannot be said that only benefit retained by A iH subject 
to the life interest. 
S. A settles property on B for life with remainder to B's children absolute-
ly and in default, for A abaoultely. B dies without children. Duty is payabl~ 

·10 
for the contingent interests of B's possible ohildren were "other interests" 
created by the disposition. 
4. B gives property A, who then settles it on B for life with remainder 
to himself. Duty is payable on B's death, for II was competent to dispose 
of the propcrty prior to the settlement. 
5. As in lll.uBtrat;on 1, .but B dies after A and the property reveds to A's 
heirs. Duty iSluYll.ble on B's death, for the property does not revert to the 
disposer himsel . 
Claus8 fU.-From seotion 21 (5), U. K. Finance Act, 1894. 
Illuatration.-A by deed dated 1951 settled property on his wife for life, 
and on her death on himself for life, with remainder to their children, The 
wife dies after the commencement of this Act, leaving A surviving. Estate 
duty is not payable on her death though it will be payable 011 ~he subsequent 
death of .\. The exemption would not have applied if A had become entitled 
to the corpus on his wife's dea.th. 
Claus8 25.-From section 3, U. K. Finance Aot, 1894. 
Property bona fide transfert'ed by the deceased for money or money's 
worth is not chargeable to estate duty. Although such a transfer might be 
made in anticipatIOn of death, the consideration received in respect of it 
becomes the property of the deceased and as such is liable to duty. To 
subject to tf1xatioll both the property whose sale produCAs that money or 
money's worth aud that money or money's wortl1, itself would be in substance 
to impose double taxation on the same property. Hence the f:!xemption 
in this clause. The exemption is to apply not only when the property is 
acquired for full consideration ill money or money's worth, but also to a 
proportionate extent, where part of the consideration is of that character. 
Illustration.-On the marriage of A and B, A the husband, partly in con-
sideration of the marriage and partly in consideration of the transfer to 
him of certain shares belonging to B, settled certain house property upon 
himself for life and then upon n absolutely. Here the consideration is 
only partly in money or money's worth, namely, 110 far Its it consists of 
. the shares. lHence under sub-clause (2), the value of the shares, all at 
the date of the settlement, is to be deducted from the value of the house 
property, as at A's dea.th in allcertaining the sum in respeot of which B 
is to pay an estate·duty. 
Clau86 ~6.-I<'rom section 44, U.K. Finance Act, 1940. 
Property transferred by the deceased in consideration of money 0\' 
money's worth is not chl\.1'gel\bl!'! to estate duty (llicie clause 25). This 
clause, however, provioes that mllluity or other interest limited to deoeaaed 
on death, (Ircated in favour of the dc(~eased cannot be treated as considera-
tion or transfer whC'1l such transfers nrc mudo to a "relative" or to a. 
"controlled compltlly". The IDPaning of the expres8~on "relative", 
"annuity'" and "asRociated operations'" BS used in this clause has been 
defined. Nothing ill this clnuse a.ffects /Ill annuity in fa,vour of a. person 
other than the deceased. The relaxA.tions contemplated in section 40 of 
th(~ U.K. Fina.nce Act, 1944, will be considered by the Board when framing 
rules under clause. 82. The deduction to be allowed will broadly be the 
net amount of benefit received by the decease4 from the transactioDs. 
Clau8e ·sr.-From section ~.7, U.K. Finance Act (No, 2), 1940. 

87 
tn order to protect commercial trllnsnetiOolls from higher duties imposed 
subsequent to the saW or mortgnge of Illl iutert'st in expectancy, this clause 
provj3es for relief to the purchasers Rnd mortgagees and no other duty will 
be payable by them except the duty whi(·h would huv\! baen payable ut the 
rates of estate dut,v, if any, in the CIlSP ()f n· pel'goll dying at the time of the 
sale or mortgage. 
Clau8e 28.-From section 5 (2), U.K. }'inance Act, 1894 and section 
13, U.K. :1<'in8nce Act, 1898. 
The exemption conferred by this clause is in respect of a settled property 
on which estate duty has been paid since the date of sottlemlmt on the death 
of one of the parties to a marriage. The exemption is, h{)\\"l'ver, conditional 
and would not apply if the deceased was at any time during the continuancp. 
of settlement competent to dispose of the property. 
ClGtU8e 29.-This clause empowers the Central Government to enter into 
an agreement for avoidallce or relief of doubt taxation with t.he Government 
of any reciprocating country. 
GlaUB/! aO.-From section 15, U.K. Finance Act, 1914. 
It provide,! relief in respect of quick succession where property consists of 
land and business. 
Clawe 31.-This clause which was inserted by the- Select Committee on 
the Estate Duty Bill, 1948, giveB complete exemption of duty in respect of 
coparcenary interest devolving upon the members of the coparcenary or 
any of them upon the death of II. Hindu widow if she dies within soven years 
of th3 death of her husband and if the estate duty has been levied in l'espect 
of the same on her husband's death. 
Clau80 32.-This clause is intended to cover, amongst others, the 
deductions and relaxations provided for in section 51, Finance Act, 1940, 
and sections 38 and 40, U.K. Finance Act, 1944. The following are some 
of the exemptions which, if considered desirable, may be allowed ur.der 
this clause:-
(a) Gifts not exceeding II (:ertain limit. 
(b) Gifts for national purposes. 
(c) Property of a common seaman, marine, soldier or airman . who 
is killed or dies in the service of the Union. 
Clau8e a3.-From section 4, U.K. Finance Act, 1894, and section ~2, 
U.K. Finallce Act, 1900 lind section 45 (3), U.K'. Finunce Act, 1940. 
This cla.use lays down that for purpoRcR of detemlining the rate of duty 
payable, 1\11 prope.rty will bl:' nggregated excl:'pt property in which the deceas-
ed never had I\n interest. The latter property is to he trcl\tod a8 an estate 
by itRclf. For iJl!;t/;Il1Ct', A clil's leaving (i) Hs. 1 Inl{h in cash and (li) B policy 
on his own life for Rs. 1 lalth nbsolutely and irrevocably nominated from itB 
commenoemont in favour of B. Estate duty is chargeable on (i) under 
section 4 and on (H) under section 13, but the two cannot bo aggregated 
because A had never an interest in (ii), the interest arising only upon his 
death. 
OlaUBe 84.-This clnuse leaves the rate of duty to be fixed bya separate 
enactment, 
Olavse 85.-From section 7 (5), U.K. Finanoe Act, 1894 and IIBction 60 
(2), U.K. Finance Act, 1910. 

88 
This clause lays down the principle on which the principal value of Imy 
property is to be estimattld for the purposes of estate .uty. 
Clau'8 36.-'fhe clause lays down the manner in which the shares ill a 
l)rivate limited company /U"e to be valued When alienation of. ,such shares is 
restricted. It embodies the principle enunciated in paragraph 276, Hals· 
bury's Laws of England, Vol. XllI, Second Edition. 
ClaU'8 37.-From section 7(6), U.K. Finanoe Act, 1894 . 
. It provides for the payment of estate duty on i.nterest in expectanoy either 
WIth the duty in respect of. the rest of the estate or when the interest in 
expectancy flills in possession. In either case, the value of the other estate 
is to be aggregated. 
Clau'8 3B.-From section 7 (7), U.K. Finance Act, 1894. 
This clause provides a formula for calculating the amount upon which 
duty is leviable on account of cesser of an interest. The effect of this olause 
is to charge duty on a slice of the capital concemed, the income of whioh is 
equivalent to the income enjoyed by the deceased immediately before his 
death. 
ClOtU.'8 39.-From section 7. (8), U.K. Finanoe Act, 1894. 
Under this clause the value of any property for the purpose of estJllte duty 
is to·be determined by the Uontrol1er. 
Clause 40.-.Prom section 7 (9), u. K. Finanoe Aot, 1894. 
This is self· explanatory . 
01au.8 41.-From section 8 l8), U.K. Finance Act, 1894. 
The object of this clause is to enable the persons primarily accountable 
for the payment of the est·llte duty to upportion th£' duty where neoe8sary 
in administeriug the estate Rna to provide a method of ascertaining the pro-
portion of duty which may be charged on a particular property and may be 
recoverable against" person having a charge 011 the property. 
Clause 42.-}'rom section 7 (I), U. K. Finance Act; 1894 and section 
44 (1), U.K. Fina.nce Act, 1940. 
This clause specifies the deductions to be made (s\)bject to restrictions) 
for Iletermining the value of an estate. Allowance is to be made for reason-
abJe funeral expenses and for debts and encumbrances but not i.:>r 8uch 
debt. which were 110t bona fide. ! 
ClaUllll 43.-li'rom sectioll vi, Ii .K. Finance Aot, 1910. 
lllu.tration .. -Proporty is sottled on A for life with remainder too his only 
son B. A, when in failing henlth, purchases B's remainder at a fair price, 
which in the circumstances is nearly the full value of the property, giving 
a promissory note or mortgtlge. for the amount. Upon A's. death, the pro-
perty goe:J to B as his only heir. But for the present section, the amount 
of the debt would fall to be deducted under section 48, although the 
property would have devplved upon B even without the purohase. liy 
virtue of the present section however no such deduction is permissible. 
Clout. U.-Jc'rom aeotion 81, U.K. Finanoe Act, 1989. 

ao 
Broadly the ~fteot of this clause is to reduce the amount allowable A8 
a deduction for a debt in proportion to the value of the consideration given 
for it, which was derived directly or indirectly from the deceased or which 
was giVf'll by a creditor who acquired property from the ueceased 101' the 
purpose of facilit.ating the lmin. 
Clause 45.-From section 7 (2), V.K. Finance Act, 1894. 
This is in accordance with the elltablished rule of law that debts claim· 
able in th9 country where the assets are situate should be paid out of the 
Msets in thnt country before any surplus is availt,'hle for transmisllion to 
the country of the domicile. 
014u8e 46.-]'rom section 7 (3), U.K. FinaIlce Act, 1894. 
This clause authorises the Controller to aUow as a deduction from the 
value of th l estate any additional expense in administering or realising the 
property situated out of India' subject to a limitation of five per tJent. of 
the value of the property. 
Clau8e 47.-From section 7 (4), V.K. Finance Act, 1894. 
This clause provides for the deduction from the value of the property 
of the whole or nny part of the duty of the nature of death duty paid in 8 
non-reciprocating country. 
Clause 4B.-Enables the Board to prescribe the manner in which estnte 
duty may be collected. 
(Jlause 49.--Adapt-t'cl from section 84, U.K. Finance Act, 1917 and 
section 42, U.K. Finance Act, 1918. 
The term "Government securities" is defined in the General Clauses 
Act. 1897. 
Clau8e oO.-Adapted from section 8 (3) and 8 (4), U.K. Finance Aot. 
1894. section H\. V.K. Law of Property Act. 1925 and section 54 (8), U.K. 
Fin!lnce Act, 1940. 
Sub· clause (2) [Bee section 8 (18), U.K. Finance Act, 1894]. 
Sub-clause (4) fS6e section 6 (8), V.K. Finance Act, 1894]. 
Sub-clause (5) [Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. xm, para. 298]. 
This clause defines liabilities of the different categories of persons \'I'bo 
are accountable for the payment of estate duty, and the extent thereof. 
ClauRe .~l.-From section 8 (5), V.K. Finance Act, 1894, and section 
57, U.K. Finance Act, 1940. 
This clause provides the machinery for the collection of information and 
data for the purposes of administrAtion of estate duty. 
Cla1tH8 5!?-From section 8 (6), V.K. Finance Act, 1894. 
This is a pennI clause for non.~ompliancA with the requirements of 
sectioTls 50 and 51. i.e., failure to furnish t·he statement of accountFl. 
Clause li.'I.-Adapted from section 8 (1l). V.K. Finr.:nce Act, 1894. and 
section 19-I, Court·fees Act, 1870. 
Non·issue of grant of representations by the Court in the nbRcn(',e of B 
certifi(la.te from thE' Controller to thf' effect that the oRtnte duty haR heen 
or will be paid, will Ret ns dett"rrent to evasion of f'Rtate duty. 
OIat/Be M.-From section 6 (4), 6 (6), 6 (7) Rnd. 6 (8), U.K. l"inanc3 
Act, 1894. 

• 
This clause fixes the time when the esk:te duty is due Rnd details the 
procedure for coll('!ctioll when the IUlIOlmt dUI' is determined. 
ClauRe M.-Adapted from sedioll 11 (I), U.K. Finance Act, 1894. 
The provision for grnnt of 1\ certificllto by the Controller either on pay. 
ment of the duty or on furnishing adequate seourity for the duty is neces· 
sary 8S evidence of discharge of duty. 
('lauRe .56.-Suh-clallse (1) is adapted from section lOR (9), Indian 
Court-f~es Act, ]870. . ! 
Th", npl~p!lsit.v of providing for estimr.te to the best of the judgment of 
the Contl-ollel" ",hel'c II() IWe01l1lt hIlS heen deliv('!red is evident. Provision 
exists for Rppl:'nl nguinst the valuation mllde and the estate duty determined 
by the Controller (vide clause 57). 
Olau8ll .S7.-The right of appeal to t.he Board against valuation made or 
determination of the estnte duty by the ControUer is provided for in this 
clause. In CRse of R dispute relnting' to valuntion of any property the 
appellant may require the BonTd to refer the question to the arbitration 01 
the Vnluel·s. 
(J1aUR;J ,5'B.-Provision has been mnde in this clause for a reference to 
the High Court, against the orders of the BOllrd of . any question of law 
arising out of such order. 
S\lb-claus8 (4) authol'ises the Boara to refer a case direc"ti to the Supreme 
Court on an application nnner suh-clanse (1) if the QtJestion is of Ruftieient 
importnnce or if there is conflicting decision of different HiJh Courts on 
the question involved. 
C7aU8(! 59.-Dptnils the manner of the formation of the High Oourt 
Bench and how the cases Are to be decided upon. An IIppeal shall lie to 
thf~ Supreme Court also from the jlld~ment of any High Court in any (lQ8e 
which the Hig~ Court certifies to be II. fit one for appeal to the Supreme 
Court. 
Claus6 60.-Adapted from section 19-1 (2), Court-fees Act, 1870. 
ClO,1186 61.-Ad~pterl from sections 19E and 190, Court·fees Act, 
1870. R('ction 11 (2). U.K. Finance Act, 1894 nnd section 14, U.K. Finance 
Act, 1007. 
In the mnjorit:v of CIISP-S, the proceifnre will he that the perROn account-
able will fll'Rt df'liver 0.11 a.cconnt under clause 50 (3) Rnd p"Y duty on the 
nropertv incllliled t·herein lInd(~r clmlRe nn. TTAurdly. the account may not 
be ~ comnh·f,e one. f01 it haR to he filled within Rix monthi of the death 
nnd fl111 ifl'taili:; mny not he IIvRilnhle r"/lf~ clanse nO (4)1- This preliminary 
nccount will Rervp- RA n noticf' of thp ilel1th tlO the Controller, 110 that he 
ma.y, if necesRRry. stftrt mRldng inouiri(lS unrler clRuse !'i6. At II. Jaler 
!ltag~. the perRons ncconnt.nhlp should be in a. position to deliver B full 
IItntement. t.o PR:V t,he pntire dut:v dm'. Rno to oMain R (l('!rtificllte of pa:v-
ment llnc1f'r Rllh-clRllf!l' (1) or (I)) of clnll!'!e 61. In oomplioated cases, they 
ClIln r.pnly and oMAin 11 C'f'rt.iiicnte of pnvment nnder clRuse 68. It. ill only 
n cert,iflCllte unoer clRUS!' 61 or ('.lAllsl' fl~ thAt oiFlchnrgeR the property (Rt'tJ 
c1a.lI~P fUJ). A cp.rt.ificnip. Ilnder clnll~p !i!'i sufficell for R grant of l'tmresentn-
tion so ns to (,"ahle t.he IZl'Rnt.ee fI,.CI, pnrlv R.R pORsibl('! to ~t in Rll the nro· 
J)!'rty "Mt.inl" in hi.m r.no to Rllbmit. R fll11 inventory OR required bv section 
Rt7. Indion RIlCC'eRRion Act, 1925. but rnl('h a C'ertiflcate does not operate 
AS A discharge for the purposes of clRuse 69, 

~ 
Clauss 6~.-Adapted from section 12, U.K. Finanoe Act, 1894. 
This olause authorises the commutation of an estate duty that would 
be payable on an interest in expectancy when it falls, for a certain Bum 
to be presently paid. 
Clause 63.-Adapted from section 13, U.K. ]i'manoe Act, 1894. 
This c;lauEle empowers the Board on the application of any person 
accountable for estate duty to accept composition for estate duty in certain 
complicated cases. 
ClauBs 64.-Adapted from section 8 (9), U. K. Finance Act, 1894. 
Where estate duty cannot be raised at once except by sale of property 
at excessive sacrifice due to adverse market conditions, the Controller is 
authorised to allow postponement of the recovery of the estate duty on 
payment of prescribed interest and on such other terms as the Controller 
nlay think fit. Power to extend time of payment or to allow payment of 
the demand in instalments is also exercised by Income·tax authorities as 
an administrative measure. 
Clause 6.i.-A.dapted from section 8 (14), U.K. Finance Act, 1894. 
This clause vests the Board with power to remit the payment of estate 
duty Ot {Iny part thereof or any interest thereon in fit cases if the duty 
remains unpaid after th~ expiration of 20 yeliTS from the date of death. 
The pUrp08(;; of this provillion is not to burden the administration with a. 
heavy carry forward of uncollectable demands after all steps for realisa-
tion hav~ been exhausted. Similar power to write off irrecoverable 
demands of income-tax are exercised by the Income-tax authorities und~r 
executh'e instructions. 
Clause 66.-Adapted from section 8 (14), U.K. Finance Act, 1804. 
Unde)' this clause the forms, affidavits, accounts and oertificates, etc., 
in conuection with the administration of estate duty are to be in such 
forms oontaining such particulars, to be delivered and verified in such 
manner anel by such documents as may be prescribed by the Board. This 
is analogous to the rule-making power of the Board in the administration 
of the Income-tax Aot (section 59 of the Inoome-tax Act, 1922). 
Olause 6r.-Adapted from section 19.1(1), Court·fees Aot, 1870. 
'l'his clause authorises the Controller to reoover the estate duty, 
intere!.=t or penalty through certifioate proceedings by the Colleotor and 
corresponds to section 46 (2), Indili:n Income-tax Aot, 1922. 
ORUSS 68.-This clause was inserted by the Seleot Committee on the 
Estate Duty Bill, 1948. The estate duty is made the first charge 011 
movable and immovable property. 
Clause 69.-Adapted from section 11 (2), (8) and (4), U.K. Finance 
Act, 1894. 
Wide terms of this clause clearly indicate that fraud or failure to dis· 
close material f8lJts on the part of Gny person will render the certificate or 
discharge useless to any other person except to a bona fide purchp.!ler for 
valuable consideration without notice. 
Cla1ts6 70.-Adapted from s~ction 9 (4), U.K. Finanoo Act, 1894. 
Under this clause if any person accountable for estate duty pays any 
pllrt of it in respect of Rny property not p&'Ssing to him, he shall have the 
right k be repaid by the trustees or owner of such property. 

.~ 
Clause rI.-Adapted from section 9 (6), (6) Bnd (7), U.K. Finance Act, 
1894. 
Any person who is authorised or is required to pay estate duty in res-
pect of /lny property is empowered under this clause to raise the amount 
of such duty ~y the sale or mortgage or a termintlble charge on that pro-
perty for the purpose of pfiying duty or reCOlll)iug the amount of duty if 
all'tlady paid. 
Clau8e 72.-Adapted from scction 67, Indian Income-tax Act. 1922. 
'rhi~ is a common feature to all revenue enactments. 
Clause 78.-This provision is necessary because of the confidential 
nature or information. etc. obtained in connection with the execution of 
the enactment. 
Clau8e 74.-This clause authorises the Board to make rules prescribing 
aU matters for carrying out the purposes of or giving effect to the clauses 
of the Bill. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE , 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and collection of an estate duty. 
The President has, in pursuaDce of clause (1) of article 
117 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, 
reoommended to the House of the People the introduotion of 
the Bill. 
(SAri O. D. DesAmu1cA, 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
Minister lor Finance) 
01PD-LAD-348 M of Law-ll·8.62-lfOO 