1. 
WK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE CODE OF CRrnINAL PROCEDURE (~$.NDMENT) BILL, 1978 
CTo be/As introduced in 10k Sabha 7 
1. Page 4, line 2,-
fo r "purpo se It ~ 'lpurpo S8 S " 
2. Page 4, line Y{),-
for ''detenion'' read "de ten tion tt 
3. Page 20, line 27,-
.f2£ "P anel II ~ "Penal" 
NEW DE.TJU; 
Mit ~ 1~78 

As INTRODl1~ IN 1.oK SAImA OK 
1 ~ MAY '~18' 
Bin No. 92 of 1978 
.. -
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
BE it enacted by P~ament in the Twenty-ninth Year ot.the RepubUc 
ot India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amend- Short 
ment) Act, 1978. title. 
2 of 1974. S I,. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to 
as the principal Act), in section 2, in clause (;), the words "and SAlch 
local area may comprise the whole of the State, or any part of the State, 
as the State Government may, by noti&:ation, specify" shall be inserted 
at the end. 
10 3. In section 11 of the principal Act, to sub-section (II), the following 
IS 
proviso shall be added, namely:-
"Provided that the State Government may, after consultation 
with ,the High Court, establish, for any local area, one or more 
Special Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first cl~s or of the 
second class to try any particular caS(: or particular,"ss of cases, 
and where any such Special Court u. established, 1'lo.(;',~~~.co~rt of 
. .('~ , 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 11. 
/ 

Amend-
ment of 
section 13. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 14. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 18. 
Magistrate in the local area shall have jurisdiction to try any case 
or class of cases for the trial of which such Special Court of J,udicial 
Magistrate has been established.". 
4. In section 13 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (i), for the words "of the second class, in S 
respect to particular cases or to particular classes of cases or to 
cases generally, in any district, not teing a metropolitan area: ", the 
words "of the first class or of the second class, in respect to parti-
cular cases or to particular classes of cases, in any local area, nOit 
being a metropolitan area:" shall be substituted; 10 
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3) The High Court may empower a Special Judicial 
Magistrate to exercise the powers of a Metropolitan Magistrate 
in relation to any metropolitan area outside his local juris- IS 
diction.". 
5. In section 14 of the principal Act,-
(a) to sub-section (1), the foLlowing proviso shall be added, 
namely:-
"Provided that the Court of a Special Judicial Magistrate 20 
may hold its sitting at any place within the local area for which 
it is established."; 
(b) aitel sub-sectioll (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
",(3) Where the local jurisdiction of a Magistrate, appoin- 2S 
ted under section 11 or section 13 or section 18, extends to an 
area beyod the district, or the metropolitan area, as the case 
may be, in which he ordinarily holds Court, any reference in 
this Code to the Court of Session, Chief Judicial Magistrate or the 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall, in relation to such Magis- 30 
trate, throughout the area within his local jurisdiction, be 
construed, unless the context otherwise requires, as a referenoe 
to the Court of Session, Chief Judicial Magistrate, or Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, exerai.ling juris-
&ction, in relation to the said district or metropolitan area.". , 35 
6. In section 18 of the prinCipal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), the words "or to cases generally" shall 
be omitted; 
(ii) for BUlb-section (3), the 
substituted, namely:-
following suh-.ection shall be 
\ "(3) The High Court or the State Government, as the case 
ma)\ be, may empower any Special Metropoiitan Magistrate to 
elr~'1 'le, in any local area outside the metropolitan area, the 
pp' of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.". 
-I' ... ;,.,;.. • 
40 

• 
.,. In aeotion 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,- Amend-
ment (a.? for the words uaU or any", the word "such" shall be sube- of section 
tituted; 20. 
(b) after the words "in force", the words "as may be directed 
S by the State Government" shall be inserted. 
10 
8. For section 24 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substit~ 
substituted, namely:- tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 24. 
"24. (1) For every High Court, the Central Government. ot the Public 
'State Government shall, after consultation with the High CQurt, ap- ~rosecu­
point a Public Prosecutor and may also appoint one or more Addi- . ors. 
tional Public Prosecuto,1'B, for conduding in such Court, aay prosecu-
tion, appeal or other proceeding Oft behalf of the Central Gewrnment 
or State Government. as the case may be. 
(2) The CentTal Government may appoint one or more Public 
I S Prosecutors, for the PUl'])08e of conducting any ease or class of cases 
in any district. or local area. 
20 
35 
'IS 
(3) For evf!ry district, the State Government shall appoint a 
Public Prosecutor and mav also appoint one or more Additionai Pub-
lic Prosecuttlrs for the district: 
Provided that the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prose-
cutor appointed for one district may be appointed also to be a Public 
Prosecutor or an Additional Ptlh1ic Prosecutor, as the case may be. for 
another district. 
(4) The )')istrict Ma~i!;trate shan, in consultation with the 
Sessjon~ Judge, prepare a panel of names of person!'!, who are, in hi!; 
opinion fit to be appbinted as Public Prosecutors or Additional Pub-
lic Prosecutors for the district. 
(5) No person shall be appointed by the StAte GoV'eftlment a~ 
the Public Prosecutor or AddJtional PubHc Prosecutor fnr the (Ustnct 
unless his name appears in the panel of names prepared by the Dis-
trict Magistrate under sub-section (4). ' 
un NotwithstandinJ! anvthinJ! contained in sub-section (5), where 
in a state there exists a reji{Ular Cadre of Prosecutin~ Officers. the 
State Government shall appoint a Public Prbsecutor or an Additional 
Public Prosecutor only from among the person! constituting such 
Cadre: 
Provided that where in the opinion of the State Government, no 
suitable person is available in such Cadre for such appointment that 
Government may appoint a person as Public Prosecutor or Additional 
PubliC' Prosecutor, as the case may be, from the panel of names pre-
pared by the District Magistrate, under sub-section (4). 
(7) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Public Prose-
cutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor undpT sub-section (1) or s~b­
section (2)- or sub-section (3) or sub-secti.()~ (5) . or sub-secbon 
(6), only if he has been in practice as an 'advocate' for n~t less th::1n 
seVen yearS, . ,':' • .tt. .j H.~~ 1\: ... r 

Amend-
merit of 
section 
25. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
102. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
107. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
121. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
18'7. 
(8) The Central Government or the State Govel'llment may ap-
point, for the pu1'pose of any case or class of eases, a person who 
has been in practice as an advocate· for not less than ten years as a 
Special Public hosecutor. 
(9) For the purposes of sub-section (7) and sU'b-sec~ion (8), the 5 
period during which a person has been in practice as a ple;:tder. or 
has rendered (wh'"'ther before or after the commencement of this 
code) service as a Public Prosecutor or as an Additional Public Pro-
secutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor or other Prosecuting Officer, by 
whatever name called, shall be deemed +0 be the period fluring which 10 
such person has been in practice as an advocate. 
9. In section 25 of the prineipal AM, after sub-section (1). the follow-
fn.g sub-section shall be inserted, namely: - . 
"(1A) The Central Government may' a1tPOint one ~t' more Assist-
ant Public Prosemtn~ fo1' the purpose' of conducting any cUe Or IS 
class of (!8c;es in the Courts of Magistrates.". 
18. In section 102 of the principal Act. after snb-sect:ion (2). the 
following sub-section shall be- in~erted, namely:-
"(3) Everv police officer acting' under sub-section (1) shall 
forthwith report the seizure to the Magistrate having jurisdiction and 20 
where the property seized if; such that it cannot be conveniently 
transported to the Court. he may give custody· thereof to any person 
on his executing a hond undertaking to produce thp. property 
before the Court as and when rE'quired and to give effect to the 
further orders of the Court as to the disposal of the same.". 25 
11. In section 107 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the 
words "ordered to execute a bond,", the words "with or without sureties," 
shaLl be inserted. 
12. In section 123 of the Principal Act.-
(i) in sub-section (1). for the words "the Chief Judicial Magis-30 
ti"ate", tJie words and figures "the District Magistrate in the case of an 
order paped by an Executive Magistrate under section 117. Or the 
Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-sections (2). (5), (6), (7) and (9), for the words 
"Chief Judicial Magistra1:le", wherever they occur, the wor'ds and 35 
figures "District Magistrate, in the case of. an order passed by an Exe-
cutive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate 
in any other case" shall be substituted. 
1 S; In section 167 of the principal Act: in the proviso to sub-section 
m~ ~ 
(a) for paragraph (a) .. the following paragraph shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(a) the Ma~fstrat4o! may authorise thp. netention of the IIe-
et1Ied person. otherwise th an in the custoti" of the l'olicf!. hevond 
the period of fifte!"n rbvs, ff h .. t:'l sntisfl~ th~t: adeonate l1rounlis 4' 
,. __ .• ~-' I.~PLilr. tor doing so. but no Mngistr'Ate shl'\lJ ~u~+hortw +h. d~fon 

I 
of the accused person in custody ·under this paragraph for a total 
period exceeding,-
(i) ninety days, where the investigation relates to an 
offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or im-
5 prisonment for & term of not less than ten years; 
(if) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any 
other oiIence, 
and, on the expiry of the said period of· ninety days, or sixty 
days, as the case may be, the accused person shall be released 
'0 on bail if he is prepared to and does furnish bail, and every 
person released on bail uRder this sub-section shall be deemed 
to be so released under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII for 
the purposes of that Chapter;"; 
(b) in paragraph (b), for the words "no Magistrate shall", the 
r S words "no Magistrate shall, except for reasons to be recorded in writ-
ing," shall be substituted; 
(c) the ExpLanation shall be numbered as Explana1Jion II, and 
before Explanation II, as so numbered, the following Explanation 
shall be inserted, namely:-
20 "Explano.tw-n r.o-For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that, notwithstanding the expiry of the period specified 
in paragraph (a.), the accused shall be detained in custody so long 
as he does not furnish baiL"; 
(d) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section snaIl be 
2S inserted, namely:-
"(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2), the officer in charge of the police station 
or the police officer making the investigation, if he is not below 
the rank of a sub-Inspector. may. where a Judicial Magistrate is 
30 not availa15le, transmit to the nearest Executive Magistrate, on 
whom the powers of a Judicial Magistrate or Metropolitan Magis-
trate have been conferred, a copy of the entry in the diary here-
inafter prescribed relating to the case, and shall, at the same time, 
forward the accused to such Executive Magistrate, and thereupon 
35 such Executive Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, authorise the detention of the accused person in such 
custody as he may think fit for a term not exceeding seven days 
in the aggregate; anli, on the expiry of the period of detention 
so authorised, the accused oerson shaD be released on bail 
40 except where an order foOr further detention of the accused 
person has been made by a M,aglstrate competent to make such 
order; and, where an order for such further detention is made, 
the period during which the accused person was detained in 
custody under the orders ma.ife by an ExecUtive Magistrate 
4S under this sub-section, shall be taken into account in computing 
the petrfod specified in paragraph (a) of the proviso to sub~ 
section (2): 
Provided that before the expiry of the period aforesaM, the 
Executive J6agistrate ~alI trnncnnit to the' nea~~" J~tn\ 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
167 to 
apply to 
pending 
investi-
gations. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
182. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
196. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
198. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
208. 
Amend-
ment of 
aect10n 
209. 
Amend-
ment of 
sectiOn 
276. 
8 
Magistrate the records of the case together with a copy of the 
entries in the diary relating to the case which was transmitted 
to him by the officer in charge of the police station or the police 
officer making the investigation, as the case may be.". 
14. The provisions ot: section 167 of the principal Act, as amended by 5 
this Act, shall apply to every investigation pending immediately before 
the commencement of this Act, if the period of cieten,Uo~ of the accused 
person, otherwise than in the custody of the police, had not, at such 
commencement, exceeded sixty days. 
15. In section 182 of the principal Act, in SUb-section (2), after the 10 
words "by the first marriage", the words .. , or the wife by the first 
marriage has taken up permanent residence after the commission of the 
offence" shall be inserted. 
16. In section 196 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
words "a cognizable offence", the words "an offence" shall be suqatttutet!. IS 
1'7. In section 198 of the principal Act, in paragraph (c) of the proviso 
to sub-section (1),-
(i) for the word and figures "section 494", the words and 
flgures "section 494 or section 495" shall be substituted; 
(ii) after the words "mother's brother or sister", the words 20 
". or, with the leave of the Court, by any other person related to 
her by blood, marriage or adoption" shall be inserted. 
18. In section 206 of the principal Act. af.ter sub-section (2), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) The State Government may, by not;fkation, specially em-2; 
power any Magistrate to exercise the powers conferred by sub-section 
(1) in relation to any offence which is compoundable under section 
320 or any offence punishable with imprisonment for a tenn not 
exceeding three months, or with fine, or with both where the Magis-
trate is of opinion that. having regard to the facts and circumstances 3 ) 
of the case, the imposition of fine only would meet the ends of justice.". 
11. In section 209 of the principal Act, for clause (a). the following 
clause shall be substituted, namely:-
.. (a) commit, after complying with the provision. of section 207 
or section 208, as the case may be, the case to the Court of Sess1on, and 35 
subject to the prOvisions of this Code relating to bail, remand the 
\. accused to custody until such commitmen't has been made;~'. 
-\' . ' 
20'. In section 276 of 'the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the follow-
ing sup-section shall be substituted, namely:-
): II (2) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken OOwD in the form 40 
1.' a narrative, but the- presiding Judge may, in'his discretion, t'akp. 
, _It,1 

7 
down, or cause to be taken down, any part ot such evidence in the 
form of question and answer.". 
"21. 101 section 277 of the principal Act, in clause (a), after tbe words 
"taken down in that language", the words "or if it is not practicable to 
5 do so, it shall be taken down in Hindi or in English" shall be inserted. 
22. In section 293 of the principal Act, in clause (e) of sub-section (4), 
after the word. "Director", the words ", Deputy Director or Assistant 
Director" shall be inserted. 
23. In section 297 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for clause 
10 (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(a) any Judge or any Judicial or Executive Magistrate, or". 
24. In section 299 of the principal.Act, in sub-section (1), after the 
words "competent to try", the words ", or commit for trial," shall be 
inserted. 
15 25. In section 309 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the 
second proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided also that no adjournment shall be granted for the 
purpose only oil enabling the accused person to show cause against 
the sentence proposed to be imposed on him .... 
20 26. In section 320 of the principal Act, in the Table under sub-section 
(1), in column 1, for the word "Defamation", the words, figures and brac-
kets "Defamation, except such cases as are specified against section 500 of 
'5 of 1860. the Indian Penal Code in column 1 of the Table under sub-section (2)" 
shall be substituted. 
25 117. In section 323 of the prinCipal Act, the follOWing shall be inserted 
30 
at the end, namely:-
"and thereupon the provisions of Chapter XVIII shall apply to the 
. commitment so made". 
28. In section 326 of the principal Act,-
(i) in SUb-section (1), for the word "Magistrate", wherever it 
occurs, the words "Judge or Magistrate" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "from one Magistrate to 
another Magistrate", the words "from one Judge to another Judge 
or from one Magistrate to another Magistrate" shall be substituted. 
35 •. In section 374 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
wards "has been passed", the words "has been passed against him or 
against any other person convicted at the same trial" shall be substituted. 
30. In section 377 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
words "the Central Government may direct", the words "the Central 
40 Government may also direct" shall be substituted. lA'·~, 
"' 
;w: 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
277. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
293. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
297. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
299. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
309. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
320. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
323. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
326. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
874. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
377. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
378. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
428. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
433A. 
Restric-
tion on 
powers 
of remis-
sion or 
commut-
ation in 
certain 
cases. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
468. 
Amend-
ment 01 
section 
478. 
Ament'-
ment of 
the 
Second 
Schedule. 
31. In section 378 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1). the f.o11ow-
ing shall be inserted at the end, namely:- . 
"or an order of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in rev!-
sion"~ 
32. In section 428 of the principal Act, after the words Usentenced to 5 
imprisonment for a term", the words Ii, not being imprisonment in default 
of payment of fine,", shall be inserted. 
33. After section 433 of. the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"433A. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 432, where 10 
a sentence of imprisonment f()r life is imposed on conviction of a person 
for an offence for which death is one of the punishments provided by 
law, or where a sentence of death imposed on a person has been com-
muted under section 433 into one of imprisonment for life, such person 
shall not be released from prison unless he had served at least fourteen IS years of imprisonment.". 
34. In section 468 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the follow-
ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) For the purposes of this section, the period of limitation, in 
relation to offences which may be tried togetber , shall be determined 20 
with reference to the offence which is punishable with the more 
severe punishment or, as the case may be, the most severe punish-
ment.". 
35. In section 478 of the principal Act,-
(i) for the words "State Legislature", the words "Legislative 25 
Assembly of a State" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the word "requires", the word "permits" shall be sub-
stitutec:l. 
36. In the Secoo.d Sche:lule to the principal Act,-
(9 in Form No. 34,-
(a) in the heading, for the word "Magistrate", the wdrd 
"Court" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the brackets, words and figures" (See sections 248 and 
255) ", the brackets, words and figures" (See s~tions 235, 2'48 and 
30 
255)" shall be substituted; 35 
. (ti) in Form No. 41, for the brackets, words and ftgures .' (See 
section 386) ", the brackets, w<1rds and figures" (See sections 386, 413 
and 416)" shall be substituted; 
(iii) in Form No. 42, for the brackets, words and figures .. (See 
section, 414) ", the brackets, words and figures" (See sections 413 and 40 
4«).t I,ball be substituted; 

5 
9 
(itt) after Form ND. 44~ the folloWing Form shall be inserted, 
DUnely:-
IIFORM No. 44A 
BOND 10'08 APPEARANCE OF OFFENDER RELEASED PENDING REALISATION OF FINE " , 
[See section 424 (l)(b)] 
- --.I'" 
WHEREAS I, (name), inhabitant of (place), have been sen-
tenced to pay a fine of rupees and in default of payment 
thereof to undergo imprisonment for ........ ; and whereas the 
Cowrt has been pleased, to order my releaBf:, on condition of my 
10 executing a bond for my appearance on the following date (or 
dates), namely: - ' 
I hereby bind myself to appear before the Court of 
af o'clock on the following date (or dates),namely:-
,and, in caSe of making default herein, I biild myself to"forfeit to 
15 Government the sum of rupees 
Dated, this day of ,19 . 
(Signa~ure). 
WHERE A BOND WITH SURETIES IS TO BE EXECUTED, ADD-
We do hereby declare ourselves sllII"eties for the above-named 
20 that he will appear before the Court of on the following 
date (or dates). namely:-
and, in case 0f his making default therein, we bind ourselves 
jointly and severally to forfeit to Government the sum of 
rupees 
(Signature) .It; 
25 (v) after Form No. 46, the following Forms shall be inserted. 
'" 
namely:-
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT 1'0 ENFORCE A BOND 
(See section 446) 
To the P<Alce Officer in charge of the pollee 'station at 
WHEREAS (name, ,deBcriptiOft. and addr~" of pe7'Bon) has 
failed to appear on (mention the oct:asion) pursuant to his recog-
n,izance, and has by default forfeited to Governmeu.t the sum of 
,ru~ ,,(the penalty in the. bond); and whereas. the said . (name 
of pe1"son) has, on due notice to him, ~led to pay the S8ld sum 
011" show any suffiCient cause why payment should not be enfdrced 
against him; 
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable 
"property of the said (name) that you may find within the district 
of • by seizure and detention, and, if the said amount be 
not paid within days, to sell the property so attached or so 

10 
much, of it as ,may be sufticient to realise the atI10Ullt ,aforesalid, 
and to make return of what you have done under this.wasnnt 
immediately upon its execution. ' 
Dated, this day of ,19 . 
'(Signature). S 
(Seed of the Court) 
FORM No. 48 
NO'l'ICE TO SURETY ON BREACH or A BOND 
To 
(See section 446) 
of 
Wm:aAson the day of • 19 . , you becallRe surety 
l.or (name) of (place) that he should appear before this Court on 
the day of and bound yourself in default thereof 
to forfeit the sum of rupees to Government; and whereas 
10 
the said (name) has failed to appear before tliis Court and by IS 
reason of such default you have forfeited the aforesaid sum of 
rtlpeE'S 
You are hereby required to pay the said penalty or show 
cause, within days from this date, why payment of the 
said sum should not be enforced a'gainst you. 20 
Dated, this day of ,19 . 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) . 
FORM No. 49 
NOTICE TO SURETY OF FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUII 
To 
(See section 446) 
of 
WHEREAs on the 'day of ,19, you became surety 
by a 'bond for (na'J'7W!) af (pT4ce) that he would be of good beha-
2S 
viour for the period of and bound yourself in default thereof 30 
to forfeit the sum of rupees to Government; and whereas 
the said (name) has been convicted of ·the offence of (mention 
the offence concisely) committed' since you became sue'h surety, 
Whereby your security bond has become forfeited; 
You are her.eby required to pay the said penalty .of'rupees or" 
to show cause within days why it shouJd not be paid 
Dated, this day of ,19 . 
(Se41 of the Cou.rt) 
i ~Stgnatur8'). 

To 
II 
lI'ORM No. 50 
WARRANT OF ATl'ACIiMENT AGAINST A SURETY 
(See section 446) 
of 
S WHEB&\S (name, de8cription and addres8) bQ.~, himself 
as surety for the appearance of (mention. the conditw. C1f the 
bond) and the said (name) has made default, and ,1;hereby for-
feited to Government the sum of rupees (th.e penaltll 
i1,& the bond); 
10 This is to aut~~ise and require you to attach any movable 
property of the said (('14me) which you ~y find within the 
dis~ict of " by seizure and detention; and, if ihe said 
amount be not paid withln days, to sell the property 80 
attached, or so much of it·as may be sufficient to realibe the 
IS amoWlt aforesaid, and make return of what you have done 
und.er this walTant immediately upon its execution. 
, ' 
20 
30 
3S -" ... 
40 "f 
Dated, this day of ,19 . 
(Seal of the Court) 
'(Signature). 
FoaM No. 51 
W ARR~ OF COMMITMENT OF THE SURETY OF AN ACCUSED 
PERSON ADMITTED TO BAIL 
~ee section 446) 
To the SUperintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at 
WHEREAS (name and description of suretll) has bound himself 
as a surety for the appearance of ('state the ~ditioo of the bond) 
and the said (name) has therein made default whereby the penalty 
mentioned in the said bond has been forfeited to Government; 
and whereas the said (name of surety) has, on due notice to him, 
failed to pay the said sum or show any sufficient cause why pay-
ment sh~uld not be enforced against him, and tlie same, cannot be 
recovered by attachment and sale of his movable property, and 
an order has been made for his imprisonment in 'the'Civil Jail 
for (spe~ify the period); 
This is to authorise and requiJre you, the said Superintend~nt 
(or Keeper) to receive the said (name) into your custody wl~h 
this warrant and to keep ,him 'safely in the said Jail for the saId 
(term of imprisonment), and to retumthis warrant w,iija an 
endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. 
Dated, this day of ,19 • 
(Seal of the Court) " 
(Signature) 

t, 
12 
F6RM No. 52 
NonCE TO mE ,JUNCIPAL OF FORFEITURE OF BONDT<> '~i THE PEACE 
(See section 446) 
To (name, descriptiOn and 'address) 
WHEREAS on the day of " you entered into 5 
a bond not to commit, etc., (as in the bond), and proof of the 
:forfeitti.re of the same has been givenbef'ore me and duly 
reCorded; , 
You are hereby called upon to pay~he saic;l ~nalty of 
rupees or to show cause before me withili .', ' days 10 
why payment of the same should not be, enforced against you. 
Dated, this day of I 19 . 
(Seal 'iQthe Court) 
,~~~ .. ' (S;ip1tature) . 
, .... 
. ~', ... 
FORM No. 53 IS 
WARRANT TO A'l"l'ACH THE PROPERTY OF THE PRiNCIPAL ON BREACH OF i BOND TO 
KEEP THE PEACiI 
f r~ 'J 
, , tf, , 
(See section 446) 
To (~ame and designation of police Officer), at the police 
station of 20 
WHEREAs (name and desCTiJ)tion~ did, on the day of 
19 • enter iniY.-I a bon~ for the sum of rupees binding 
himself not to commit, a breach of the pef;lCe, etc., (as in the 
bond), and 'Proof, of the forfeiture of the said bond has been given 
before me and duly rf'('ordpd: t'lnd whpT'I"a::; notice haSi been given 25 
to the said (name) callinl! tlPon him to show cause why the sai.d 
sum should not hoe paid, Rnd he has failed to do so or to pay tlie 
said sum; 
This is to authorise and requh'e vou to '!'It't'~'ch bv sei.zure 
movable propt(~rty belonltinlt to the said (name) to, tb.~ value of 30 
rupees , which ynn may find within ~he dishict of 
and, if the snirl SllYn, be not pJ'lid within . to !'jell the 
property so att?f'heri, 01:" so much of it as mRy be, "uffici.ent to 
realize the same; and to m~"k~ return of what VOCl hwe done 
under this warrant immediatelv upon its execution. 35 
'Dated, 'tJi1Ji day of ,19 . 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) . 
FORM No. 54 • J ' , '".! ';" 
WARRANT OF'lMPR!90NMr.NT ON BREACH OF A BOND TO kEEP 'THE ~ PEACE 
(See section 446) 
To the Superintendent (oTke~per) of the Civil 'Jail at 
WHEREAS proof has been given before me and duly recorded 
that (name and description) has committed a breach cd the bond 
.. ~tered into by him to keep the peace, whereby he has forfeited 45 
to Government the sum of rupees ; and whereas the said 

) 
10 
IS 
20. 
30. 
3S 
4S 
13 
(~me') has failed to pay the said 'sum Qr to. shQW Cit-use why the 
uidsuin should not be paid, although duly called ~to do so., 
;1IDd payment th.ereofcannot be enforced by att$chment Qf his 
movable prQperty, and an order has been made far the iJ:nprison-
ment Off the said (name).in the Civil Jail for the PQriod (J.f (term 
&j imprisonment); 
.-ft " ';['h~,is to authorise and require you, the said SUperintendent 
(or Kee~f) Qf the said Civil Jail to"receive the said (M7Re') into 
yQur custody, together with this warrant, and "to' keep him safely 
in the said Jail fQr the said period of (term of impmonmen.t), and 
to return that warrant with an,en~rsement certifying the man-
nerof ita execution. 
Da~, this' day o.f , 19 . 
t'Sea.l·of the Court) 
(Signature) . 
\, , 
Fo.RM No.. 55 , 
WARRANT o.F·ATrACHMENT AND SALE o.N FQRFEITURE o.F Bo.ND Fo.R GOOD 
BEHAVIOUR 
(See section 446) 
To the police officer in charge Qf the police statiQn at 
WHEREAS (name, description and address) did, Qn the 
day Qf ,19, give security by bQnd in the sum Qf 
rupees for the good behaviour of (name, etc., Qf the 
principal), and proof has been g,iven befQre me and duly recarded 
00: the commission by the said (name) of the Qffence Qf 
whereby the said bQnd has been forfeited; and whereas nQtice 
has been given to the said (name) calling upon him to sho.W 
cause why the said sum should not be paid, and he lias failed to. 
do so or to pay the said sum; 
This is to. autho.rise and require you to attach by seizure 
movable property helonging to. the said (name) to. the value Qf 
rupees which you may find within the district of 
and, if the said sum be not paid within , to sell the prQperty 
so attached, or so much of it as may be sufficient to realise the 
same, and to make return of what you have dOne under this 
warrant immediately upon its execution. 
Dated, this day of ,19 . 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature ). 
FORM No.. 56 
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FORFEITURE OF Bo.ND Fo.R GOOD BEHAVIOUR 
(;See sectiQn 446) 
To the Superintendertt (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at 
WHEREAS 
day of 
(name, descriptio.n and address) did, on the 
,19 ,give security by bGlnd in the sum of 

14 
rupees for the good behaviour of (name, ,tc., of the 
PI intipal) and proof of the breach of the said bond has been given 
befwe me and duly recoroed, whereby the laid (fII(I1Il.e') has 
forfeited to Government the sum of rupees , and whereas 
he has failed to pay the said sum or to show caUse why the said , 
sum shauld not be paid although duly called upon tu do so, and 
payment thereof cannot be enforced by attachment of his movable 
property, and an order has been made for the imprisonment of 
the said (name) in the Civil Jail for the perPad. of (tenn Of 
imprisonment) ; 10 
This is to authorise and require you, the Superintendent (or 
Keeper), to receive the said (name) into your oUltody, together 
with this warrant,and to keep him safely in the said Jail for the 
said period of (term of imprisonment), !returning this warrant 
with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. 
Dated, this day of , 19 . 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) .". 
IS 

STATEMENT OF OBlD:TS -AND REASONS 
The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 came into force on the tit day 
of April, 1974. The working of the new Code has been cat'efully watched 
and ir. thE li~ht of the experience, it has been found ne,cessary to make 
a few changes for removing certain difficulties and doubts. The notes 
on clauses explain in brief the reasons for the amendments. 
NIW I>a.m; S.D.PATIL. 
The 9th May, 1978. 

Notes on clause, 
Clause 2.-The jurisdiction o.f ~ Magistrate under the new Code is 
confined to a district This has created difficulty in enabling the ap,p'oint-
ment of Magistrates with jurisdiction beyond a district such as when 
Special Judicial Magistrates ~re to be appointed to try c~rtain categories 
of cases or cases involving inter-district ramification,s. The definition 
of the expression "local jurisdiction" in section 2(j) is therefore being 
amended to empower the State Government to define the local jurisdic-
tion-GSextending to the whole of the 'State or to any p,art thereof in the 
case of Special Courts or Special Judicial Magistrates, 1~here necessary. 
Clause 3.-Under the new Code, Courts of Magistrates are established 
for every district. Sometimes it becomes necessary to set up Courts of 
Judicial Magistrates for trying special categories of cases, where the 
juris~ction has to extend to areas beyond a district. Sub-section (1) of 
section 11 is being amended to empower the State Government to estab-
lish Sp.ecial Courts of Judicial Magistrates having jurisdiction through-
out any local area and to confer on such Courts exclusive jurisdiction to 
try any particular case or particular class of cases. 
Clause 4.-The amendment to sU'b-section (1) of section 13 seeks to 
enable Special Judicial Magistrates to exercise jurisdiction over any local 
area and to enable the conferment on them the powers of a Magistrate 
of the first class also. 
The High Court is also sought to be empowered to authorise Special 
Judicial Magiltrate to exercise the powers of a Special Metropolitan 
Magistrate in relation to any metropolitan area outside his local jurisdic-
tion. 
ClGuse 5.-Sub-section (1) of section 14 is being amended to insert 
a proviso to the effect that the Court of Special Judicial Magistrate may 
hold its sitting at any place within the local area for which it is estab-
lished. The intention is to facilitate the holding of mobile Courts. 
New 8ubl-section (3) is being inserted in section 14 to provide that, 
whE!!'e the local jurisdiction of a Magistrate extends beyond a district or 
a metropolitan area in which he ordinarily holds his C{'urt, references 
in the Code to the Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate or Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate shall, in relation to the entire area in the local 
jurisdiction be construed as 'I'eferences to the Court of Session, Chief 
Judicial Magistrate or Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may 
be, exercising jurisdiction over the district in which he ordinarily holds 
his Court. 
Clause 6.-Section 18 is being amended to bring it in line with the 
amendment proposed to section 13. 
The High Court is sought to be empowered to authl)rise a Special 
Metropolitan Magistrate to exercise powers of a Judicial Magistrate in 
any area outside his local jurisdiction. 
,'·i .. 18 

17 
Clause 7.-Sub-section (2) of section 20 is being amended to remove 
the difficulties in the interpretation, which may be felt, since the words 
"as the State Government may direct", aP.P8aring in the corresponding 
provision in the old Code, were deleted from the provision in the new 
Code. 
Clawe 8.-The section is being amended (i) to enable the Central Gov-
ernment and State Governments to apr,oint one or more Additional 
Public Prosecutors for the High Court; (ii) to enable the Central Govern-
ment to appoint one or more Public Prosecutors in any district or local 
area; (iii) to enable counting of service rendered as Prosecuting Officer 
before or after coming into force of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
as service as an advoc&.te for the purpose of appointment as Public Pro-
secutor or Additional Public Prosecutor or Special Public Prosecutor; 
and (iv) to provide that in any State where there exists n regular cadre 
of Prosecuting Officers, appointment of Public Prosecutors Or Additional 
Public Prosecutors will be made ,only from that cadre and when therE' 
are no suitable persons available appointment can be made from the panel 
prepared by the District Magistrate in consultation with the Sessions 
Judge. 
Clause 9.-Section 25 is being amended to empower the Central Gov-
ernment also to appoint Assistant Puiblic Prosecutors for the purpose 
of conducting any case or class of cases in the Court of Magistrates, 
whenever necessary. 
Clau.se 10.-Section 102 is being amended (1) to provide that the 
police officer shall forthwith report the seizure of any property under 
sub-section (1) to the Magistrate, as there is a lacuna in the Law and (2) 
to give effect to the observations of the Sur,reme Court made in Anwar 
Ahmad vs. the State of U.P. (AIR 1976 SC 680) that the police should 
be given the power to get a bond from the person to whom the property 
seized is entrusted, liarticularly in cases where a bulky property like 
elephant or car, is seized and the Magistrate is living at a great distance 
and it is difficult to produce the property seized befone the Magistrate. 
Clause 1l.-Under the new Code, a Magistrate cannot demand 
surety from a person for keeping the peace. He can only demand a 
personal bond from the person concerned. It has been felt that the old 
provision permitting the demand of the sureties along with bond should 
be restored. Section 107 is being amended to enable the Magistrate to 
demand sureties in appropriate cases. 
Cl.au.se 12.-Under the new Code even the bond executed under the 
orders of an Executive Magistrate can be cancelled on.ly by the Chief 
Judicial Magistrate. Section 123 of the. Code is being amended to em-
pOWer the District Magistrate to release persons imprisoned for failure 
to give security in a case where such person was ordered by an Execu· 
tive Magistrate to furnish security. 
Clause 13.-Section 167 is being amended to empower the Magistrate 
to authorise detention, p~nding investigation, for an aggregat~ period of 
90 days in cases where the investigation relates to offences punishable 
with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not les~ than ten 
years or more and up to 60 days in any other case. These amendments 

18 
ate intended to remove difficulties which have been actually experienced 
in relation to the investigation of oJfences of a serioua nature. 
A new sub-section is being inserted empowering an Executive Magis-
trate, on whom the, powers of a Judicial Magistrate or Metropolitan 
Magistrate have been conferred under section 13 or section 18 to make 
an order for remand of an accused for a period not exceeding seven days 
in the aggregate in cases where a, Judicial Magistratei:; not available. 
The period of dete~tion ordered by such a Magistrate will, however, be 
taken into account in computing the total Pteriod specified in clause (a). 
This is being done with a view to overcoming the difficulties arising out 
of a shortage of judicial magistrates in the remote areas. 
Paragraph (b) of the proviso to sub-section (2) is being amended to 
provide that the requirement that the accused person should be produc-
ed before the Magistrate making an order for remand may be waived 
by the Magistrate for the reasons to be recorded by him. There may 
be cases where for practical considerations it may be difficult to produce 
the accused repeatedly for obtaining remand. 
An Explanation is being inserted to clarify that when the accused 
person does not furnish bail would continue to be in detention, 
CZaw.:e 14.-A provision is also being inserted to make the provisions 
of section 167 applicable to pending investigations. 
Clause 15.-Section 182 is being amended 1;0 enable a complaint by a 
woman relating to an offence of bigamy, to be made at the place of per-
manent residerx:e after the commission of the offence instead of at the 
place where she last resided with the husband. 
Clause 16.-Sub-section (2) of section 196 restricts the power of the 
Court to take cognizance of the offence of, any criminal conspiracy 
punishable under St!ction 120B of the Indian Penal Code, other than a 
criminal conspiracy to commit a cognizable offence which is punishable 
with death, imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term of 
two years or upwards unless the State Government or the District 
Magistrate has consented to the initiation of proceedings. The said sub-
section is being amended to remove the distinction between cognizable 
and non-cognizable offences. 
Clause 17.-Section 198 is being amended to provide that a complaint 
of an offence of bigamy may be filed also by any other person related 
to the wife by! blood, marriage or adoption, after obtaining leave of Court. 
This is intended to afford the much needed help to the aggrieved woman 
in such cases. 
Clause lB.-New sub-section (3) is being inserted in section 206 to 
('nlarge the scope of ' the facility provided by that section SO that the 
State Government may specia1ly empower a Magistrate to' exercise the 
powers conferred by sub-section (1) in relation to any offence which 
is compoundable under section 320 and to other offences punishable 
with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months, where a 
Magistrate is of opinion that imposition of only fine would meet the ends 
of justice. 

Clause 19.-Clause (a) of section 209 is being replaced by a new clause 
which clarifit.'S that the commitment is to be made a~ter complying with 
the provisions of section 207 or 208 and that the committ41g Court will 
also have the power to make an order for the remand of the accused in 
custody until the commitment has been made. This is intended to re-
move the difficulty actually experienced in cases where the committing 
Magistrate is unable to comm.t the accused on the same day. 
ClaU8e 20.-Under the new Code, in sessions trials, the evidence is to 
be recorded ordinarily in the form of questions and answers. It has 
been found that such recording of evidence caused delay. Section 276 
is being amended to provide that, as under the old Code, evidence shall 
ordinarily be taken down in the form of a narrative, but the Judge may 
,take down any particular question and answer verbatim. 
Clause 21.-The present provision in the new Code is that the evi-
dence shall be taken down in the language of the Court. This has 
created d:fficulties in areas where other languages are alsQ in use. To 
remove practical difficulties in taking down evidence in the language of 
the Court, section 277 is being amended to prOvide that evidence may be 
taken down in Hindi or English, if it is not practicable to take down 
such evidence in the language of the Court. 
Clause 22.-SUb-section (4) of section 293 is being amended to include 
Deputy Directors and Assistant Directors of Central and State Forensic 
Science Laboratories in the list of Government scientific experts. 
Clause 23.-At present affidavits can. be sworn in by a Judge or a 
Magistrate. To remove a doubt whether this would include Executive 
Magistrates, section 297 is being amended to clarify that the provision 
would ('over Executive Magistrates also. 
Clause 24.-Under section 299, evidence of witnesses can be recorded 
in the absence of the accused when he is absconding by the trying Magis-
trate and not by the committing Magistrate. The section is being amend-
ed to enable the committing M.agistrate also to exercise the function of 
recording evidence of witnesses. when the accused is absconding. 
ClaU8e 25.-The new Code provides for an opportunity to an accused 
person to show cause against thE' proposed sentence. As this should not 
lead to delay, section 309 is being amended to clarify that adjoumment 
shall not be granted only for the purpose of enabling the accused to show 
cause against the proposed sentence. . 
Clause 26.-The Table under mrb-section (1) of section 320 is being 
amended to provide tha.t only those cases of defamation may be com-
pounded without the permission of the Court, as are not mentioned against 
~ection 500 of the Indian Penal Code, in column 1 of the Table under sub-
sechon (2) of section 320. 
Clause 27.-Section 323 is being amended so as to clarify that, where 
a commitment is made by a Magistrate after inquiry and trial, the pro-
cedure specified in Chapter XVIII shall apply to the' commitment so 
made. 

20 
Clause 28.-Under the existing prov~sion, a de-novo trial is not obli-
gatory when there is a change of Magistrate. It is proposed to extend 
the scope ot the section to the Court of Session also to expedite trial of 
cases therein. 
Clause 29.-Secti/)n 374 is being amended to provide for cases where 
there are two or more accused persons. The right of appeal, where the 
appealable sentence has been passed against such person or against any 
other person convicted at the same trial. will be available to all the 
a<!Cll.Sed persons irrespective of the sentence passed on each. This was 
the position under the old Code. 
Cla"se SO.-Section 377 is being amended to clarify that the State 
Government, besides the Central Government can also direct the Public, 
Prosecutor ,to present an appeal against inadequate sentence in cases in 
which the offence was investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establish-
ment or any other agency empowered to investigate an offence under any 
\ ·th~r Central Act. 
Clau..,e 31.-Section 378 is being amended to provide that an appeal can 
be filed in the High Court against an order of acquittal passed. by Court 
of Session in revision. 
Clause 32.-There was a doubt on the question whether the period of 
imprisonment referred tb in section 428 will apply to imprisonment in 
rlefault of payment of fine. Section 428 is being amended to clarify that 
it will not apply to the imprisonment in default of payment of fine. 
Clause 33.-Section 432 contains provision relating to powers OIfthe 
appropriate Government to suspend or remit sentences. The Joint Com-
mittee on the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1972, had suggested 
the insertion of a proviso to section 57 of the Indian Panel Code to the 
effect that a person whOi has been sentenced to death and whose death 
sentence has been commuted into that of life imprisonment and persons 
who have been SE.'ntenced to life imprisonment for a capital offence should 
undergo actual imprisonment of 14 years in jail. Since this particular 
matter relates more appropriately to the Criminal Procedure Code, a new 
section ie; being inserted to cover the proviso inserted by the Joint 
Committ:----. 
Clause 34.-In the new Code, there is no provision for computing 
the period of limitation in re~ation to offences which can be tried together. 
Section 468 is being amended to provide that for the purpoiSe of comput-
ing the period of limitation in relation to offences which may be tried 
tn[!ether tne offence for which the more severe punishment or, as the 
case ma~ be, the most severe punishment can be imposed shall be taken 
into account. . 
Clau.se 35.-Sectioo 478 provides for the procedure for the alteration 
of functions allocated to Judicial Magistrates to Executive Magistrates or 
vice 't1ersa in certain cases. The procedure provides that if the State 
Legislature by a resolution so requires, the State Government 
may. in concmltation. with the H1~h Court, by notiflcation, give effect. to 
+l,p alteration: of functions allocated to Judicial Magistrate to Executive 
Magistrates. The seoction is being amended to substitute "State Assem-
bly" for "State Legislature" and to make 'Some drafting improvements. 

."", 21 
Claflse 36.-(a) Forms Nos. 34, 41 and 42 are being amended to clarify 
that they can be used in connection with other relevant sections of the 
Code. 
(b) A new Form No. 44A, which Can be used under section 424, is being 
inserted. 
(c) A set of Forms Nos. 47 to 56, which can be issued under section 446, 
is being inserted. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clauses 8 and 9 of the Bill provide for the appointment of Public PI. 
secutor and A:dditional Publk: Prosecutors for the High Court, 
Public Prosecutors for the district or local area, Special Public Prosecu-
tor for the purposes of any case or class of cases and Assistant 
Public Prosecutors for the courts of Magistrates by the Central 
Government. These are enabling provisions and the power given 
is meant to be exerc.sed only when occasion demands. The appoint-
ment of Assistant Public Prosecutors by the Central Government will 
generally be made from among departmental officers. Provision for ex-
penditure tluit may have to be incurred wila be made in the appropriate 
budget as and when the occasion arises. It is, therefore, not possible to 
give an estimate of the actual expenditure (whether or recurring or non-
recurring) in this behalf at this stage. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODEm' CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 
(2 OF 1974) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Code, unless the collt.ext otherwise requires,-
• • • • 
(j) "local jurisdiction", in relation to a Court Or Magistrate, 
means the local area within which the Court or Magistrate may 
exercise all or any of its or his powers under this Code; 
• II 
• • • 
11. (1) In every district (not being a metropolitan area), there ah4l1 
be established as many Courts of judicial Magistrates of the fiut class 
and of the second class, and at such places, as the State Government may, 
after consultation with the High Court, by notification, specify. 
• * * • • 
13. (1) The High Court may, if requested by the Central or State Gov. 
ernment so to do, confer upon any pelson who holds or has held any 
post under the Government, aU or any of the powers conferred or con-
ferrable by or under this Code on a Judicial Magistrate of the second 
class, in respect to particular cases or to particular classes of cases or 
to cases generally, in any district, not being a metropolitan area: 
Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless 
he possesses such qualification or experience in relation to legal a1fairs 
as the High Court may, by rules, specify . 
• • * • * 
14. (1) Subject to the control of the High Court, the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate may, from time to time, define the local limits of the areas 
within which the Magi!rtrates appointed under section 11 or under section 
13 may exereise all or any of the ·powers with which they may respec" 
tively be invested under this Code. 
• * • • 
18. (1) The High Court may, if requested by the Central or State 
Government 80 to do, confer upon any person who holds or has held any 
post under the Government, all or any of the powers conferred or con-
ferrable by or under this Code on a Metropolitan Magistrate, in respect 
to particular cases or to particular classes of cases or to cases generally, 
in any metropolitan area within its local jurjsdiction: 
23 
Defini. 
tions. 
Courts 
of Judi-
cial 
Magis-
trates . 
Special 
Judicial 
Magis-
trates. 
Local 
jurisdic-
tion of 
Judicial 
Magis-
trates . 
Special 
MetropoIl-
tBn Malis-
trates. 

Execu-
tive 
Malia-
trates. 
Public 
Prosecu-
tors. 
Security 
for 
keepin8 
the 
peace 
in other 
cases. 
Provided that nO such power shall be conferred on a persOri uniess he 
-possesses such qualification or experience in relation to legal affairs aa 
the High Court may, by rules, specify. 
'" '" '" '" '" 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Code, a 
Special Metropolitan Magistrate shall not impose a sentence which a 
Judicial Magistrate of the second class is not competent to impose out-
side the metropolitan area. 
ZOo (1) '" '" '" • '" 
(2) The State Govemment may appoint any Executive Magistrate tu 
be an Additional District Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have all 
or any of the powers of a District Magistrate under this Code or under 
any other law for the time being in lorce. 
'" '" '" '" '" 
N. (1) For every High Court, the Central Government or the State 
Government shall, after consultation with the High Court, appoint a 
Publlc Prosecutor for conducting, in such Court, any prosecution, appeal 
or other proceeding on behalf of 1he Central or State Government, as the 
case may be. 
(2) For every district the State Government shall appOint a Public 
Prosecutor and may also appoint one or more Additional Public Prosecu-
tors for the district. 
(3) The District Ma·gistrate shall, in consultation with the Sessions 
Judge, prepare a panel of names of persons who are, in his opinion, fit to 
be appointed as the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for 
the district. 
(4) No person shall be appojnted by the State Government as the 
Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the district unless 
his name appears on the panel of names prepared by the District Magis. 
trate under sub-section (3). 
(5) A person shall only be eligible to be appointed. as a Public Prose-
cutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), if he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than 
seven years. 
(6) The Central Government or the State Government may appoint. 
for the purposes of any case or class of cases, an advocate who has been 
in practice for not less than ten years, as a Special Public Prosecutor. 
'" '" '" '" '" 
107. (1) When an Executive Magistrate receives information that any 
per&on is likely to commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public 
tranquillity or to do any wrongful act that may probably occasion a 
breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity and is of opinion 
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding, he may, in the manner 
hereinafter provided, lequire such person to show cause why he should 
not be ordered to execute a bond, for keeping the peace for such period. 
not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit . 
• • • • • 

1%3. (1) Whenever the Chief Judicial Magistrate is of opinion that 
any person imprisoned for failing to give security under this Chapter 
may be released without hazard to the community or to any other person, 
he may order such person to be discharged. 
(2) Whenever any person has been imprisoned for failing to give 
security under this Chapter, the High Court or Court of Session, or, 
where the order was made by any other Court, the Chief Judie'ial 
Magistrate. may make an order reducing the amount of the security or 
the number of sureties or the time for which security haa been required . 
... ... ... ... ... 
(5) If any condition upon which any person has been discharged i.s; in 
the opinion of the Chief Judicial Magistrate by whom the order of dis-
charge was made or of his successor J not fulftl1ed, he may cancel the 
lame. 
(6) When a conditional order of discharge has been cancelled under 
sub-section (5), such person may be arrested by any police offtcer with-
out warrant, and shall thereupon be produced before the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate. 
(1) Unle<;s such person gives security in accordance with the terms 
of the original order for the unexpired portion of the term for which he 
was in the first instance committed or ordered to be detained (such por-
tion being deemed to be a period equal to the period between the date 
of the breach of the conditions of discharge and the date on which, except 
tor such conditional discharge, ~ would have been entitled to release), 
the Chief Judicial Magistrate may remand such person to prison to 
undf"rqo such unexpired portion . 
• ... ... • • 
(lJ) -Thl" Hil!h' Court or Court of Session ma~ lit any time. for suft\cient 
reasons to be recorded in writing. CAncel an~ bond for keeping the peace 
or for~ood hehaviour executed under this Chapter by anv order made 
by it. and the Chief Judicial Magistrate may make such cancellation 
where such bnnd was executed under his order or under the order of any 
other Court in his district. 
• • • • • 
187. (1) • • • ... • 
(2) The Ma~trate to whom an accused penon is fOT'W'ardeci undeT' 
this flection may, whether he hall or haR not jurisdiction to tr~ the case. 
from time to time. authoric;e the detention of the accused in such custody 
as- such Ma~istrate thinks fl.t, for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the 
whole; and if he has no jurisdiction to try the case or commit it for 
trial and considf"rs further detention unnecessarY. he may order the 
accuseti to be forwarded to a MaJristrate having such jurisdiction: 
Provided that-
(a) the Magistrate may authorise detention of the accused 
~son. otherwi~ than in M.t!Stodv of the police. ~vond the Period 
of ftfteen. davs if he is satisfied that adequate grounds t'Xist for doing 
so. but no Magistrate shall authorise the detention of the accu!led 
person in custOdy under this section for a total period ex{'eeding 
sixty days. and on the expiry of the said period of sixty days. the 
accused person shall be released on bail if he is prepared to and 
does furnish bail; and every person released on bail under this 
Power to 
l'eleue 
person. 
itnprison-
ed tor 
failinc to 
,ive 
:security. 
Proce-
dure 
when 
invert!-
I.Uon 
cannot 
be com-
pleted 
in 
twenty-
foUl' 
hour .. 

Oftenees 
c:ommit-
ted by 
letters, 
etc. 
Proeecu-
tion for 
offence. 
qainlt 
theSta\e 
and for 
criminal 
conspi-
racy to 
eommit 
such 
oftence. 
PrOllaeu-
tionfor 
offences 
.,aiDat 
marria ••. 
Commit-
Diento1 
cue to 
Court ot 
Seaion 
when 
offence il 
triable 
exelusive-
ly by it. 
Record 
m tr1&l 
before 
Court of 
Selltcm. 
aection shall be deemed to be 10 released under the provisions of 
Chapter XXXIII for the purposes of that Chapter; 
(b) no Magistrate shall auth~rise detention in any custody und. 
this section unless the accused is produced before him; 
• • • • • 
B%pIcmation.-It any question ansa whether an accused penon wu 
produced before the Magistrate as required under paragraph (b), the 
production of the accused person may be proved by his -signature on the 
order authorising detention. 
• • • • 
liZ. (1)'" ... ... ... 
(2) Any offence punishable under section 494 or section 4~ of the 
Indian Penal Code may be inquired into or fried by a Court within whose 4& of 1180. 
local jurisdiction the oftence was eommi11ted or the offender last re!&ided 
with his Or her spouse ~ the first marriage. 
... . . . . 
1". (1) • • • • • 
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of the oft'ence of any crimiaa! 
conspiracy punishable under section 120B of the Indian Penal Code, other 
than a criminal conspiracy to commit a cognizable offence punishable 
with death, impriaonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term 
of two years or upwards, unless the State Government or the District 
Magistrate has consented. in writing to the initiation of the proceedings: 
Provi1ed that where the criminal conspiraq is one to which the pro-
visions of section 195 apply, no such consent shall be necessary. 
• • • • .. 
III. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under 
Chapter XX of the Indian Penal Code except upon a complaint made by 
some person aggrieved by the offence: 
Provided that-
• • • • • 
(c) where the person aggrieved by an oifenee punishable under 
section 494 of the Indian Penal Code is the wife, complaint may be 
made on her behalf by her father, mother, brother, sister, son or 
daughter or by her father's or- mother'. brother or sister. 
• • • • • 
Z09. When in a case instituted on a police report or otherwise, the 
aCeu.!!ed ap'pears or is brought before the Magistrate and it appears to 
the Magistrate that the otrence is triable exclusively by the Court of 
Session, he shall-
(a) commit the case to the Court of Session; 
• • • • • • 
278. (1)· .. • • • 
(I) Such evidm~ .hall ordjJW'ily be take down in the 'term ef 
,qu.-tion and answer; but the .presiding Judge may, in his di8eretion, take 
down or cause to ~ taken down, the whole or any part of such evidence 
in the term of a na1T8tive. 
• • • • 
45 of latto. 
45 of 1860. 
41 of 1880. 

.t In every case where evidence is taken down Wlder section 276 
Or section 276,--. 
. (s) if the witneas gives evidence in the laneuage of the Court. 
it shall be taken down m that language; 
... 
293. (1) ... 
... 
... • 
... ... 
... • 
(4) This section applies to the- following Government scienti1\c experts, 
namely:- ••. 1 ... __ 
... ... ... ... 
(e) the Director of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory or a 
State Forensic Science Laboratory; 
... ... ... ... ... 
*. (1) Affidavits tp be used before any Court under this Code may 
be aworn or affinned before-
(a) any Judge or Magistrate, 01' 
• ... • ... 
289. (1) If it is proved that an accWied person bas absconded, and 
tw.t there is no immediate prospect of arresting him, the Court compe.-
tent to try such person for the offence complained of may, in biB 
absence, examine the witnesses (if any) produced on behaU of the 
prosecution, and record their depositions and any such deposition may, 
on the arrest of such person, be given in evidence against him on tbe 
in'iwl'Y into, or trial for, the offence with which he is charged, if the 
deponent is dead or incapable of giving evidence Or cannot be found or 
his presence cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense 
or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case, would be 
unreasonable . 
... ... • .. • 
~. (1) ... ... ... ... 
(2) If the Court, after taking cognizance of an oifenee, or commence-
ment of trial, finds it necessary or advisable to postpone the commence-
ment of. or adjourn, any inquiry or trial, it may. from time to time, for 
reasons to be recorded, postpone or adjourn the same on auch terms u 
it thinks fit, for such time as it considers reasonable, and may by a 
warrant remand the accused i~ in cus~dy: 
Provided that no Magistrate shall remand an accU8ed perIOD to 
custody under this section for a term exceeding fifteen days at a time: 
Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance, no adjourn-
ment or' postponement shall be granted, without examining them, except 
for special reasons to be recorded in writing. 
Expla.fI4tiOn I.-If sufticient evidence haa been obtained to ra1le a 
suspicion th-at the accused may have committed an offence, and it 
appears likely that further evidence may be obtained by a remand, this 
is a reasonable cause for a remand. 
. . 
Explanation 2.-The terms 011 which an adjournment or postpone-
ment may be granted include, in appropriate·ca .... the payment of eoIti 
. by the ,rOlewUan or the ac<:used. 
• • • • • • 
Laneu-
. ale of 
record of 
evidence. 
Reports of 
certain 
Govern-
ment 
scient.iflc 
experts. 
Autho-
riMes 
before 
whom 
affidavits 
may be 
sworn. 
Record of 
e\ridence 
in 
absence 
of 
accused. 
Power to 
postpone 
or ad· 
journ 
proceed-
ints. 

Com-
poundin, 
cd 
oJfeneet. 
Proce-
dure 
when, 
after 
cGm-
menee-
ment of 
inquiry 
or trial, 
Malis-
tra\e 
flnga 
cue 
mould b~ 
commit-
~. 
Convic-
tion or 
cOmmit-
ment on 
evidenee 
partl7 
recorded 
by one 
Malis-
trat.-
and 
partly bJ 
another 
Appeals 
from con-
viction •. 
..(1) The offences pun:shable under the seetions oj the India» 
Penal Code specified in the first two columns of the Table next follow- .. 5 of lHO. 
inl may be compounf;lecl by the persons mentiolUld in the third column 
of that Table:-
1 
• • 
Defamation 
• • 
TABLE 
Section of 
the Indian 
Penal Code 
applicable 
• 
500 
• 
Person by whom. offence Dlay 
be compounded 
3 
• • 
The person defamed 
• • 
323. If, in any inquiry into an offence or a trial bfIore a Magistrate, 
it appears to him at any stage of the proceedings before signing judg-
ment that the case is one which ought to be tried by the Court of 
Session, he shall commit it to that Court under the provisions herein-
bef<lre contained. 
• • • • • 
32JG. (1) Whenever any Magistrate, after having heard and recorded 
the whole or any part of the evidence in an inquiry or a trial, ceases to 
exercise jurisdiction therein and is succeeded by another Magistrate who 
has and who exercises such jurisdiction, the Magistrate so succeeding 
may act on the evideRce so recorded by his predecessor, or partly record-
ed by his predecessor and partly recorded by himself: 
Provided that if the succeeding Magistrate is of opinion that further 
examInation of any of the witnesses whose evidence has already been 
recorded is necessary in the interests of justice, he may re-summon any 
such witness, and after such further examination, cross-examination and 
re-examination, if any, as he may permit, the witness shall be discharged. 
(2) When a case is transferred under the prOVisions of this Code from 
one Malistrate to another Magistrate, the former shall be deemed to cease 
to exercise jurisdiction therein, and to be suC'Ceeded by the latter, with-
in the meanine of suh-Iection (l) . 
• • • • • 
37'- (1) • • • • • 
(2) Any person convicted on a trial held by a Sessions Judge or an 
Additional Sessions .1 udge or on a trial held by any other Court· in 
wbM· • Jentence o~ imprisonment for more than liieven years has been 
..... , may. appeal to the Hi&h Court. . 
•• • • • • 

:l~ of 1."', 
.7. (1) • • • • • 
(2) If such conviction is in a case in which the offence has been 
investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment, constituted under 
the 1i>elhi Special Police Establiahment Act, 1946, or by any other 
agency empowered 'to make investigation into an offence under any 
Central Act other than this Code, the Central Government may direct the 
Public PrOHCUtor 'to present an appeal to the High Court ll8aitwt the' 
Imtence on the ground of its inadequacy. 
• • • • • 
378. (1) Save as otherwise provided in suD-section (2) and subject 
to the provisions of sub·sections (3) and (5), the State Government may, 
in any case, direct the Publ.ic Prosecutor to' present an appeal to the 
High Court from an oripnal. or appellate order of acquittal paned by 
any Court other than a High Court . 
• • • • • 
t2S. Where an accused person hall; em c,,"v1dion, been sentenced to 
imprisonment for a term, the period O'f d~tion, if any, underJOfte by 
him during the investigation, inquiry or tTial of the' same case and ~ 
the date of such COflvic tion , shall be set off against th~ term of irnprisol'l.-
ment imposed on him on such convic'tion, and the liability of such person 
to undereo imprisonment on such conviction shall be restriCted' to the 
lema.inder, if any, O! the t.enn of imprisonment im~d on him. 
.. • • • 
Appeai 
by the 
State 
Govern· 
ment 
a,ainst 
sentence. 
Appeal in 
case of 
acquittal. 
Period of 
deten-
tion 
under· 
gone by 
tile 
accused 
to be 
~ oir 
acain.t 
the 
.entence 
of im· 
prison-
ment. 
471. If the State Legislature by a resolution so requires, the State POWft' to 
Government may, after consultation with the High Court, by noUftca- ::= 
tion, direct tha~ tiona 
(4) mennct!'S in sections 108, 109 and 110 to a Judicial Magi9-
trate of. the first class shall be construed as references to an Execu· 
tive Magistrate; 
(b) refer~ea in sections 1 ~ and If7 to an, EHoutive MealBtrate 
shall be construed as referenees to a Ju~l Nagiavate of tbe ftret 
01188. 
• • • • • 
alloeated 
to Judi· 
cial and 
Executive 
MaP. 
trateaiD 
certain 
caaea. 

• 
T1il!: SJ.:cOND SCHEDt1L! 
(See'section "76) 
1.-, --" 
" , l 
• • • 
FORM No. 34 
• 
WAJUUNT. OF f;CJMMITM2NT,ON A f\ENTENCF. OF I),UIR 1SOlUoUN'r OR nNE tV.AIlSIID 
BY." MAGISTRATK.; 
(S~~sections 2+8 and 255) 
To the Officer in charge of the J ail at 
- ! 
WHn:REAS on the day of , ("arne oj prillouer) , the 
(lst, 2nd, 3rd, as the caS(' may be) prisoner in case No. of the 
Calendar for 19 , w~, convicted before me (n.c:nne and oJliciald,sig-
'l14tj~) of the offence of (mention the offmce ,OT offe.ncts conci.nty) 
Wlder section (or sections) of the India. Penal Code (or of Aot ), 
and ~as sentenced, to (state the p1tnisltm.ent fully and di&~inctZy); 
This i,S to authorise and require you to ,receive the said (prisoner', 
name) intQ your custody in the said Jail, together with this warrant, and 
thereby carry the aforesaid sentence into execution according to law. 
Dated, this day of , lY 
(Seal of the Court) 
• • • 
FORM No. 41 
WARRANT AFTER A COMMUTATION OF A SENTENC! 
", (S~~ section' 386) 
To the OfficeI' in charge of the Jail at 
(Signature) 
• 
\VJmW..s aia session held on the' -'. day of , 19 _ ' , (name 
of' pri$oner), the (lst,; 2nd,' 3rd, tIE the caRe m4y be) prisoner in cue 
No. of 'the Calendar for 19 at the said Session, was convicted of the 
offence of , punishable under section of the Indian 
Penal Code, and sentenced to , and was thereupon cOmmitted 
'to your custody; and whereas by the order of the Court 
of (a duplicate of which is hereunto annexed) the punish-
ment adjudged by the said sentence has been commuted to the punish-
ment of imprisonment for life; 
This is to authorise and require you safely to keep the said (pri.ton~r'B 
nome) in your custody in the said Jail, as by law is required, until he 
30 

81 
.hall be delivered over by you to the proper authority and custody for 
,the purpoae of his undergoing the punishment of imprisonment for life 
under the said order, 
or 
if the mitigated sentence is one of imprisonment, Ray, after the words 
ucuatody in the said Jall", "and there to carry into execution the punish-
ment of imprisonment under 'the said order according to law". 
Dated, this day of , 19 
(S.al of the Court) 
FORM No. 42 
WARRA..'lfT OF EXECUTlON Of A SENTENCE OF DEATH 
(Sec section 414) 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at 
(Signature) 
WHEREAS (name of prisoner). the (lst, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be) 
prisoner in case No. of the CaJendar for 19 at the Session held 
'before me on the day of ,19. has been by a walTant of the 
Court, dated the day of , committed to your custody 
under sentence ot death; and whereas the order of the High 
Court at conftnning the said sentence has been received by this 
Court; 
This is to authorise and requil'e you t() carry the said sentence into 
execution I?y causing ,the said to be hanged by the neck until he be 
dead, at (time and pl4Ce of execution), 'and 'to return .ma, "Warrant to the 
Court with an endorsement certifying that the sentence has been 
executed. 
Dated, this 
(Seed of the Court) 
• • 
day of 
• 
, 19 
(Signa.ture) 
• • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
furttMr to amend t1le CGCie of Crimil1QI Proeedwre, 1973. 
(Shrf S. D. PotU, Minilter of StAte in the MiftiltPtl of 
Home Afftlin.) 