THE WORKING JOURNALISTS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTllODUCBD IN LoIt SABHA 
ON 7m SEPTBMBER, 1962) 
,... AHUA"£HT '\l1:.t.M l 
Jf·······~r:·· .. ~ 
ft-_ ". L-- -.,., ........... _... -

BW !ie. ,a ollp6z 
THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Working Jauf'Tl4l.ilt, (Ccmditimu of SenJ4ce) 
and MisceUan.eoUB ,Pr.!)vi.sions Act, 1955 and the Working Jour-
naList, (Fization of Rate, of Wages) Act, 1958. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India u fo~:-
1. (1) Thb Act may be called the Working Journalists (Amend- Shon tide 
meot) Act, 1962. ==11&. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In section 2 of the Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) Amendment 
and Miscellaneous Provisions Ad, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as of aectiO;l 1. 
the principal Act), in clause (a), for the word andftgure "sectioJl S", 
10 the word and figure "section 9" shall be substituted. 
IS 
3. For section 5 of the principal Act, the following sections shall Substitution 
. d 1 of new lee-be substltute , name y: - tiona for 
Iecr;on ,. 
"5. (l) Where- Payment of 
p'atuity. 
(a) any working journal.ist has been in continuous ser-
vice, whether before or after the cammencement of this 
Act, for Dot less than three years in any newspaper estab-
lishment, and-
(i) his services are terminated by the employer in 
relation to that newspaper establishment for any reason 
whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment intlicted 
by way of disciplinary action; Or 
1731 (B) LS-l. 

2 
(ii) he retires from service on reaching the age of 
superannuation; or 
(b) any working journalist has been in continuous ser-
vice, whether before or after the commencement of this 
Act, fer not less than ten years in any newspaper establish- S 
ment, and he vo 1 untarily resigns from service in that 
newspaper establishment on any ground whatsoever; or 
(c) any working journa!ist who has been in continuous 
service, whether before or after the commencement of this l . 
Act, for less than ten years but not less than three years in 10 
any newspaper establishment, and he voluntarily resigns 
from service in that establishment on the ground of con-
science; or 
(d) any working journalist dies while he is in service 
in any newspaper establishment, 
the working journalist or, in the case of his death, his nominee 15 
or nominees or, if there is no nomination in force at the time of 
the death of the working journalist, his family, as the case. may 
be, shall, without prejudice to any benefits or rights accruidg 
under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, be paid, on such termi-
nation, retirement. resi~ation Or death. by the employer in 20 
relation to that f>stablishment ~ratuity which shall be equivalent 
to fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of service 
or any part thereof in excess of six months: 
Provided that in the case of a working journalist referred 
to in clause (b). the total amount of gratuity that shall be pay~ 2S 
able to him shall not exceed twelve and half months' average 
pay: 
Provided further that where a working journalist is ern· 
ployed in any newspaper establishment wherein not more than 
six working journalists were employed on any day of the twelve 30 
months immediately preceding the commencement of this Act. 
the gratuity payable to a working journalist employed in any 
such newspaper establishment for any period of service before 
such commencement shall not be equivalent to fifteen days' 
average pay for every completed year of service or any part 40 
thereof in excess of six months but shall be equivalent tl>-
(a) three days' average pay for every completed year 
of service or any part thereof in excess of six months, if 
the period of such past $ervice does not exceed five yearsi 
14 of 1'47. 

10 
IS 
20 
30 
14 of 1941. 
35 
3 
(b) five days' average pay tor every completed year of 
service or any part thereof in excess of six months, if the 
period of such past service exceeds five years but does not 
exceed ten years; and 
(c) seven days' average pay for every completed year 
of service Or any part thereof in excess of six months, if the 
period of such past service exceeds ten years . 
. 
E.rplanation.-;-For the purposes of this sub-section, "family" 
means-
(i) in the case of a male working journalist, his widow, 
children. whether married or unmarried, and his dependent 
parents and the widow and children of his deceased son: 
Provided that a widow shan not be deemed to be a 
member of the fDmily of the working journalist if at the 
time of his death she was not legally entitled to be maintain-
ed by him; 
Cii) in the case of a female working journalist, her 
husband, children, whether married or unmarried, and the 
dependent parents of the working journalist or of her hus-
band, and the widow and children of her deceased son: 
Provided that if the working journalist has expressed 
her desire to exclude her husband from the family. the 
husband and his dependent parents shall not be deemed to 
be a part of the working journalist's family, 
and in either of the above two cases, if the child of a working 
journalist or of a deceased son of a working journalist has been 
adopted by another person and if under the personal law of 
the adopter, adoption is legally recognised, such a child shall 
not be considered as a member of the family of the working 
journalist. 
(2) Any dispute whether a working journalist has volunta-
rily resigned from service in any newspaper establishment on the 
ground of conscience shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute 
within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or any 
corresponding law relati.n.g to investigation and settlement of 
industrial disputes in force in any State. 
(3) Where a nominee is a miner and the gratuity under sub-
section (1) has become payable during his minority, it shall be 
paid to a person appointed under sub-section (3) of section GA: 

Nomination 
b, workin. 
journalist. 
4 
Provided that where there is no such person, payment shaH 
be made to any guardian of the property of the minor appointed 
by a competent court or where no such guardian has been 
appointed, to either parent of the minor, or where neither parent 
is alive, to any other guardian of the minor: 
Provided further that where the gratuity is payable to two 
or more nominees, and either or any of them dies, the gratuity 
shall be paid to the surviving nominee .or nominees. 
5A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for 
the time being in force, or in any disposition, testamentary or 10 
otherwise in respect of any gratuity payable to a working jour-
nalist, where a nomination made in the prescribed manner pur-
ports to confer on any persan the right to receive payment of 
the gratuity for the time being due to the working journalist, 
the nominee shall, on the death of the working journalist, 'be- 15 
come entitled to the gratUity and to be paid the sum due in 
respect thereof to the exclusion of all other persons, unless the 
nomination is varied or cancelled in the prescribed manner. 
(2') luly nomination referred to in sub-section (1) shall be-
come void if the nominee predeceases, or where there are two 20 
or more nominees, all the nominees predecease. the working 
jo.urnalist making the nomination. 
(3) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for 
the working journalist making the nomination to appoint any 
person in the prescribed manner to receive the ,ratuity in the lS 
event of his death during the minority of the nomineE'.'. 
Sob.titution t. For sections 8 9 10 11 12 and 13 of the princiftlll A.-. the ofocwaec- ' , , , ~ ~ ... 
nODI for aec- following sections shall be substituted, namely: ---
tiona 8,9, 
10, II, r2 
and 13. 
PiutiOD ~ 
reviaion of 
rateaof 
Wqel. 
"ft. (1) The Central Government may, in the manner herein-
after provided,- 30 
la) fix rates of wages in respect of working journalists; 
Cb> revise, from time to time, at such intervals as it 
may think fit, the rates of wages fixed. under this section or 
specified in the order maci.e und~r sef;tion 6 of the Working 
Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) Act, 1958. 3' 29 of 1951. 
(2) The rates of wages may be fixed or revised by the Cen-
tral Government in respect of workiIli journalists for time work 
and for piece work. 

10 
IS 
5 
t. Por the purpose of fixin, or revisinl rates ef wages in p~ 
respeet of workin, journalists under this Act, the Cefttral Gov- :r.::~-= 
emmellt shall as and when neeessaT)', con8titu~ a Wage Board o(wages. 
whleh shall censist ef-
(a) two persons representinl employers in relation to 
newspaper establis~nts; 
(b) tw. penons represeatiag wodtina jeumalists; 
(c) tltree independent persODS, one of whom shall be a 
person who is or has been, a Jud«~ of a High Court or the 
SuPreme Court and who shall be appointed by that Gov-
ernment as the Chairman thereof. 
10. (1) The Board shall, by notice published in such man- ~n_ 
ner as it thinks fit, call upon newspaper establishments and :::. by 
working journalists and other persons interested in the fixation 
revision of rates of wages of working journalists to make 
sucn representations as they may think fit as respects the rates 
of wages which may be fixed or revised under this Act in l"es-
pect of working journalists. 
(2) Every such representation shall be in writing and shall 
be made within such period as the Board may specify in the 
notice and shall state the rates of wages which, in the 
opinion of the person making the representation, would be 
reasonable. having reg~rd to the capacity of the employer to 
pay the same or to any other circumstance, whichever may 
seem relevant to the person making the rep!"esentation in 
relation to his representation. 
(3) The Board shall take into account the representations 
af~e.ui4. if any, and after examtninJ{ the materials placed be-
fore it make such recommendations as it thinka fit to the Central 
Gove~ent for the fixat.ion or revision of rates of wages in 
respect of working journalists; and ~y such recommendation 
may specify, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the date 
from which the rates of wages should take effect. 
(4) In making any recommendations to the Central Govern-
ment. the Board shall have regard to the cost of living, the pre-
valent ra~s of wages for compara'ble employment, the circum-
stances relating to the newspaper industry in different regions 
of the country and to any other circumstances which to the 
Board may 8eem. relevant. 

Powenand 
procedure of 
the Board. 
Powera of 
C:ntral Go-
vernment to 
enforce re-
commenda-
tion:! of the 
WaaeBoard. 
6 
11. (1) Subject to the provisions contained. in sub-section 
(2). the Board may exercise all or any of the powers which an 
Industrial Tribunal constituted under the Industrial Disputes 
Act. 1947, exercises for the adjudication of an industrial dispute r .. of 1947. 
referred to it and shall, subject to the provisions contained in .5 
this Act, and the rules, if any, made thereunder. have power to 
regulate its own procedure. 
(2) Any representations made to the Board and any docu-
ments furnished to it by way of evidence shall be open to inspec-
tion on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, by any person 10 
interested in the matter. 
(3) If, for any reason, a vacancy occurs in the office of 
Chairman or any other member of the Board, the Central Gov-
ernment shall fill the vacancy by appointing another person 
thereto in accordance with the provisions of section 9 and any 15 
proceeding may be continued. before the Board so reconstituted 
from the stage at which the vacancy occurred. 
12. (1) As soon as may be, after the receipt of the recom-
mendations of the Board, the Central Government shall make 
an order in terms of the recommendations or subject to such 20 
modifications, if any, as it thinks fit, being modifications which, 
in the opinion of the Central Government, do not effect import-
ant alterations in the character of the recommendations. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
the Central Government may, if it thinks fit,- 25 
(a) make such modifications in the recommendations, 
not being modifications of the nature referred to in sub-
section (1), as it thinks fit: 
Provided that before making any such modifications, the 
Central Government shall cause notice to be given to all 30 
persons likely to be affected thereby in such manner as may 
be prescribed, and shall take into account any representa-
tions which they may make in this behalf in writini; or 
(b) refer the recommendations or any part thereof to 
the Board, in which case, the Central Government shall con- 35 
sider its further recommendations and make an order either" 
in terms of the recommendations or with such modifications 
of the nature referred, to in sub-section (1) as it thinks fit. 
(3) Every order made by the Central Government under 
this section shall be pubUlhed in 'the Ofticial Gazette topther 40 
)I 
.. 

7 
with the recommendations of the Board relating to the order and 
the order shall come into operation on the date of publication or 
on such date, whether prospectively or retrospectively, as may be 
specified in the order. 
S 13. On the coming into operation of an order of the Central Working 
Government under section 12, every working journalist shall be ~~~[3:JiS~ 
entitled to be paid by his employer wages at the rate which wages at rates 
shall b 1 h . . not lesa than in no case e esst an the rate of wages specified In the thOle apeci-
order.". tied in the 
order. 
10 I. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following sections shall Substitution 
b b i d 1 ofnew sec-
20 
30 
e au st tute • name y:- tions (or sec-
tion 17. 
"17. (1) Where any amount is due under this Act to a news- Recovery of money due paper employee from an employer. the newspaper employee from an 
may. without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an employer. 
application to the State Government for the recovery of the 
amount due to him, and if the State Government, or such auth0-
rity, as the State Government may specify in this behalf, is satis· 
fied that any amount is so due, it shall issue a certificate for that 
amount to the Collector, and the Collector shall proceed to reo 
cover that amount in the same manner as an arrear of land reo 
venue. 
(2) If any question arises as to the amount due under this 
Act to a newspaper employee from his employer, the State Gov-
ernment may. on it~ own motion or upon application made to it. 
refer the question to any Labour Court constituted by it under 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or under any corresponding law 
relating to investigation and settlement of industrial disputes in 
force in the State and the said Act or law shall have effect in 
relation to the Labour Court as if the question so referred were 
a matter referred to the Labour Court for adjudication under 
that Act or law. 
(3) The decision of the Labour Court shall be forwarded bv 
it to the State Government which made the reference and any 
amount found due by the Labour Court may be recovered in the 
35 manner provided in sub-section (1). 
17A. Every employer in relation to a newspaper establish- MaintenUlcc 
ment shall prepare and maintain such re,nsters. records and of rerdgistend, reeo san 
muster-rolls and in such manner as may be prescribed. muster-roU •• 

bapecton. 
8 
17B. (1) The State Government may. by notificattoniD the 
Ofticial Gazette, appo-int such pertOns as it thinkB fit to be Ina-
peet~rs for the purposes of this Act and may define the local 
limits within which they shall exercise their functions. 
(2) Any Inspector appointed under sub-lection (1) may , 
for the purpose of ascertaining whether any of the provisions of 
this Act or of the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of 
Wages) Act, 1958 have been complied with in respect of a news- If" 1951. 
paper establishment-
(a) require an employer to furnish such information as 10 
be may consider necessary; 
(b) at any reasonable time enter any newspaper estab-
lishment or any premises connected therewith and require 
anyone found in charge thereof to produce before him for 
examination any accounts. books, registers and other docu- IS 
ments relating to the employment of persons or the pa,ment 
of wages in the establishment: 
(c) examine with respect to any matter relevant to any 
of the purposes aforesaid', the employer, his agent or servant 
or any other penon found in charge of the Dewspaper estab- 20 
lishment or any premises connected therewith or any person 
whom the Inspector has reasonable cause to believe to be or 
to have been an employee in the establishment; 
(d) make copies of or take extracts from any book, re-
gister or other documents maintained in relation to the news- 25 
paper establishment; 
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. 
(3) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within tb~ meaning of the Indian Penal Code. ., of r96o. 
(4) Any person required to produce any document or thing 3G 
or to give information by an Inspector under sub-section (2) 
shall be legally bound to do so.". 
Amendmeat S. In section 18 of the principal Act. for sub-section (1), tbe 
of sectioD following sub.sections shall be substituted. namely:-IL 
'(1) If any employer contravenes any of the provisions of 35 
this Act or any rule or order made thereunder, he lIhaU be 
punishable with flne whtch may extend to two hundred rupees. 

, 
10 
IS 
20 
9 
(1.4) Whoever, having been convicted of any offence under 
this Act. is again convicted of an offence involviDg the contra-
veation of the same provision, shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to flve hundred rupees. 
(IB) Where an ofteDce has been committed by a company, 
wery penon who, at the time the offence was committed, was in 
claarp of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 
of the b1Ulnels of the company, as well as the company. sllall be 
deemed to be guilty of the oftence and shall be liable to be pro.. 
eeeded agalut and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall 
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in 
this JeCrtion, if he proves that the offence was committed without 
hia lmowledge or that he exercised all due dlligeaee to prevent 
the commission of such offence. 
(1e) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(lB),where an offence under this section has been committed 
by a company and it is proved that the off.euee has ,been com-
mitted with the consent or connivance of. or that the commission 
of the offence is attributable to, any gross negligence on the part 
of any director, manager, secretary or other offteer of the 
compauy, such director, ~ger, secretary or other officer shall 
also be deemed to be guilty of such offence and shall he liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
(1 D) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a 
ftrm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in 
the firm ... 
30 T. In section 19 of the principal Act, after the words "member of ::-=cnt 
the Board", the words "or an Inspector appointed under this Act" Ie 19. 
shaD. be Insened. 
8. After section 19 of the principal Act, the following sections shan Insenf~ ef 
ftCW ...... OI1I 
be inserted, namely: - IpA .ad J-.. 
"19A. No act or proc:eeding of the Board shall be questioned Defects In 
on the .gound merely of the existence of any vac~cy in, or :Uu"!;;,t co 
defect in the constitution of, t~ Board. in'falid.~ 
-. 1731 (B) LS-2 

Amendment 
of ICICtion 2Q. 
" " I.'.: 
10 
19B. Nothing in this Act or the Working Journalists (Fixa-
tion of Rates of Wages) Act, 1958 shall apply to any working 29 of 19SB. 
journalist who is an employee of the Government to whom the 
Fundamental and Supplementary Rules, Civil Services (Classi-
fication, Control and Appeal) Rules, Civil Services (Temporary 5 
Service) Rules. Revised Leave Rules, Civil Service Regulations, 
Civilians in Defence Services (Classification. Control and Appeal) 
Rules or the Indian Railway Establishment Code or any other 
rules or regulations that may be notified in this behalf by the 
Central Government in the Official Gazette. apply.... 10 
9. In section 20 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (2), for clauses (d), (e) and (t>, the 
following clauses shall be substituted, namely:-
., (d) the procedure to be followed by the Board in the 
discharge of its functions under this Act; 15 
(e) the form of nominations, and the manner in which 
nominations may be made; 
(f) the manner in which any person may be appointed 
for· the purposes of sub-section (3) of section 5A; 
(g) the variation or cancellation of nominations; 
(h) the manner of giving notice under clause (a) of sub-
section (2) of section 12; 
(i) the registers, records and muster-rolls to be pre-
pared and maintained by newspaper establishments, the 
forms in which they should be prepared and maintained and 2S 
the particulars to be entered therein; 
(j) the powers that may be exercised by an Inspector; 
(k) any other matter which has to be. or may be, 
prescribed."; 
(ii) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 30 
substituted, namely:-
It (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid 
as soon as may be after it is made before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two 35 
successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in 
which it is so 1aiQ or the session immediately followingl 

11 
both Houses agree in making any mOdification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may bej so however that any 
5 such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 
10. The Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) Act, Am~ndmODt 
1958 shall be amended in the manner hereinafter specified, namely: _ ~~ at of 
(a) section 8 shall be omitted; 
10 (b) in section 9, for sub-section (2), the following sub-
15 
20 
30 
35 
section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) If any question arises as to the amount due under 
this Act to a working journalist from his employer, the State 
Government may, on its own motion or upon application 
made to it, refer the question to any Labour Court constitu-
ted by it under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or under 
any corresponding law relating to investigation and settle-
ment of industrial disputes in force in the State and the said 
Act or law shall have effect in relation to the Labour Court 
as if the question so referred were a matter referred to the 
Labour Court for adjudication under that Act or law."; 
(c) after section 12, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'12A. (1) Any employer who contravenes the provisions of penl1tr. 
section 7 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees. 
(2) Whoever, having been convicted of any offence under 
sub-section (1), is again convicted of an offence under that sub-
section, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees. 
(3) Where an offence has been committed by a company, 
every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the con-
duct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall 
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in 
this section if he proves that the offence was committed without 

,... 
U 
h~ knowledge or that he exercised all due diiigence to prevent 
the commission of such offence. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-aection (3), 
where an offence under this section has been c::ommitt.d by 8 
company and it is proved that the offence has been committed $ 
with the consent or connivance of, or that the commission of the 
offence is attributable, to any gross negligence on the .part afay 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company,_ sueh 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed 
to be guilty of such offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 10 
against and punished accordiagly. 
(5) For the purposes of this section,-
(a.) "company" means any body corporate and includes a 
ftnn or other associati')n of individuals: and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in I' 
the firm.'. 

§1f'ATEMENT OF-OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the case of Express Newspapers V8. Union of Indi'3, the 
Supreme Court in its judgment dated the 19th March, 1958 declared 
that section 5(1) (a) (iii) of the Working Journalists (Conditions of 
Service) and MiseeUaneous Provisions Act, 1955 was illegal and void 
as it contravened the fundamental rights ~ranteed to citizens under 
article 19(1) (g) of the Constitution. The Supreme Court observed 
that there would be no justification for awarding gratuity when an 
employee vcluntarily resigns except in exceptional circumstances like 
the operation of a 'conscience clause' and a longer period of continuous 
servite. 
2. Section 5 (1) (a) (iii) inter alia provides for payment ot gratuity 
to a working journalist when he voluntarily resigns from service 
from any. newspaper establishment after rendering a continuous 
service of not less than three years. It is accordingly proposed to 
amend the Act to provide for payment of gratUity to a working jour-
nalist if he voluntarily resigns on any ground whatsoever after the 
total service of ten years and also on the ground of conscience if his 
total service is not less than three years but less than ten years. 
Provision is also being made for enabling a working journalist to 
appoint nominee or nominees for receiving gratuity in caSe of his 
death. 
3. The Central Government is also being empowered tc fix and 
revise rates of wages payable to working journalists. For this pur-
pose provision is now being made to set up Wage Boards from time 
to time which will make necessary recommendation.c; to the Central 
Government as regards the rates of such wa~es. 
4. For the purpose of effective implementation of the provisions 
of the Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1955 Gnd the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates 
of Wages) Act, 1958, opportunity is being taken to provide for appoint-
ment of Inspectors and for requiring newspaper establishments to 
maintain registers. muster-rolls and other records. 
5. The Notes on Clauses e'lq)lain in detail the various provisions 
of the BiU. 
Nnr DI:uu; JAISUKHLAL HATHI. 
The 3rc! September. 1962. 
13 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 3.-This clause substitutes the existing section. 5 of the 
Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Pro-
visions Act, 1955 by two new sections 5 and 5A and makes provision 
inter aZia for the payment of gratUity to a working journalist-
(a) on resignation on grounds of conscience after a service 
of three years, or 
(b) on voluntarily resignation after a service of ten years. 
the maximum gratuity payable not to exceed 12i months' average 
pay. 
Specific provision has been made to enable a working journalist to 
nommate a person or persons to receive payment of gratuity in case 
of his death. If no nomination is made, the gratuity would be pay-
able to his family. It is also being provided that any dispute whe-
ther a working journalist has resigned on the ground of conscience 
shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute within the meaning of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or any corresponding law in force 
in any State. 
Clause 4.-This clause substitutes the exist.ing l:iections 8, 9, 10, 11, 
12 and 13 of the Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955. Under the proposed section 8, 
the Central Government is being empowered to fix and revise rates 
of wages payable to working journalists. In order to enable the 
Central Government to fix and revise such wages, the Central Gov-
ernment is being empowered in the proposed section 9 to constitute 
a Wage Board which will consist of seven persons, two representing 
employers, two representing working journalists and three indepen-
dent persons, one of whom, who is or has been e Judge of a High 
Court or the Supreme Court, will be appointed by that Government 
as the Chairman thereof. Under the proposed section 10, the Wage 
Board will make the necessary recommendations to the Central Gov-
ernment after taking into account the various representations made 
to it by newspaper establishments and working journalists and any 
other person interested in the fixation or revision of the rates of 
wages. The powers of the Wage Board will be the same as of an 
Industrial Tribunal constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947. Under the proposed section 12. the Central Government wiD 
14 
",.: 

- IS 
!ssue the order fixing the rates of wages in the 1i~ht of the recommen-
. dations made subject, of course, to any modifications that the Central 
Government may think fit to make. This new section is on the same 
lines as section 6 of the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of 
Wages) 'Act, 1958. It is also being provided in the proposed section 
13 that working journalists shall be entitled to be paid by the 
employer wages at the rate which shall in no case be less than the 
Altes of wages fixed by the Central Government. This corresponds 
to section 7 of the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) 
Act, 1958. 
Clause S.-This clause substitutes the existing section 17 by a new 
section and inserts two more new sections 17A and 17B. New section 
17 is almost on the Slame lines as section 9 of the Working Journalists 
(Fixation of Rates of Wages) Act, 1958. The two new Rections 17A 
and 17B are necessary for the purpose of the effective implementa-
tion of the Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and Mis-
cellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 and the Working Journalists (Fixa-
tion of Rates of Wages) Act, 1958. Under the proposed section 17A, 
every employer shall be required to prepare and maintain such regis-
ters, records and muster-rolls and in such manner as may be pres-
cribed by rules. Under the proposed section 17B, State Governments 
are being empowered tQ appoint Inspectors who will exercise func-
tions mentioned in that section. 
Clause 6.-This clause substitutes the existing sub-section (1) of 
section 18 by five new sub-sections. The existing sub-section (1) 
proyides for penalty for violation of the provisions contained in 
section 6 only. It is felt that the employer should be made liable for 
contravention of every provision in the Act or any rule or order 
made thereunder. New sub-sections (IB), (1C) and (1D) provide 
that where an offence has been committed by a company. every per-
son who is in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the 
conduct of the business of the company shall also be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. These new sub-sections 
are on the general pattern relating to offences by companies. 
Clause 7.-This clause makes amendment in section 19 so as to 
afford protection also to an Inspector appointed under the Act. , 
Clause B.-This clause inserts two new sections 19A and 19B. 
Proposed section 19A is self-explanatory. As regards section 19B. 
it is necessary to exclude Government servants from the operation 
of the Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1955 and the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates 
of Wages) Act, 1958 as the Government rules and regulations gene-
rally offer better terms and conditions: of service, 

16 
Clause 9.-Section 20 of the Working Journalists (Conditions o! 
Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 is being amended by 
this clause so as to enable the Central Govenunent to make rules 
with regard to the procedure to be followed by Wage Board, the 
manner in which nominations are to be made by working jou.rneliau, 
the powers to be exercised by Inspectors and the manner in which 
registers, records and muster-rolls are to be maintained by news-
paper establishments. 
Clause lO.-This clause amends the Working Journalists (Fixation 
of Retes of Wages) Act, 1958 in following respects. Section 8 is 
being omitted as it is no lcnger necessary in view 'of the new sections 
8 to 12 proposed to be inserted in the Working Journalists (Condi-
tions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 by clause 4. 
There is no provision in the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates 
of Wages) Act, 1958 for penalty for the violation of the provisions of 
section 7. The proposed section 12A provides for such penalt,.. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
This Bill contemplates the setting up of a Wage Board for working 
journalists as and when necessary and also for appointment of 
Inspectors. 
2. Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to cons-
titute a Wage Board, as and when considered necessary, for purposes 
of fixing and revising the rates of wages in respect of working journal. 
ists. The Wage Board, when appointed will consist of two indepen-
dent members besides the two representatives each of the employers 
and the working journalists and a person of the status and experience 
of a High Court Judge as the Chairman. It is expected that when 
such a Board is appointed, it may complete its work within a period 
of six months. The total expenditure on the salaries, etc. of the 
Chairman, staff and travelling expenses of the members of the Board. 
and witnesses, etc. would be about Rs. 65,000 for a period of six 
months. 
3. Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the State Governments to appoint 
Inspectors for the proper enforcement of the provisions of the Work-
ing Journalists (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions 
Act, 1955 and the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) 
Act, 1958. The responsibility of too Central Government is limited 
to the Union territories and the powers of the State Government 
have been delegated to the Chief Commissioners/Lt. Governors con-
cerned. It is expected that the Union territories would be able to 
appoint the existing officers as Inspectors under this Act and as such, 
no additional expenditure is likely to be incurred. 
17 
1731 (Ai) LS-3. 

Clause 9- of the Bill amel'ldssection 20 of, the WorkiDJ!: :J01l1"DI:nstlt 
(Conditions· of Service) and Miscelleneous Prorisioas Act. 18u::'Wbieb 
empowers the Central Government to make rules. The matt ... 
respect of which such rules may now be made relate to the procedure 
to'be followed· by the Wel'e &ard in' the' diseharge of'itS"fUnetiens, 
the· ttrlltUler of making nominationS by. working' j0\2!'halist8'; poWetl 
of ·lJ1SpectOl'S, rtwlintenanee of registers, recorda' ana < liluStei'-!'o1:1s.i 
'i!hese are Matters of procedure or detail. The proposed. del ..... 
tion· of· legislative· powers ia thus of· a normal chal'8eteIt 
18 

ExTRACTS FROM 'l'HE ;W~G JotJRlU.I.IS'IS ,(CozmmoNS OF' SBaVICI:) 
AND MISC,J:LLANEOUS PRO\USIONS ACT, 19l)5 ,(~OF.1$~) 
,e ,. , .. ,. • 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requ~,-
(q) "Board" means t~e Wage .B~ coJl,t~t~~ under 
sectlon:8; 
• • -. .. 
S. (1) ~ere--
'&1) : any IW'Orking joumaHst"us,been in· eoatinuous aervice, 
·wbether:·before -er .after·the oommeacement of-this Act,'for not 
11_, than"t!uree-~eus in ,aay, newspaper ·establishment, ,and-
-(i) ~bis,Nl'!rices,aretenninated by the·employer in·rele-
tUm f to that ,newspaper' estabU.ament' for-any reason what-
:SMYer, -otherwise than '·as a, puni&hmel'lt inftieted h1. w~y ef 
,1I1acl~,,,etion. or 
(ii) he retires from service on reaching the age of super-
annuation. or 
(tin, he V()l\lI)tarUy. re:;JQ'llS. frot;n..$eroce. ~QJIl that ~~8-
. p~per e$~aPu.a,l}ment,. or 
(b) 'iUl'Y -working' j C)Ul'Il1alist dies. while : he is -in 'serftee: ,in 
,lillY rlMnVSpaper, estabiiahJnent, 
tlael.WUldIlg j01ll'Dalist or. ,as-the ease may be, his helrsm.n, wHhout 
prejudice to any benefits or rights accruing under the Industrial 
Disputes,Act. 1947, be. pa~~" on.slJe,h. term.iIl~i~. l"etj~eJllen~.·~gna- 14 of r~1. 
tion or ,deatl.t. ~r . ,tJ,:te ~ropl9yer In , ~lat~9.n" to thet e~t~QliJl;Im.~Dt 
gratuity which shan be equivalent to fifteen days' average pay for 
every completed year of service or any part thereof in ~~CeSS of six 
months. -
(J) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1). where 
a working journalist is employed in any newspaper establishment 
wberein not more than .six working. jownallsts weJ'e e.mploy~d on 
~yday, of the twelve .months immediat~y preced_i:g.g tbE\ comxnenc;e-
ment Of \his. Act,.. the .. ,sratu~~y> .p.yable to~,a W9;t:kiqg jQ..WJ}li\Ust C\1l-
'19 

20 
ployed in any such newspaper establishment for any period of service 
before such commencement shall be equivalent to-
(a) three days' average pay for every completed year of 
service or any part thereof in excess of six months, if the period 
of such past service does not exceed five years; 
(b) five days' average pay for every completed year of ser-
vice or any part thereof in excess of six months, if the period of 
such past service exceeds five years but does not exceed ten 
years; and 
(c) seven days' average pay for every completed year of ~ ,: 
service or any part thereof in excess of six months, if the period 
of such past service exceeds ten years . 
• • • • 
S. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the omclal ConItitutioD 
Gazette, constitute a Wage Board for fixing rates of wages in respect QC 
of working journalists in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
(2) The Board shall eonsist of an equal number of persons nomi-
nated by the Central Government to represent employers in relation 
to newspaper establishments and working journalists, and an inde-
pendent person shall be appointed by the Central Government as the 
Chairman thereof. 
9. (1) In fixing rates of wages in respect of working journalists, the Plsation of 
Board shall have regard to the cost of living, the prevalent rates of wapi. 
wages for comparable employments, the circumstances relating to 
the newspaper industry in different regions of the country and te 
any other circumstances which to the Board may seem relevant. 
(2) The Board may fix rates of wages for time work and for piece 
work. ' 
(3) The decision of the Board ftxtng rates of wages !l.ball be com-
municated as soon as practicable to the Central Government. 
10. (1) The decision of the Board shall, within a period of one hb1lcation 
month from the date of its receipt by the Central Government, be ~~~=~ODaDCl 
published in such manner as the Central Government thinks fit. ia com-mencement. 
(2) The decision of the Board published under sub-section (1) 
s11all come into operation with effect from such date as may be speci-
fied in the decision, and where no date is so sp~ifted, it shall come 
into operation on the date of its publication. 

21 
, 
Pown IIId ." 11. Subject to any rules of procedure which may be prescribed, 
=ure of the Board may, for the purpose of fixing rates of wages, exercise Ule 
same powers and follow the same procedure as an Industrial Tribu-
Decision of 
Board to be 
bindinloll 
'f 1.!-employ-, ~n. 
nal constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, exercises or 14 of 1947. 
follows for the purpose of adjudicating an industrial dispute referred 
to It. 
12. The decision of the Board shall be binding on all employers 
in relation to newspaper establishments and every working journalist 
shall be entitled to be paid wages at a rate which shall, in no case, 
be less than the rate of wages fixed by the Board. 
~werof 13. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where the 
to fi:~= Central Government is of opinion that it 1s necessary so to do, it may, 
rates of after consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official 
waps. Gazette, fix interim rates of wages in respect of working journalists. 
bcover,of 
IDODC1 due 
from an 
employer. 
Penalty. 
(2) Any interim rate of wages so fixed shall be binding on all em-
ployers in relation to newspaper establishments and' every working 
journalist shall be entitled to be paid wages at a rate which shall, in 
no case, be less than the interim rate of wages fixed under sub-
section (1). 
(3) Any interim rates of wages fixed under sub-section (1) shall 
remain in force until the decision of the Board comes into operation 
under sub-section (2) of section 10,. 
• • • 
17. Where any money is due to a newspaper employee from an 
employer under any of the provisions of this Act, whether by way of 
compensation, gratuity or wages, the newspaper employee may, 
without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an application 
to the State Government for the recovery of the money due to him, 
and if the State Government or such authority as the State Govern-
ment may specify in this behalf is satisfied that any money is so due, 
it shall issue a certificate for that amount to the collector and the col-
lector shall proceed to recover that amount in the same manner as an 
arrear of land revenue. 
11. (1) If any employer contravenes the provisions of section 6, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees. 
• • • • 

.. Jf.,No"suit,pl'OHCutionor'otaer,iegalpreaeec:UD.g ahalhUej . .,alDlt , • .....,. 
tAe .CAairman or ely otlaer; member of the Board.;for "ny~thiDglwhJ.eh 
is 'inr'ood :iaith done or iftteDded to be GODe • 
.20.' (1) The Central Government. may, by. notiflcatiOl'lrin the,OIl-'=' ~e .. 
cial Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
hlr'maUers, namely:-
(a)rpayment ofrgratuity to working 3aumallstl; 
(b) hours of 'WOrk ~f ·working journalists; 
(c) holidays, earned leave, leave on medical certificate, 
'casual leave or any other kind of'leave admissible to wor~J 
journalists; 
(d) the prraeeciure, to be followed-by tbe~ Board in fb:ing D_ 
of wages; 
(e) the manner in .which thedeclsian of. the,Boant may.be 
p10lblished ; 
(f) '.y other matter which has to be, or may be,preserthed. 
(3) All rules made under this section shall, as soon as practicable 
after they 8l'e 1 malde; be' laid before both'Houses- ef!Parliameftt. 

LTaAcTs FROM THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES or 
WAam;) Aer, 1958 (29 OF 1958) . 
• • • • 
Reviewof0f 8. The Central Government may, at any time after the expiry of 
~~ Gov- three years from the date of the order passed by it under this Act, if 
erlllDent., it is of opinion that circumstances require that the rates of wages 
specified in the order should be revised, constitute a Wage Board as 
provided in section 8 of the Working Journalists Act, and where a 
Wage Board is so constituted, the provisions of the Working Journa-
lists Act shall apply thereto. 
Recov~ of 9. (l) Where any amount is due under this Act to a working 
:O:~ journalist from an employer, the working journalist may, without 
joumaUla. prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an application to the 
State Government for the recovery of the money due to him, and if 
the State Govemment,. or such authority as· the State Government 
may: specify in this behalf, is satisfied that any money ia so due, it 
shall. isaue a certificate'for that amount to the Collector, and. the. Cal-
lector shall proceed to recover that·amount in the same manner as an 
arrear of land revenue. 
(2) If any question arises as to the amount due under this Act to 
a working journalist from an employer, the State Government may, 
on its own motion or upon application made to it, refer the question to 
any Labour Court constituted by it under section 7 of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947, and the said. Act shall have effect in relation to 14 of 1947. 
the Labour Court as if the question so referred were a matter speci-
fled in the Second Schedule to that Act which has been referred to 
the Labour Court for adjudication. 
(3) The decision of the Labour Court shall be forwarded by it to 
the State Government which made the reference, and any amount 
found due by the Labour Court may be recovered in the manner pro-
vided in! suD-aec:tiQll· (1) . 
• • • • • 

t.OK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Working Journalists (Conditions of 
Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 and the 
Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) Act, 1958. 
(Shri Jai Sukh Ltd Hathi, 
Minister of Labour in the 
Ministry of Labour and 
Employment.) 