THE SEA CUSTOMS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Bill No. 9J of 1951 
THE SEA CUSTOMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958. 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Sea Customs Act, 1878. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Sea Customs (Amendment) Act, ShOI"t title. 
1958. 
1171. S 2. In the Sea Customs Act, 1878, after section 195A the following .Inse"tion of 
section shall be inserted namely: _ new aection , I9SB• 
"19~B. (I) Where this Act or any other law requires any- Power to 
thing to be done before a person can import or export any allow impott 
d f or export on goods or currency or clear any goo s or curren<:y rom the execution of 
10 control of officers of Customs and the Customs-collector is bonds in cer-
. fi d h h . d h . f h tain C.lses. sabs e t at avmg regar to t e CIrcumstances 0 t e case, 
such thing cannot be done before such import, export or 
clearance without detriment to that person, the Customs-
collector may, notwithstanding anything contained in this 
IS Act or such other law, grant leave for such import, export 
or clearance on the person executing a bond in such amount, 
with such surety or security and subject to such conditions as 
the Customs-collector approves, for the doing of that thing 
within such time after the import, export or clearance as may 
20 be specified in the bond. 
(2) If the thing is done within the time specified in the 
bond. the Customs-collector shall cancel the bond as discharged 
I 

2. 
in full and shall, on demand, deliver it, so cancelled, to the 
person who has executed or who is entitled to receive it; and 
in such a case that person shall not be liable to any penalty 
provided in this Act or, as the case may be, in such other law 
for the contravention of the provisions thereof relating to the 5 
doing of that thing. 
(3) If the thing is not done within the time specified in 
the bond, the Cu~toms-collector shall be entitled to proceed 
upon the bond in accordance with law; and in such a case the 
person concerned shall also be liable to the penalty provided in 10 
this Act or, as the case may be, in such other law for such 
c;ontravention as aforesaid.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Sea Customs Act, 1878, the Tea Act, 1953, and several other 
enactments lay down certain requirements which have to be 
'!omplied with before goods can be released by the Customs 
authorities for import or export. It often happens that importers 
and exporters are not in a position, for reasons beyond their control, 
to comply with these requirements before the release of the goods 
for import or export. In such cases loss or detriment to the trade 
can be avoided if goods are released from customs control for 
import or export on the importers or exporters executihg a bond 
to comply with the requirements of the law within a time to be 
sp~ified in the bond. 
The Bill seeks to achieve this object. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 9th August, 1958. 
3 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Sea Customs Act, 1878, 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article II7 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
introduction of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shn· Morarji Desai, 
Minister oj Finance.) 