1
THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD MARRIAGE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2016
By
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Child Marriage (Amendment) Act,
2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  92 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In section 2 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006, (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act), for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(a) "child" means a person who has not completed eighteen years of age.'.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 1) to ( 3), the following
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
"3. (1) Every child marriage solemnised after the commencement of this Act shall be
null and void at the option of the contracting party, if the age of either or both of the
contracting party was below sixteen years on the date of solemnisation of marriage.
(2) The marriage referred to in sub-section ( 1) may be declared null and void by a
decree of nullity, on a petition being filed in the district court only by a contracting party
who was below the age of sixteen years at the time of marriage.
(3) Every child marriage, whether solemnised before or after from commencement of
this Act, shall be voidable at the option of contracting party who was a child above the age
of sixteen years but below the age of eighteen years at the time of marriage.
(3A) The petition for annulling a child marriage under sub-section (3) by a decree of
nullity may be filed in a district court by a contracting party till the age of twenty years.
(3B) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall also apply
to null and void child marriages as they apply to voidable child marriages.".
4. In section 9 of the principal Act, for the words "two years", the words "five years"
shall be substituted.
5. In section 10 of the principal Act, for the words "two years and shall be liable to fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees", the words "five years and shall be liable to fine
which may extend upto ten lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
6. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "two years and
shall also be liable to fine which may extend upto one lakh rupees", the words "five years
and shall also be liable to fine which may extend upto five lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment
of section 10.
Child
marriages to
be void or
voidable at
the option of
contracting
party being a
child.
Amendment
of section 11.
6 of 2007
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 was enacted to provide maintenance and
residence to the female contracting party to child marriage. The provision of maintenance,
residence and other such matters are applicable only to the voidable child marriages.
However, no such benefit is available to the parties of void marriages which is unjustified as
the same is available under the other marriage laws.
It is, therefore, need of the hour that, Act should be applicable to cases of void
marriages also. This is in line with the 205th Report of Law Commission of India, 2008.
Moreover, the current penal provisions of the parent Act hardly act as a deterrent and
needs revision. The need is to increase the punishment provided in the parent Act to
discourage the increasing child marriage in the country.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 with a
view to—
(i) restrict the age of filing petition for annulling a voidable child marriage till the child
filing the petition attain the age of twenty years;
(ii) prescribed child marriage below sixteen years of age to be void marriage;
(iii) apply the provisions of the Act to void marriages; and
(iv) increase the punishment provided under the Act to act as a deterrent to the
increasing child marriages in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANJAY JAISWAL
February 22, 2016.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD MARRIAGE ACT, 2006
(NO. 6 OF 2007)
* * * * *
3. (1) Every child marriage, whether solemnised before or after the commencement of
this Act, shall be voidable at the option of the contracting party who was a child at the time
of the marriage:
Provided that a petition for annulling a child marriage by a decree of nullity may be
filed in the district court only by a contracting party to the marriage who was a child at the
time of the marriage.
(2) If at the time of filing a petition, the petitioner is a minor, the petition may be filed
through his or her guardian or next friend along with the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer.
(3) The petition under this section may be filed at any time but before the child filing
the petition completes two years of attaining majority.
(4) While granting a decree of nullity under this section, the district court shall make
an order directing both the parties to the marriage and their parents or their guardians to
return to the other party, his or her parents or guardian, as the case may be, the money,
valuables, ornaments and other gifts received on the occasion of the marriage by them from
the other side, or an amount equal to the value of such valuables, ornaments, other gifts and
money:
Provided that no order under this section shall be passed unless the concerned
parties have been given notices to appear before the district court and show cause why
such order should not be passed.
* * * * *
9. Whoever, being a male adult above eighteen years of age, contracts a child marriage
Punishment shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years
or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
10. Whoever performs, conducts, directs or abets any child marriage shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall be liable to
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees unless he proves that he had reasons to believe
that the marriage was not a child marriage.
11. (1) Where a child contracts a child marriage, any person having charge of the
child, whether as parent or guardian or any other person or in any other capacity, lawful or
unlawful, including any member of an organisation or association of persons who does any
act to promote the marriage or permits it to be solemnised, or negligently fails to prevent it
from being solemnised, including attending or participating in a child marriage, shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall also be
liable to fine which may extend up to one lakh rupees:
Provided that no woman shall be punishable with imprisonment.
* * * * *
Child
marriages to
be voidable at
the option of
contracting
party being a
child.
Punishment
for male adult
marrying a
child.
Punishment
for
solemnising a
child
marriage.
Punishment
for promoting
or permittting
solemnisation
of child
marriages.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006.
————
(Dr . Sanjay Jaiswal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5332LS(S3)—25-04-2016.