AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE DOMESTIC WORKERS (REGULATION OF WORK AND SOCIAL
SECURITY) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI SANKAR PRASAD DATTA, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
REGISTRATION
3. Registration of domestic workers, employers and service providers.
4. Compulsory registration of service provider.
5. Compulsory registration of employer.
6.  Compulsory duty of service provider to register domestic worker.
7. Registration of domestic workers.
8. Migrant worker.
9. Effect of non-registration.
10. Effect of non-payment of annual contribution.
11. Renewal of registration certificate.
12. Effect of non-renewal.
13. Beneficiaries of the Fund.
14. Identity cards.
15. Maintenance and digitisation of records.
CHAPTER III
I
MPLEMENTING AUTHORITIES UNDER THE ACT
16. Constitution of Central Advisory Committee.
17. Functions of the Central Advisory Committee.
18. Constitution of State Social Security Boards.
19. Secretary and other officers of the State Board.
20. Meeting of Board.
21. No Act or proceedings of a Board shall be invalid merely by reason of vacancies,
etc.
Bill No. 92 of  2017
(i)

22. Functions of the State Boards.
23. Grants and loans by the Central Government.
24. Budget.
25. Annual Report.
26. Accounts and Audit.
27. Establishment of District Domestic Workers Regulation of Work and Social Security
Board.
28. Functions of the District Board.
29. Powers of the District Board.
30. Disqualification and removal of member.
31. Resignation from Office by Member.
32. Proceedings presumed to be good and valid.
33. Secretary and other officers of the District Board.
34. Dissolution of the District Board.
35. Employment of a child.
CHAPTER IV
E
STABLISHMENT OF FUND
36. Domestic Workers Social Security Fund.
37. Contribution of domestic workers or employers.
38. Effect of non-payment of contribution.
CHAPTER V
R
EGULATION OF THE WORKING CONDITIONS
39. Duties of the employer and service provider.
40. Working hours of the domestic workers.
41. Basic amenities.
42. Accommodation for live in domestic workers.
43. Payment of wages.
44. Termination from employment.
45. Leave.
46. Enrolment of domestic worker under Employee State Insurance Scheme.
47. Prohibition of crime against domestic workers.
48. No discrimination at work place.
49. Minimum wages.
50. Grievance redressal mechanism.
CHAPTER VI
G
RIEV ANCE REDRESSAL AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION
51. Setting up of special Court.
(ii)
CLAUSES

CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
52. Offences and penalties.
53. Complaint mechanism.
54. Emergency aid, medium term assistance and legal aid.
55. Court not to take cognizance of any offence punishable.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS P ROVISIONS
56. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act.
57. Supersession of the State Board.
58. Power to remove difficulties.
59. Accounts and Audit.
60. Application of other Acts.
61. Act not in derogation of other laws.
62. Power to make rules.
(iii)
C
LAUSES

1
THE DOMESTIC WORKERS (REGULATION OF WORK AND SOCIAL
SECURITY) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI SANKAR PRASAD DATTA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of work of domestic workers in order to improve their
working conditions and to provide social security to them; setting up of State
and District Boards for the purpose and for compulsory registration of
domestic workers, employers and service providers to such Boards
and also for setting up of  Domestic Workers Social Fund and for
matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Domestic Workers (Regulation of Work and Social
Security) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Short title,
extent,
application and
commencement.
Bill No. 92 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(3) It shall not apply to such Domestic Workers migrating for employment to any other
country.
(4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "beneficiary" means every domestic worker registered as a beneficiary under
sections 6 and 7 in this Act;
(c) "child" means a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(d) "Committee" means Central Advisory Committee constituted under
section 16.
(e) "District Board" means the District Domestic Workers Regulation of Work
and Social Security Board established under section 27;
(f) "domestic work" means work performed in or for a households;
(g) "domestic worker" means any person engaged in domestic work within the
employment relationship and includes:
(i) "replacement worker" who is working as a replacement for the main
workers for a short and specific period of time as agreed with the main worker
and the employer;
(ii) "full time worker" means a person who is employed as a domestic
worker in a single household for working hours as specified under sub-section
(4) of section 39;
(iii) "live-in-worker" means a person employed as a domestic worker who
lives in the employer's premises; and
(iv) "part time worker" means a person who is employed as a domestic
worker for less than prescribed daily working hours of that of a full time worker,
whether employed in single or multiple households;
(h) "discrimination" means any form of differential treatment on the basis of
caste, race, region, language, colour, sex, creed and religion, nature of work or age at
the place of work;
(i) "employer" means any person, that engages the domestic worker to do any
work in a household whether part time or full time either directly or through service
provider and who has an ultimate control over the affairs of the household which
includes any other person to whom such affairs of the household are entrusted and in
relation to contract labour, the principal employer;
(j) "employment agreement" means an agreement that lays down conditions of
employment between the employer and domestic worker;
(k) "forced labour" means compelling a person to offer his/her services as a
domestic worker against his will;
(l) "Fund" means the Domestic Workers Social Security Fund constituted under
section 36;
(m) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(n) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the
appropriate Government;
Definitions. 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(o) "service provider" means any voluntary association or placement agency or
company registered under any law for the time being in force, which espouses the
cause of domestic workers and/or provides or engages them in employment with the
principal employer excluding those collectives or cooperatives that are created by the
workers themselves as a means of collective bargaining;
Explanation.— "placement agency" means any agency/bureau/contractor or
person(s) registered under this Act which provides/engages in employment of domestic
workers or which facilitates the placement of domestic help for prospective employers
and includes such agency or person offering services through any print, electronic or
any form of communication.
(p) "State Board" means the State Domestic Workers Regulation of Work and
Social Security Board constituted under section 18;
(q) "trafficking" means to recruit, transport, transfer, harbour, or receive a person
by means of abuse of power or taking advantage of his position of vulnerability by
threat or use of force or coercion, abduction, fraud, deception; and that includes
giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of such person
having control over another person;
(r) "workplace" means any household or a place where a Domestic Worker
works as per the terms of the employment agreement; and
(s) "wages" means all emoluments which are earned by an employee while on
duty or on leave in accordance with the terms and conditions of his employment and
which are paid or are payable to him in cash and includes dearness allowance but does
not include any bonus, commission, house rent allowance, overtime wages and any
other allowance.
CHAPTER II
R
EGISTRATION
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, all
domestic workers, employers or service providers shall be registered as per procedure
hereinafter prescribed.
(2) An application for registration shall be made to the District Board in such form as
may be prescribed.
(3) Every application under sub-section (2) shall be accompanied by such documents
together with such fee as may be prescribed.
(4) If District Board under sub-section (2) is satisfied that the applicant has complied
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, it shall register the name of the
applicant as a domestic worker under this Act:
Provided that an application for registration shall not be rejected without giving the
applicant an opportunity of being heard and without assigning reasons in writing.
(5) Any person aggrieved by the decision under sub-section ( 4)  may, within thirty
days from the date of such decision, prefer an appeal to the State Board and the decision of
the State Board on such appeal shall be final:
Provided that the State Board in this behalf may entertain the appeal after the expiry of
the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the domestic worker was prevented by
sufficient reasons from filing the appeal in time.
4. Every service provider shall, prior to the process of recruitment or engagement of
domestic worker, register itself with the District Board by submitting an application along
with such fee and details as may be prescribed:
Registration of
domestic
workers,
employers and
service
providers.
Compulsory
registration of
service
provider.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Provided that the District Board or any such person so authorized may entertain any
such application for registration after expiry of the period fixed in this behalf, if satisfied, that
the applicant had sufficient reason for delay in submitting the application.
5. Every employer shall, within one month from the date of engaging a domestic
worker, register himself with District Board by submitting an application along with such fee
and details as may be prescribed:
Provided that the District Board or any person authorized by the District Board may
entertain an application for registration after expiry of the period fixed in this behalf, if
satisfied that the applicant had sufficient reason for the delay in submitting the application
in time.
6. (1) Wherever a domestic worker undertakes work through service provider, then it
shall be the duty of service provider to get the domestic worker registered within one month
from the commencement of the work, with the District Board by submitting an application
along with such fee and details as may be prescribed.
(2) Where a domestic worker undertakes work under a single employer and is not
engaged through any service provider or middleman or placement agency, as the case may
be, then it shall be the duty of such employer to ensure that the domestic worker is registered
with the District Board within one month from the commencement of the work:
Provided that the District Board or any such person so authorized by it may entertain
any such application for registration after expiry of the period fixed in this behalf, if satisfied
that the applicant had sufficient cause for delay in submitting the application.
7. Where a domestic worker undertakes part-time work in two or more households and
is not engaged through any placement agency, the employer shall ensure that the domestic
worker is registered with the District Board by submitting an application alongwith such fee
and details as may be prescribed.
8. Where a domestic worker leaves the work in a district and migrates to any other area
in any part of the territory of India and takes up work in any household in such part either on
his own or through any agency or employer, it shall be the duty of such worker or agency or
employer, respectively to inform the concerned District Board where he was registered
regarding the migration and register with the District Board at the place where work has been
taken up.
9. (1) No employer or service provider shall employ a domestic worker unless a certificate
of registration in respect of such employment is issued by the respective District Board or
Government servant so authorized.
(2) If the District Board or any Government servant so authorized by it is satisfied,
either on a reference made to it in this behalf or otherwise that the service provider or
employer fails to register the domestic workers employed by it, then it shall be held liable and
punished in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
10. If a domestic worker fails to pay annual contribution to the District Board, he shall
cease to be a beneficiary for the purposes of this Act.
11. Every registration certificate issued under this Act shall be renewed annually on
the payment of fee as may be prescribed.
12. (1) No employer to which this Act applies shall employ domestic worker unless the
renewal of registration certificate is carried out by him in respect of such employment as
issued under this Act.
Compulsory
registration of
employer.
Compulsory
duty of service
provider to
register
domestic
worker.
Registration of
part-time
domestic
worker.
Migrant
worker.
Effect of non-
registration.
Effect of non-
payment of
annual
contribution.
Renewal of
registration
certificate.
Effect of non-
renewal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(2) If the District Board or any person authorized by it is satisfied, either on a reference
made to it in this behalf or otherwise that the service provider or employer fails to carry out
the renewal of registration certificate, then such person shall be punished in accordance with
provisions of sub-section (1) of section 52.
13. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every domestic worker above the age of
eighteen years, registered under this Act shall be entitled to the benefits provided by the
District Board from its Fund under this Act:
Provided that every domestic worker above the age of sixty years shall continue to be
beneficiary under this Act without paying annual contribution to the Fund.
14. (1) The District Board shall issue an identity card to every beneficiary registered
under this Act containing such details as may be prescribed.
(2) Every beneficiary who has been issued an identity card under this Act shall,
produce the same whenever demanded by any officer of the appropriate Government or the
District Board or any other authority, as the case may be.
15. (1) The District Board shall maintain records or register of all its records duly
catalogued and indexed in a manner and in prescribed form and shall ensure that all records
are computerized within a reasonable time.
(2)  The digitisation of the records shall be introduced through software established
by the Central Government and databases available with the District Boards shall be
connected through a network all over the country on different systems so that access to
such records is facilitated:
Provided that it shall be the duty of the District Board to submit the computerized
records to the Committee within reasonable time.
CHAPTER III
I
MPLEMENTING AUTHORITIES UNDER THE ACT
16. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, shall
constitute a Committee to be known as the Central Advisory Committee to advise the Central
Government to carry out the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The term of the Committee shall be three years.
(3) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) such number of members not less than eight representing non-Governmental
organisations, trade association, union or persons representing and espousing the
cause of domestic workers, individuals having expertise in issues relating to labour
matters, women and child issues, law and related interests,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and members, procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions and
the manner of filling up of vacancies of the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Committee shall meet at least once every six months to review the working of
this Act.
17. (1) The Committee shall—
(a) review and monitor implementation of the Act and rules made thereunder and
recommend to the Central Government or State Governments or Union territories
Administrations regarding any changes in the said Act;
Beneficiaries
of the Fund.
Identity cards.
Maintenance
and
digitisation of
records.
Constitution
of Central
Advisory
Committee.
Functions of
the Central
Advisory
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(b) prepare an annual report of the administration of the Act;
(c) advise the State Boards regarding schemes in relation to social security,
health, medical, education and other beneficial schemes for the welfare of domestic
workers and their family members;
(d) advise upon such matters arising out of the administration of this Act or any
scheme made under this Act or relating to the application of the provisions of this Act
to all domestic workers and employers;
(e) co-ordinate and monitor the work of various District Boards to ensure
portability of registration and delivery of benefits across the country representative of
the registration in any one State or Union territory Board;
(f) prescribe minimum standards to achieve decent conditions of work in
consultation with State Boards;
(g) recommend appropriate strategies on elimination of any form of trafficking,
forced or bonded labour and child labour; and
(h) undertake any other matter assigned to it by the Central Government, from
time to time.
18. (1) The appropriate Government shall, with effect from such date as it may, by
notification, appoint, constitute a State Board to be known as the .......(name of the State)
Domestic Worker Regulation of Work and Social Security Board to exercise the powers
conferred on, and perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The State Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The State Board shall consist of a Chairperson and such other members, not
exceeding fifteen, to be appointed by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the State Board shall include an equal number of members representing
the State Government, the employers and the domestic workers:
Provided further that at least one-third members of the State Board shall be women.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and the other members of the State Board and the manner of filling of
casual vacancies of the members of the State Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
19. (1) The State Board shall appoint a Secretary and such other officers and employees
as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The Secretary of the Board shall be its Chief Executive Officer.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Secretary and the other officers and employees of the State Board shall be such as may
be prescribed.
20. (1) The State Board shall meet at such  time and place and observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at
such meetings) as may be prescribed.
(2) The Chairperson or, if for any reason he is unable to attend a meeting of the State
Board, any member nominated by the Chairperson in this behalf and in the absence of such
nomination, any other member elected by the members present from amongst themselves at
the meetings, shall preside at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the State Board shall be
decided by a majuority of votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of
Constitution
of State Social
Security
Boards.
Secretary and
other officers
of State Board.
Meetings of
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence, the person presiding, shall have a
second or a casting vote.
21. No act or proceedings of a State Board shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the State Board; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the State
Board; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the State Board not affecting the merits of
the case.
22. (1) The State Board shall—
(i) with the previous approval of the State Government, make regulations
consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder for all or any of the matters
provided under this Act;
(ii) review and monitor the District Board and take appropriate steps to ensure
its proper and effective implementation;
(iii) allocate funds to the District Board and administer the Fund;
(iv) prescribe the fees to be charged from the employers, service providers,
placement agencies and domestic workers, from time to time;
(v) prescribe fee for registration as beneficiaries under the Fund and rate per
mensem for the beneficiaries of the Fund;
(vi) implement schemes and welfare measures as formulated in consultation with
the Committee;
(vii) prescribe the form of register to be maintained for registration of domestic
workers under the Fund;
(viii) procedure for renewal of registration certificate;
(ix) entertain appeals with respect to any decision by the District Board;
(x) ensure decent conditions of service including rates of remuneration, hours of
work and conditions of service of domestic workers;
(xi) provide immediate assistance to a beneficiary in case of accident;
(xii) make payment of pension to the beneficiaries who have completed the age
of sixty years;
(xiii) sanction loans and advances to a beneficiary for construction of a house
not exceeding such amount and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed;
(xiv) pay such amount in connection with premium for Group Insurance Scheme
of the beneficiaries as it may deem fit;
(xv) give such financial assistance for the education of children of the beneficiaries
as may be prescribed;
(xvi) meet such medical expenses for treatment of major ailments of a beneficiary
or, such dependant, as may be prescribed;
(xvii) make payment of maternity benefit to the female beneficiaries; and
(xviii) make provision and improvement of such other welfare measures and
facilities as may be prescribed.
(2) The State Board may grant loan or subsidy to a local authority or an employer in
aid of any scheme approved by the appropriate Government for the welfare of domestic
workers in any establishment.
No act or
proceedings of
a Board shall
be invalid
merely by
reason of
vacancies, etc.
Functions of
the State
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
(3) The State Board shall pay annually grants-in-aid to a local authority or to an
employer who provides to the satisfaction of the State Board welfare measures and facilities
of the standard specified by the State Board for the benefit of the domestic workers and the
members of their family:
Provided that the amount payable as grants-in-aid to any local authority or employer
shall not exceed—
(a) the amount spent in providing welfare measures and facilities as determined
by the State Governments or any person specified by it in this behalf; or
(b) such amount as may be prescribed, whichever is less:
Provided further that no grant-in-aid shall be payable in respect of any welfare
measures and facilities where the amount spent thereon determined as aforesaid is
less than the amount prescribed in this behalf.
23. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, make to a State Board grants and loans of such sums of money as it may
consider necessary.
24. The State Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year, as
may be prescribed, its Budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and
expenditure of the State Board and forward the same to the appropriate Government.
25. The State Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year as
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous
financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the State Government and the Central Government.
26. (1) The State Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare and annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by
him in connection with the auditing of the accounts of the Board under this Act shall have
the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the auditing of the
Government accounts and, in particular shall have the right to demand the production of
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any
of the offices of the Board under this Act.
(3) The accounts of the State Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India annually and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall
be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(4) The State-Board shall furnish to the State Government before such date as may be
prescribed its audited copy of accounts together with the auditor's report.
(5) The State Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's report to be laid,
as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of the State Legislature.
27. (1) The State Government may for the purposes of preparation and implementation
of the schemes for welfare of domestic workers, in a District, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish such number of District Boards to be known as the District Domestic
Workers Regulation of Work and Social Security Board:
Provided that the State Government may constitute such Board for two or more
Districts:
Provided further that the State Government may, by notification, constitute more than
one Board for a District and specify the local limits in which such Boards shall have jurisdiction
or authorize any existing Board under any other law dealing with labour related matters.
Grants and
loans by the
Central
Government.
Budget.
Annual report.
Accounts and
audit.
Establishment
of District
Domestic
Workers
Regulation of
Work and
Social Security
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(2) The District Board shall consist of a Chairperson and such other members
nominated, from time to time, by the State Government representing the employers, the
domestic workers and the State Government:
Provided that the members representing employers and domestic workers shall be
equal in number, and the members representing the State Government shall not exceed one-
third of the total number of members representing employers and domestic workers:
Provided further that the Chairperson of the District Board shall be one of the members
representing the State Government and nominated in this behalf by the State Government.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to any other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and member of the District Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The District Board shall meet at least once every four month to review the operation
of the Act and evaluate the implementation of the Act.
(5) The meetings of the Board and the procedure to be followed for the purpose and all
matters supplementary or ancillary thereto shall be such as may be prescribed.
28. (1) The District Boards shall—
(a) carry out the registration of domestic workers, employers and service
providers and placement agency as per the procedure prescribed under the Act in the
name and account of State Board either directly or through the Workers Facilitation
Centres and maintain records and registration of domestic workers as beneficiaries
under the Act;
(b) collect from employers and service providers a monthly amount equal to two
per cent. of the wages paid to domestic workers or one per cent. of the house tax being
paid by the employer or service providers, whichever is higher;
(c) grant following benefits to beneficiaries under the Act:—
(i) provision for immediate assistance and rehabilitation to a beneficiary in
case of an accident arising in the course of employment;
(ii) financial assistance for the education of beneficiary and his children;
(iii) provision for medical expenses for treatment of ailments of a
beneficiary or his such dependent;
(iv) provision for maternity or paternity benefit to the women or men
beneficiaries:
Provided that such maternity or paternity benefit shall be restricted to two
children only;
(v) make payment of funeral expenses to the legal heir on the death of the
beneficiary;
(vi) facilitate the settlement of disputes through conciliation;
(vii) renewal of registration certificate and collection of annual contribution;
(viii) issue of identity card for the beneficiary;
(ix) disseminate information on available social security schemes for the
workers;
(x) authorize the workers Facilitation Centre to act as an authorized
intermediary in collecting contributions from the workers and others as mandated
under the Act and remit them to the district Board;
(xi) authorize workers Facilitation Centre to carry out surprise visits to the
working place of the domestic workers and check the implementation of the Act;
Functions of
the District
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(xii) training and imparting skills to the domestic workers;
(xiii) authorize the workers Facilitation Centre to conduct surveys for
beneficiaries;
(xiv) provide legal aid to beneficiaries in case of a court proceeding to
address their claims;
(xv) implement schemes or welfare measures framed by the Central Board
in consultation with the State Boards;
(xvi) maintain complaint registers for grievance redress of domestic workers;
(xvii) establish or devise establishment of creche facilities for children of
domestic workers;
(xviii ) admit upon request of the aggrieved domestic worker into
rehabilitation centres established by the appropriate Government; and
(xix) such other benefits as may be decided by the Board, from time to
time;
(d) in consultation with the State Board may make available such schemes as
applicable under other laws such as the Unorganized Workers Social Security
Act, 2008.
(2) The District Board shall designate any one or more of the following at such areas as
may be considered necessary, as Workers' Facilitation Centres for purposes of facilitating
registration of workers:—
(i) local Panchayati Raj Institutions or urban local bodies; or
(ii) resident welfare associations or society; or
(iii) non-profit organizations working among the domestic workers:
Provided further that such Workers' Facilitation Centres shall function under the
supervision of the District Board.
(3) The District Board shall maintain such registers and records giving such particulars
of domestic workers employed the nature of work performed by the domestic worker, and
such other particulars in such form as may be prescribed.
29. (1) Subject to any rules by the State Government in this behalf, the District Board
may, within the local limits—
(a) make such examination and hold such inquiry as may be necessary for
ascertaining whether the provisions of this Act have been or are being complied within
any place or premises;
(b) require the production of any document, record or evidence (written or oral);
and
(c) enter, with such assistance as it may consider necessary, at all times any
place or premises if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that any domestic
worker has or is being subjected to any form of sexual exploitation or wrongfully
confined in any such place or premises or rescue any child being used employed as a
domestic worker.
(2) Every employer shall accord to the Board, all reasonable facilities in the discharge
of his duties under this Act.
(3) Each District Board shall have the same powers as are vested in civil court under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when adjudicating a dispute in respect of the following
matters, namely—
33 of 2008.
Powers of the
District Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5 of 1908.

11
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) compelling the production of documents and material objects;
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses; and
(d) in respect of such other matters as may be prescribed.
30. (1) No person shall be chosen as, or continue to be, a member of the District Board
who,—
(a) is a salaried officer of the District Board;
(b) is or at any time has been adjudged insolvent;
(c) is found to be a lunatic or become of unsound mind; or
(d) is or has been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude.
(2) The State Government may remove from office any member, who—
(a) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in
sub-section (1); or
(b) is absent without leave of the District Board for more than three consecutive
meetings of the District Board;
(c) in the opinion of the Government, has so abused the position of member as to
render that persons continuation in the office detrimental to the public interest or is
otherwise unfit or unsuitable to continue as such member:
Provided that, no person shall be removed under clause (c) unless such person
has been given a reasonable opportunity to showcause as to why he should not be
removed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, the
members shall hold office during the pleasure of the State Government and if in the opinion
of the State Government,—
(a) the member representing employers and the domestic workers, ceases to
adequately represent the employers or, as the case may be, the domestic workers, or
(b) having regard to exigencies of circumstances or services in the State
Government, the member representing the State Government cannot continue to
represent the State Government,
then it may, by an order, remove all or any of them from office at any time.
31. Any member of the District Board may at any time resign his office by writing under
his hand addressed to the State Government, and his office shall, on acceptance of the
resignation, become vacant.
32. No act or proceeding of the Board shall be questioned or invalidated merely by
reason of any vacancy in its membership or by reason of any defect in the constitution
thereof.
33. (1) The District Board shall, with the approval of the State Government, appoint a
full time Secretary and such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the
efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The Secretary of the District Board shall be its Chief Executive Officer.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the secretary and other officers and employees of the District Board shall be such as may be
prescribed.
Disqualification
and removal
of member.
Resignation
from office by
member.
Proceedings
presumed to be
good and valid.
Secretary and
other officers
of the District
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

12
34. (1) Every case of complaints relating to non-functioning of the District Board, shall
be filed with the State Board in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The State Board shall, after conducting an enquiry found the complaint to be true
and the District Board dysfunctional, dissolve the District Board.
(3) Upon dissolution of a District Board under sub-section ( 2), New District Board
shall be constituted within fifteen days.
35. No child shall be employed as a domestic worker or for any such incidental or
ancillary work which is prohibited under any law for the time being in force.
CHAPTER  IV
ESTABLISHMENT OF DOMESTIC WORKERS SOCIAL SECURITY FUND
36. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be known as Domestic Workers Social
Security Fund, and credited thereto—
(a) the amount collected every month by the District Board under clause (b)
sub-section (1) of section 28;
(b) employers’ contribution collected by the District Boards in the name and
account of the State Board as annual registration fees under section 6;
(c) any grants made to the Fund by the Central Government and State Government
or any other person or organisation;
(d) all amounts from the District Boards received as registration and other
fees of domestic workers, employers and service providers;
(e) any income from investment from nationalized bank;
(f) share from Gross Domestic Product and State revenue;
(g) all fines collected under this Act; and
(h) all other sums received by the Board from any other sources.
(2) The Fund shall be administered and applied by the District to meet the expenditure
incurred in connection with measures and facilities which, are necessary or expedient to
promote the welfare and social security of domestic workers to,—
(i) defray the cost of such welfare measures or facilities for the benefit of domestic
workers or beneficiaries as may be decided by the State Board; and
(ii) sanction any money in aid of any scheme for the welfare of the domestic
workers including family welfare, family planning, education, insurance and other
welfare measures.
37. Every domestic worker or employee who has been registered as a benficiary under
this Act shall, until he attains the age of sixty years, contribute to the Fund at such rate per
mensem, as may be prescribed:
Provided that the District Board may, if satisfied that a beneficiary is unable to pay his
contribution due to any financial hardship, waive the payment of contribution for a period
not exceeding three months at a time.
38. When a beneficiary has not paid his contribution under sub-section ( 1) of
section 36 for a continuous period of not less than one year, he shall cease to be a beneficiary,
but he shall continue to be a member:
Provided that if the Board is satisfied that the non-payment of contribution was for a
reasonable ground and that the domestic workers is willing to deposit the arrears, he may
allow the domestic workers to deposit the contribution in arrears and on such deposit being
made, the registration or entitlement to receive benefits of domestic workers shall stand
restored.
Dissolution of
the District
Board.
Employment
of a child.
Domestic
Workers Social
Security Fund.
Contribution
of domestic
workers or
employers.
Effect of non-
payment of
contribution.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
CHAPTER  V
REGULATION OF THE WORKING CONDITIONS
39. (1) Every employer and service provider shall provide such particulars of the
domestic workers engaged directly or through agency, to the district Board or any person so
authorized by the Board, in such form and paying such fees as may be prescribed.
(2) No service provider or a person or agency shall carry on the business of providing
domestic workers to any employer unless the said service provider or agency or person is
registered under the Act.
(3) The Service provider shall maintain the records in a standard format as prescribed
by the board of all domestic workers being contracted by them for purposes of employment
from any part of the territory of India and provide the details thereof in such form as may be
prescribed.
40. For the purposes of this Act, the working hours of the domestic worker shall be as
follows:—
(a) weekly working hours—no employees shall be required or allowed to work
for more than forty-eight hours in a week;
(b) daily working hours—subject to weekly working hours, no domestic worker
shall be required or allowed to work for more than nine hours in a day;
(c) duration of working hour—the period of work of a domestic worker shall be
so arranged that inclusive of the intervals for rest, it shall not spread over more than
twelve hours per day;
(d) weekly holidays—every domestic worker irrespective of being a full-time
part-time, live-in, night-shift shall be entitled to a weekly day off;
(e) restriction on overtime—the total hours of overtime work in a days shall not
exceed ten hours in a day and in the aggregate twelve hours in any week;
(f) wages for overtime work—where a domestic worker works for more than the
maximum working hours as perescribed he shall, in respect of the overtime work, be
entitled to wages at the twice of his ordinary rate of wages; and
(g) interval for rest—the periods of work of a domestic worker each day shall be
so fixed that no period shall exceed five hours at a stretch with an interval for rest of at
least half an hour.
41. It shall be the duty of the employer to provide the domestic worker with basic
amenities like safe drinking water, food, first-aid and washroom facilities.
42. It shall be the duty of the employer to provide a live-in domestic worker with
private and decent accommodations for rest and dressing.
43. It shall be the duty of the employer to pay the wages directly to the bank account
of the domestic worker within the first five days of the month in such manner as may be
prescribed.
44. The employer or domestic worker shall before termination of employment, give one
month notice to the domestic worker or employer, as the case may be:
Provided that the employer before termination of employment shall provide wages
worth fifteen days of employment to the domestic worker.
45. (1) Every domestic worker shall be entitled to,—
(a) a paid sick leave not exceeding fifteen days on the account of being sick; and
Duties of the
employer and
service
provider.
Working hours
of the
domestic
workers.
Basic
amenities.
Accommodation
for live-in
domestic
workers.
Payment of
wages.
Termination
from
employment.
Leave.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

14
(b) fifteen days of annual paid leave if he has worked for a period of two hundred
forty days exceeding the weekly holidays or sick leave.
46.  Every domestic worker shall enroll himself under the Employee State Insurance
Scheme as provided under the Employee State Insurance Act, 1948 so as to avail benefit from
health cover including maternity benefit provided under that Act.
47. No domestic worker shall be subjected to the offence of sexual, physical or verbal
assault, violence, trafficking, wrongful confinement and bonded or forced labour by any
employer or a member of his household.
48. (1) No employer registered under this Act shall discriminate a domestic worker on
the basis of caste, race, region, language, colour, sex, creed or religion, in matters such as
recruitment, conditions of employment or payment of wages.
(2) No voluntary association or agency shall discriminate a domestic worker on the
grounds mentioned in rehabilitation, recruitment, placement and payment.
Explanation.—For the purpose of the section there shall be equal payment for equal
work requiring the same amount of work, skill set, and effort.
49. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification, fix the minimum rate of
wages payable to domestic worker.
(2) The appropriate Government shall review minimum wages at such intervals as it
may think fit:
Provided that such intervals shall not exceed five years.
(3) The appropriate Government may fix—
(a) minimum rate of wages for time work (hereinafter referred to as ‘a minimum
time rate’) ;
(b) minimum rate of wages for piece work (hereinafter referred to as ‘minimum
piece rate’) ;
(c) minimum rate of remuneration to apply in the case of employees employed on
piece work for the purpose of securing to such employees a minimum rate of wages on
a time work basis (hereinafter referred to as ‘a guaranteed time rate’) ;
(d) minimum rate (whether a time rate or a piece rate) to apply in substitution for
minimum rate which would otherwise be applicable, in respect of overtime work done
by employees (hereinafter referred to as ‘overtime rate’) ;
(e) minimum rates of wages by any one or more of the following wage—
periods, namely:—
(f) by the hour,
(g) by the day,
(h) by the month.
CHAPTER VI
G
RIEV ANCE REDRESSAL AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION
50. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute for every district one or more Grievance Redressal Committee for the resolution
of disputes arising out of grievances relating to rejection and denial of registration,
cancellation of registration and claims as well as well as other grievances regarding
District Board.
Enrollment of
domestic
worker under
Employee
State
Insurance
Scheme.
34 of 1948.
Prohibition of
crime against
domestic
worker.
No
discrimination
at work place.
Minimum
wages.
Grievance
Redressal
Mechanism.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

15
(2) The Grievance Redressal Committee shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson; and
(b) three members each representing employees and domestic workers, to be
appointed by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Chairperson of the Grievance Redressal Committee shall be
selected from the employers and from amongst the domestic workers alternatively on
rotation basis every year:
Provided further that there shall be, as far as practicable, one woman member if
the Grievance Redressal Committee has two members and in case the number of members
are more than two, the number of women members may be increased proportionately.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the constitution of Grievance
Redressal Committee shall not affect the right of the domestic worker to raise any dispute on
the same matter under the provisions of this Act.
(4) The Grievance Redress Committee shall dispose off the complaint within forty-five
days of receipt of a written complaint by or on behalf of the employee or the domestic worker,
as the case may be.
(5) The employee or the domestic worker, as the case may be, who is aggrieved of the
decision of the Grievance Redressal Committee may appeal to the District Collector against
the decision of Grievance Redressal Committee and the Collector shall, within one month
from the date of receipt of such appeal, dispose off the same and send a copy of his decision
to the employee or the domestic worker, as the case may be.
(6) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the worker for whom there is an
established Grievance Redressal Mechanism in the establishment concerned.
51. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set
up adequate number of special courts to deal with complaints of domestic workers against
the employers or service providers, as the case may be, to provide interim relief including
reinstatement or continuity of service of domestic workers, as the case may be.
(2) Every special court established under sub-section ( 1) shall be headed by a
Chief Judge who shall be qualified to be appointed as District Judge and shall have such
number of other Judges as the appropriate Government may prescribe.
(3) The qualification and salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chief Judge and other Judges shall be such as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
52. (1) Any Service provider or placement agency or employer, as the case may be,
who is not registered under this Act or has not renewed the registration certificate as per this
Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three months
and with fine which may extend upto twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
(2) Any service provider or agencies or employer who contravenes the provisions of
the Act for the first time shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
upto three months and with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
(3) If any person who has been convicted of any offence punishable under
sub-section (2) is again found guilty of an offence involving a contravention or failure of
compliance of the same provision, he shall be punishable on a subsequent conviction with
imprisonment for a term which may extend upto six months and with fine which shall not be
less than forty thousand rupees but which may extend upto fifty thousand rupees or with
both.
Setting up of
Special Court.
Offences and
penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(4) In case of default of payment to the domestic worker, the employer shall be liable to
make payment along with the interest on such payment as may be prescribed:
Provided that if the employer makes payment to any domestic worker less than the
minimum rates of wages fixed for his work, or less than the amount due to him under the
provisions of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
upto six months or with fine which may extend upto twenty thousand rupees or with both.
(5) Any person who willfully obstructs any officer so authorized by the District Boards
to conduct inspection under the act or refuses or willfully neglects to afford the such officer
any reasonable facility for making any insepction, examination, inquiry or investigation
authorized by or under this Act in relation to the employer or a service provider to whom, this
Act applies, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months and with fine which may extend upto twenty thousand rupees.
(6) Whoever willfull refuses to produce on the demand of such an inspecting a person
so authorized by the District Boards, any register or other document kept in pursuance of
this Act or prevents or attempts to prevent or does anything which he/she has reason to
believe is likely to prevent any person from appearing before or being examined by an
inspecting person acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three months or with a fine which may extend
upto twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
(7) Any person who—
(i) knowing sends, direct or takes female to any place for immoral purposes or to
a place where she is likely to morally corrupted;
(ii) in any manner sexually exploits or indulges in trafficking of domestic worker
or child; or
(iii) if found ill treating or discriminating any domestic worker on the basis of
caste, sex, class, race, religion or region;
(iv) in any manner abuses or illegally confines any domestic worker; or,
(v) compels any person to render any forced labour; or,
(vi) engages any child as a domestic workers,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but
which may extend upto seven years and fine which may extend upto rupees fifty thousand or
with both.
53. On identification of victim by service provider or District Board, the complaint shall
be initiated to the Chief Judicial Magistrate by the service provider or District Board,
whatsoever the case may be.
54. For the victims of forced labour, sexual exploitation,  discrimination, illegal
confinement or any kind of abuse, the District Board or service provider, as the case may be,
shall provide with emergency aid, medium term assistance and legal aid in conduct of the
legal proceedings and admit the victim to rehabilitation homes.
55. (1)  No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except
on a complaint—
(a) make by, or with the previous sanction in writing of, the State Board or the
District Board; or
(b) make by an office-bearer of a voluntary organization registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860 or Trade Unions Act, 1926 or any other law for the time
being in force;
Complaint
mechanism.
Emergency
aid, medium
term
assistance and
legal aid.
Court not to
take
cognizance of
any offence
punishable.
21 of 1860.
16 of 1926.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the
first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS P ROVISIONS
56. (1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of any agreement or contract
of service, whether made before or after the commencement of this Act.
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding any worker from
entering into an agreement with the principal employer as the case may be, for granting them
rights or privileges in respect of any matter which are more favourable to them than those to
which they would be entitled under this Act.
57. (1) If the appropriate Government is satisfied that, or otherwise is of the opinion
that—
(a) the State Board is unable to perform its functions; or
(b) the State Board has persistently made delay in the discharge of its functions
or has exceeded or abused its powers, then the State Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, supersede the State Board and re-constitute it in the manner
specified in section 18 within a period of twelve months from the date of supersession:
Provided that the period of supersession may be extended by not more than six
months for sufficient reasons by a notification:
Provided further that, before issuing a notification under this sub-section on
any of the grounds mentioned in clause ( b), the State Government shall give a
reasonable opportunity to the State Board to show cause why it shall not be superseded
and shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of the Board.
(2) After the supersession of the Board and until it is reconstituted, the powers and
functions of the Board under this Act shall be exercised and performed by the State
Government or by such officer or officers as the State Government may appoint for this
purpose.
(3) When the Board is superseded, the following consequences shall ensure, that is to
say—
(a) all the members of the Board shall, as from the date of publication of the
notification under sub-section (1), vacate their office;
(b) all the powers and functions, which may be exercised or performed by the
Board shall, during the period of supersession, be exercised or performed by such
persons as may be specified in the notification;
(c) all funds and other property vesting in the Board shall, during the period of
supersession, vest in the State Government and on the reconstitution of the Board,
such funds and property shall reinvest in the Board.
58. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
Effect of laws
and
agreements
inconsistent
with the Act.
Supersession
of the State
Board.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
59. (1) The State and District Boards shall maintain proper accounts  and other relevant
records and prepare annual statements of accounts in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) The Committee shall furnish to the Central Government, before such date as may be
prescribed, the audited copy of the consolidated account of itself and the Funds together
with the auditor’s report.
(3) The State and District Boards shall furnish to the State Government before such
date as may be prescribed its audited copy of accounts together with the auditor’s report.
60. The Welfare provisions of the Employees State Insurance Act, 1948, Equal
Remuneration Act, 1976, Industrial Dispute Act, 1947, Inter-State Migrant Workmen
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979, Maternity Benefit
Act, 1961, Minimum Wage Act, 1948, Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, Payment of Gratuity
Act, 1972, Payment of Wages Act, 1936, Sexual Harassment at Workplace (Prevention,
Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013, Trade Unions Act, 1926, Unorganised Worker Social
Security Act, 2008, Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 shall also apply to the domestic
workers registered under this Act.
61. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law, for the time being in force.
62. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and
subject to the conditions of previous publication except when the rules are made for the first
time, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the forgoing provision, such
rules may be made for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) term of office of members of the State and District Board as the case may be;
(b) rate of travelling and daily allowances to be payable to members of the State
and District Board for attending meetings of the State and District Board as the case
may be;
(c) form of application for registration as a beneficiary;
(d) documents to be accompanied along with application for registration as a
beneficiary and fees for the same;
(e) registers to be maintained by the Secretary of the State and District Board as
the case may be;
(f) form of an application to be made by a beneficiary to the District Board and
documents which may be accompanied to such application, for grant of payments out
of the fund;
(g) amount of contribution of the beneficiaries to the fund;
(h) form of annual statement of accounts including a balance sheet;
(i) form in which and the time when the budget of the Board is to be prepared and
forwarded to the State Government;
(j) form in which and the time when the annual report of the Board is to be
prepared and submitted to the State Government;
(k) number of members of the Advisory Committee and the manner in which they
may be chosen;
Accounts and
Audit.
Application of
other Acts.
34 of 1948.
25 of 1976.
14 of 1947.
30 of 1979.
53 of 1961.
11 of 1948.
21 of 1965.
39 of 1972.
4 of 1936.
14 of 2003.
16 of 1926.
33 of 2008.
8 of 1923.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

19
(l) term of office of members of the Committee; and
(m) rate of travelling and daily allowances to be payable to members of the
Committee for attending meetings of the Committee.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the last few decades there has been a tremendous growth in the demand for domestic
workers. Poverty has also forced people to migrate in search of work and workers with no
other skills, turn to domestic work. This has also led to the trafficking and other forms of
exploitation of millions of women and children of both the sexes. To meet growing demand
for domestic help, there has been a spurt of thousands of placement agencies providing
domestic workers in metro-towns of many States who remain outside the purview of any
legislative control.
Absence of any legal protection, has led to severe exploitation of women and children
which includes depriving domestic workers of a decent wage and excessive working hours
of work. For the live-in domestic workers, there is absence of proper food and living/sleeping
space, lack of freedom of mobility, isolation, exposure to harassment and sexual exploitation
by agents during transit and work.
In 2011 the domestic workers won a victory at the International Labour Conference
when an overwhelming majority of member countries voted in favour of a Convention to
uphold the rights of domestic workers. Convention 189 and Recommendation 201, to which
the Government of India is a signatory, explains in detail how domestic workers need to be
protected and awarded. Whereas the Government of India has not yet ratified Convention
189, the Government of India has included domestic workers in the Anti Harassment at the
Workplace Act and some schemes like the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY).  A few
State Governments have notified minimum wages for domestic workers and included them in
some welfare schemes while the State of Maharashtra has enacted a welfare Act for domestic
workers. Nevertheless in the absence of a central legislation capable of reaching all domestic
workers none of these State level measures will deliver justice to domestic workers.
As domestic workers are an important segment of the service sector of the Indian
economy and who have a multiplier impact on the economy by enabling the women in
particular to work by sharing the family burden, only a comprehensive Central Legislation
specifically designed to meet the working condition of the domestic workers can ensure the
end of the exploitation of these workers.
It is in the public interest that domestic work, employing, as it does, a very large
number of poor and vulnerable women and whose conditions of work and living need
amelioration and to whom regularity of employment must be assured, placement agencies
must be regulated so that the Directive Priniciples of the Constitution, more particularly the
relevant provisional articles 39, 41, 42, 43, and 43-A of the Constitution are given effect to by
a law made by Parliament with reference to entries 22, 23 and 24 of List III in the 7th Schedule
to the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANKAR PRASAD DATTA
April 6, 2017.
20

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the registration of domestic workers, employees and
service providers in such manner as may be prescribed. Clause 16 provides for the constitution
of the Central Advisory Committee by the Central Government. It also provides for
appointment of a Chairperson and other members of the Committee. Clause 18 provides for
the constitution of State Domestic Workers Regulation of Work and Social Security Board.
Clause 19 provides for appointment of Secretary and other officers and employees to the
State Board. Clause 22 provides that State Boards shall make grants to the local authority
and employees for providing benefits to the domestic worker. Clause 23 provides that Central
Government shall provide grants and loans to the State Boards. Clause 27 provides for the
constitution of District Domestic Workers Regulations of Work and Social Security Board.
Clause 33 provides for appointment of Secretary and other officers to the District
Board. Clause 36 provides for constitution of Domestic Workers Social Security Fund.
Clause  50 provides for the constitution of Grievance Redressal Committee. Clause 51
provides for setting up of Domestic Worker Court. The expenditure relating to State shall be
borne out of the Consolidated Fund of the State concerned. The expenditure relating to the
Union territories shall be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that recurring expenditure of about rupees Twenty thousand two
hundred forty crore and Forty seven lakh per annum would involve from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupeees Four thousand and forty eight crore is
also likely to be incurred.
21

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 62 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.
22

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of work of domestic workers in order to improve their
working conditions and to provide social security to them; setting up of State
and District Boards for the purpose and for compulsory registration of
domestic workers, employers and service providers to such Boards
and also for setting up of  Domestic Workers Social Fund and for
matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sankar Prasad Datta, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—695LS(S3)—30.06.2017.