6
Bill No. 92-F of 2022
THE DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 30TH MARCH, 2022
RAJYA SABHA ON 5TH APRIL, 2022)
ASSENTED TO ON 18 TH APRIL, 2022
ACT  NO. 10 OF 2022

1
THE  DELHI  MUNICIPAL  CORPORATION  (AMENDMENT)
BILL,  2022
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act,  1957.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Delhi Municipal Corporation (Amendment)
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 92-F of 2022

2
2. In the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act),—
(a) for the words "A Corporation", "every Corporation", "each Corporation" or
the word "Corporations", wherever they occur in the Act, the words "The Corporation"
or "the Corporation", as the case may be, shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (3) of section 36, sub-section (1) of section 41, clause (y) of
section 43, clauses ( b) and ( c) of section 70, sub-section ( 1) of section 109,
sub-section (1) of section 147, clause (d) of section 301, section 355, sub-section (1)
of section 394, clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 399 and section 481, for the
words "the area of the Corporation" wherever they occur, the word "Delhi" shall,
subject to such changes as the rules of grammar require, be substituted;
(c) in sections 1, 3A, 5, 6, 32A, 55, 56, 57, 193, 330A and 499, for the word
"Government", wherever it occurs, the words "Central Government" shall be
substituted.
3. In the principal Act, in section 2,—
(a) in clause (6), for the words "a Corporation", the words "the Corporation"
shall be substituted;
(b) in clause ( 7), for the words "a Corporation of Delhi", the words "the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi" shall be substituted.
4. In Chapter II, for the heading and sub-heading, the following heading and
sub-heading shall be substituted, namely:—
"ESTABLISHMENT OF MUNICIP AL CORPORA TION OF DELHI
Constitution of Municipal Corporation".
5. In the principal Act, in section 3,—
(a) for sub-sections (1) and (1A), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be a Corporation charged
with the Municipal Government of Delhi, to be known as the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi.";
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the word "Government", the words "Central
Government" shall be substituted;
(c) for sub-sections (5) and (6), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(5) The total number of seats of councillors and the number of seats
reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes in the Corporation, shall, at
the time of establishment of Corporation, be as determined by the Central
Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
(6) Upon the completion of each census after the establishment of the
Corporation, the number of seats shall be on the basis of the population of
Delhi as ascertained at that census and shall be determined by the Central
Government by notification in the Official Gazette and the number of seats to be
reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes shall, as nearly as may be,
bear the same ratio to the total number of seats as the population of Scheduled
Castes bears to the total population of Delhi:
Provided that the total number of seats shall in no case be more than two
hundred and fifty and the number of seats in the Corporation shall be determined
66 of 1957.General.
Amendment
of section 2.
Substitution of
heading and
sub-heading of
Chapter II.
Amendment
of section 3.

3
by the Central Government at the time of the establishment of the Corporation:
Provided further that the determination of seats as aforesaid shall not
affect the then composition of the Corporation until the expiry of the duration
of the Corporation:
Provided also that the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes may be
allotted by rotation to different wards in such manner as the Central Government
may, by order published in the Official Gazette, direct.".
6. In the principal Act, in section 42, after clause (wa), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(wb) securing and establishment of e-governance system for citizens' services
on an anytime-anywhere basis for better, speedy, accountable and transparent
administration;".
7. In the principal Act, for section 90A, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"90A. (1) On the date of establishment of the Corporation under sub-section (1)
of section 3, the officers and employees of the erstwhile North Delhi Municipal
Corporation, South Delhi Municipal Corporation and East Delhi Municipal Corporation
shall, with immediate effect, become the officers and employees of the Corporation.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Government may make such rules
as may be required.".
8. In the principal Act, in section 203, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) The contracts already made in accordance with the provisions of the
bye-laws made under this Act prior to the commencement of the Delhi Municipal
Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2022 shall be deemed to have been executed by the
Commissioner on behalf of the Corporation constituted under sub-section ( 1) of
section 3 and shall continue until the expiry of the validity period of such contracts.".
9. In the principal Act, section 388 shall be omitted.
10. In the principal Act, in section 444, after sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A) The service of notices, summons and other documents referred to in
sub-section ( 1) may be made by delivering or transmitting a copy thereof by
registered post acknowledgment due, addressed to the defendant or his agent
empowered to accept the service or by speed post or by such courier services as are
approved by the High Court or by any other means of transmission of documents
(including fax message or electronic mail service) as may be provided by rules made
by the High Court.".
11. In the principal Act, in section 479,—
(a) in sub-section ( 2), after the word and figures "section 31", the words,
brackets, figures and letter "and every notification issued under sub-section ( 2) of
section 3A" shall be inserted;
(b) in sub-section (3), the words, brackets, figures and letter "sub-section (2) of
section 3A and" shall be omitted.
12. In the principal Act, section 484A shall be omitted.
Amendment
of section 42.
Substitution of
new section
for section
90A.
Officers of
erstwhile
Corporations
to become
officers of
Corporation.
Amendment
of section
203.
Omission of
section 388.
Amendment of
section 444.
Amendment of
section 479.
Omission of
section 484A.

4
13. In the principal Act, for section 514A, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
"514A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government
may, if necessary, appoint a person to be called the Special Officer, to exercise the
power and discharge the functions of the Corporation until the date on which the first
meeting of the Corporation is held after the commencement of the Delhi Municipal
Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2022.
514AA. On and from the commencement of the Delhi Municipal Corporation
(Amendment) Act, 2022,—
(a) the North Delhi Municipal Corporation, the South Delhi Municipal
Corporation and the East Delhi Municipal Corporation (hereafter referred to as
the erstwhile Corporations) shall be subsumed with, and become part of the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi;
(b) any reference to the erstwhile Corporations in any contract or other
instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Municipal Corporation of
Delhi;
(c) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the erstwhile
Corporations shall vest in the Municipal Corporation of Delhi;
(d) all the rights and liabilities of the erstwhile Corporations shall be
transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the Municipal Corporation of
Delhi;
(e) any pending proceedings, including any disciplinary , arbitration,
appeal or other legal proceedings, of whatever nature, by or against the erstwhile
Corporations shall be continued or enforced by or against the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi;
(f) any rules, regulations and bye-laws made prior to such commencement,
shall, in so far as they are consistent with the provisions of the Act, continue to
be applicable till new rules, regulations and bye-laws are made.".
14. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary, for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
Substitution of
new sections
514A and
514AA for
section 514A.
Appointment
of Special
Officer.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Transitional
provisions.

MGIPMRND—129RS(S3)—21-04-2022.
A
BILL
further to amend the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)