   AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 92 of 2021
THE RIGHT TO WORK BILL, 2021
By
DR. ALOK KUMAR SUMAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the right to work to every eligible citizen and for
payment of allowance till such time as appropriate work is
provided to every such citizen, constitution of Right to
Work Fund, framing of Right to Work Insurance Policy
and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Work Act, 2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 (a) “employment exchange” means an employment exchange set up by the
Government of a State or Union territory Administration, as the case may be;
Short title and
extent.
5 Definitions.

(b) “Fund” means the Right to Work Fund constituted under sub-
section (1) of section 10;
(c) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette by the
Central Government; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Subject to the provisions of sections 7 and 12, every citizen who has attained
the age of eighteen years and who, being unemployed, is registered at an employment
exchange shall have the right to appropriate work to be provided by the Central
Government.
4. The Central Government may, in its endeavour to provide work under section
3, categorise citizens by notification on the basis of their qualification or such other
basis, as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Central Government shall provide the right to work to all eligible
citizens within ten years from the commencement of this Act.
5. The work to be provided by the Central Government under section 3 shall be
suited to the age and qualification of the citizen concerned.
6. Till such time the work is provided to a citizen under section 3, there shall be
paid by the Central Government to such citizen such allowance, not being less than
rupees ten thousand per month, in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. If a citizen secures any work or job subsequent to his registration with the
employment exchange, either on his own or otherwise, he shall inform the employment
exchange immediately and his name shall be removed by the employment exchange
with effect from the date of having secured the job or work.
8. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any citizen,—
(a) who has an income, from one or more sources, not less than the amount of
allowance fixed under section 6; and
(b) who is covered under any scheme of unemployment allowance prevalent in a
State or Union territory.
9. Where a citizen, being unemployed, is registered with an employment exchange,
but has an income of his own from any source, the amount of allowance to which he
is entitled under section 6 shall be reduced by the amount of his income.
10. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called “Right to
Work Fund” for the payment of allowance under this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, make such grants to the
Fund as may be required for the purpose of this Act.
(3) These shall be credited to the Fund,—
(a) all grants made by the Central Government under sub-section (2);
(b) all voluntary donations made to the Fund;
(c) all contributions in respect of the Right to Work Insurance Policy under
section 11;
(d) all sums collected under section 12; and
2
5
10
Right to work.
Categorising of
citizens
entitled to
right to work.
Nature of
work.
Grant of
allowance.
Removal of
name by
employment
exchange.
Act not to
apply to
certain
citizens.
15
20
25
30
35
40
Reduction of
allowance.
Constitution
of Right to
Work Fund.

(e) any interest or dividend or other return on any investment made out of the
Fund.
(4)  All amounts due and payable under this Act and all expenditure relating to
the management and administration of the Fund shall be paid out of the Fund.
11. The Central Government shall frame a Right to Work Insurance Policy to
cover whole or any part of such grants of allowances as may be payable under this
Act.
12. Every citizen who is provided work or allowance under this Act shall contribute
to the Fund for a prescribed period immediately after securing any work or job, at
such rate, as may be prescribed.
13. (1) The Central Government shall prepare an annual report on the
implementation of the provisions of this Act including working and administration of
the Fund in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall cause to be laid every annual report prepared
under sub-section (1) before each House of Parliament.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
 (a) the basis of categorisation of citizens under section 4;
 (b) the rate of allowance referred to in section 6 and different rates may be
prescribed on the basis of qualification and skills;
 (c) the necessary details relating to the Right to Work Insurance referred to in
section 11;
(d) the rate of contribution to the Fund under section 12;
(e) the form and content of the annual report mentioned in section 13;
(f) the procedure to regulate all payments under this Act; and
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the Government and every notification
issued under section 4, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made or
issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule or notification.
Right to Work
Insurance
Policy.
Contribution
to the Fund.
Annual report
by Central
Government.
5
10
15
Power to make
rules.
20
25
30
35
3

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Indian Constitution guarantees to every citizen the fundamental right to life. The
Supreme Court has observed that the right to life, in order to be meaningful, assumes
the availability of necessary means to a decent livelihood. On the other hand, the
problem of unemployment has assumed menacing proportions. Even the educated
citizens are rendered indigent. Lack of employment opportunity in the country is also
leading to brain drain and exodus of a large number of skilled and unskilled persons
abroad.
It is time that concerted efforts are made by the State to assure work to citizens.
The Bill seeks to provide to every citizen the legal right to work. Till such time as work
is provided to a citizen, he or she shall be entitled to an allowance.
The Bill also provides for the constitution of a Right to Work Fund by the Central
Government. The Fund shall receive grants made by the Central Government,
contributions at prescribed rate and for a specified period from citizens who secure
work after registration, etc. There is also a provision to promote Right to Work Insurance
to raise finances.
The Bill is realistic, in so far as it provides for a gradual introduction of the right
to work. To begin with, the Central Government may categorise citizens on the basis
of their qualification or any other basis and make citizens of such categories entitle to
the right to work, so, however, that gradually all the citizens secure the right to work
within a period of ten years from the commencement of the Act.
Hence this Bill.
     NEW DELHI;         ALOK KUMAR SUMAN
January 15,  2021.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for right to work to every eligible citizen. Clause 6
seeks to provide unemployment allowance not less than ten thousand per month to
every citizen who has attained the age of eighteen years and who, being unemployed,
is registered at an Employment Exchange, till such time the work is provided to such
a citizen. Clause 10 provides for the Constitution of a ‘Right to Work Fund’ for the
grant of allowance under this Act. However, at this it is difficult to make an exact
estimate of the recurring expenditure that will be involved on this count. The Bill, if
enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten hundred crore per annum
would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the right to work to every eligible citizen and for payment of
allowance till such time as appropriate work is provided to every such
citizen, constitution of Right to Work Fund, framing of Right to
Work Insurance Policy and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Alok Kumar Suman, M.P.)