AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

1 AAUG 7005

Bill No. 92 of 2005

THE FAMILY COURTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By

Suri C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.
A

| BILL

further to amend the Family Courts Act, 1984.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Family Courts (Amendment) Act, 2005.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
| 1984. 2. In section 7 of the Family Courts Act, 1984 (hereinafter referred to as the principal

5 Act), in sub-section (2), clause (b) shall be re-numbered as clause (c), and before clause (c)
as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely :—

“(b) jurisdiction over cases of maintenance under the Muslim Women (Protection
of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986 (25 of 1986);”.

| 3. In section 17 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be added, at the end,
10 namely:—

Short title
and com-
mencement.

Amendment
of section 7.

Amendment of
section 17.


a

“Provided that all orders and judgments passed under this section may also be 4
executed by respective Civil or Criminal Courts, as the case may be, having jurisdiction.”.

Amendment 4. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), the following words shall be
of section 18. added at the end, namely:—

“or by respective Civil or Criminal Courts, as the case may be, having 5
jurisdiction



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Family Courts Act, 1984 was enacted, with a view to promote conciliation in, and
secure speedy settlement of, disputes relating to marriage and family affairs and for matters
connected therewith. By the said enactment, almost all matrimonial disputes including cases
of maintenance, etc. were brought within the jurisdiction of the Family Courts.

The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986 was enacted to protect
the rights of Muslim women who have been divorced by, or have obtained divorce from, their
husbands. Though the said Act was enacted after the enactment of Family Courts Act, 1984,
the right to maintenance of divorced Muslim women was not brought under the jurisdiction
of the Family Courts. It might have been an inadvertent oversight. Due to this, the benefit of
speedy settlement of disputes as well as conciliation for settling matrimonial disputes, provided
in the Family Court Act is denied to Muslim women who have been divorced by or have
obtained divorce from their husbands.

On scrutiny of the working of the Family Courts it was found that the execution of
orders passed by the Family Court are being unnecessarily delayed. The persons have to
approach the respective Family Courts repeatedly for getting fruits of the order passed by
the Family Courts. Hence it is proposed that the Civil and Criminal Courts in the respective
locality are given jurisdiction to execute the orders of the Family Courts, so that there is
speedy delivery of justice and implementation of orders of the Family Courts.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence the Bill.

New DELHI; C.K. CHANDRAPPAN
July 12,2005 |



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE FAMILY Courts ACT, 1984
(Act No. 66 oF 1984)’

a « | कं er: *

CHAPTER II की

JURISDICTION
Jurisdiction. 7.(7) * के ok *
(०) * * oe

(2) Subject to the other provision of this Act, a Family Court shall also have and
exercise— |

(a) the jurisdiction exercised by a Magistrate of the first class under Chapter IX
(relating to order for maintenance of wife, children and parents) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974); and |

(5) such other jurisdiction as may be conferred on it by any other enactment.

He % * a % %

Judgement. 17. Judgement of a Family Court shall contain a concise statement of the case, the
point for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for such decision.

x & me b %* %
Execution of 18. (/)* * % *
decrees and | 2
orders. (3) A decree or order may be executed either by the Family Court which passed it or by

the other Family court or Ordinary civil court to which it is sent for execution.

* * ax * oe %



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Family Courts Act, 1984.

(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—1749LS (S-5)—28.07.2005.