5

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SaBHA

23 Nov 2ngy

Bio. 92 of 2001
THE CUSTODIAL CRIMES (PREVENTION, PROTECTION AND
COMPENSATION) BILL, 2001
By
Suri 5. M. Banatwata, M.P.
a
BIL

to provide for prevention of and protection against custodial crimes for compensation in
cases of custodial offences, for appointment of Vigilance Commissioner and District
Vigilance Commissioners for custodial offences and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (/) This Act may be called the Custodial Crimes (Prevention, Protection arid Short title and
Compensation) Act, 2001. ‘Commencement.

(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

i (a) “custodial crime” or “custodial offence” means an offence as understood by
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) caused against any-arrested person or a person in
custody when that person was in the custody of a police officer or a public servant
who has power under any law to arrest and detain a person in custody, by the police
officer or by the public servant concerned having the custody of that person during
that period;

(0) “custody” shall include-both legal and illegal arrest or custody;


Presumption
in custodial
offences
including
death or
injury.

Conditions
precedent to
arrest.

Notice to
appear.

(c) “District Vigilance Commissioner” means the District Vigilance Commissioner
for custodial offences appointed under sub-section (3) of section 17;

(व) “Government” means the Government of a State or the Government of a
Union territory, as the case may be;

(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Government under
Act;

(— “Vigilance Commissioner” mzans the Vigilance Commissioner for custodial
offences appointed under sub-section (1) of Section 17; and

(g) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860) or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in these codes.

3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or in any
other law in force, ina prosecution of a police officer or any public servant for a custodial
offence, including death or injury in custody, the Court may presume that the offence, death
or injury was caused by the police officer or the public servant having the custody of that
person during that period.

(2) The Court, in deciding whether or not to draw a presumption under sub-section
(J), shall have regard to all the relevant circumstances including, in particular, (a) the period
of custody, (b) any statement made by the victim as to how the injuries were received, being
a statement admissible in evidence, (c) the evidence of any medical practitioner who might
have examined the victim, and (d) evidence, if any, of any magistrate who might have recorded
the victim’s statement or attempted to record it.

4. A police officer arresting a person who bas been concerned in an offence under any
Jaw must be reasonably satisfied, and must record such satisfaction, relating to the following
matters namely:—

(a) that the complaint, information or suspicion is not only in respect of an
offence having been committed, but is also in respect of the complicity of the person
to be arrested in that offence;

(b) that the arrest is necessary in order to bring the movement of the person to
be arrested under restraint, so as to inspire a sence of security in the public or to
prevent the person to be arrested from evading the process of the law or to prevent
him from committing similar offence or to prevent him from interfering with evidence or
witnesses or from indulging in violent behaviour in general; and

(c) that the arrest, and not a service of notice of appearance under sub-section
(1) of section 5, is absolutely necessary.

5. (/) A police officer may instead of arresting the person concerned, issue to him a
notice of appearance requiring him to appear before the police officer issuing the notice at
such place as may be specified in the notice and to co-operate with the police officer in the
investigation of the offence mentioned in the notice.

(2) It shall be the duty of a person to whom notice has been issued under sub-section
(/) to comply with the terms of the notice and so long as such a person continues to do so,
he shall not be arrested in respect of the offence mentioned in the notice, unless for reasons
to be recorded, the police officer is of the opinion that he ought to be arrested.

(3) Where a person to whom notice has been issued under sub-section (1), fails, at any
time, to comply with the terms of the notice, it shall be lawful for the police officer to arrest
him for the offence mentioned in the notice, subject to such orders as may have been passed
in this behalf by a competent court.

10 2 of 1974,

1 of 1872.

20

25

30

35

40

45


6. Where a person is to be arrested, then, unless the circumstances indicate to the
contrary, his submission (0 custody on an 02) intimation of arrest shall be presumed, and
unless the circumstances otherwise require, the, police officer shall not actually touch the
Person of the one being arrested,

5 7. (1) Whenever a person is arrested by «police officer, intimation of the arrest shall be
immediately sent by the police officer (along with intimation about the place of detention) to
the following person, namely:

(@) A relative or friend or other Person known to the arrested person, as may be
nominated by the arrested person:

10 (0) failing (a) above, the local legal aid committee,

(2) Such intimation shall be given by telephone or telegram or by any other method as
may be convenient and as may convey the intimation fast enough and the fact that such
intimation has been sent shall be recorded by the police office under the signature of the
arrested person.

20 (4) The custody memo mentioned in sub-section (3) shall contain the following
Particulars: —

(4) name of the person arrested and father’s name or husband's name;
(b) address of the Person arrested;
(c) date, time and place of arrest;

25 (4) offence for which the arrest has been made;

(€) property, if any, recovered from the person arrested and taken into charge at
the time of tie arrest; and

Many other relevant particular,

8. The person arrested shall have the rizht to have the Presence and advice of a legal
30 practitioner during inter: gation and his legal practitioner shall be allowed to remain present
and to advise him. डर

2. A police officer effecting an arrest shall informn the person arrested as soon as he is
brought tothe police station, ofthe rights of the arrested person under sections 7 and 8 and
shall make an entry in the police diary about the following facts:

35 (छ the name of the person who Was informed of the arrest;

(6) the fact that the Person arrested has been informed of his rights under
sections 7 and 8;

(© the name of the legal practitioner of the person arrested; and

(6 the fact that a custody memo has been prepared as required by sub-sections
40 (3) and (4) of section 7, :

10. When an arrested person is produced before a Magistrate, the Magistrate shall
satisfy himself that the provisions of sections 4,5,6.7,8 and 9 of sub-sections (1) and (2) of
section 11 have been Gly complied with and shall further inform the arrested person of his

Fef1974. right tomedical examination under section 54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Presumption
as to
submission to
custody,

Right to
intimation of
arrest to
relative,
friend or
other person,
and custody
‘memorandum.

Right to
Legal

Practitioner
during
interrogation,

Record in
Police diary
क to rights of
the arrested
person,

Magistrates
satisfaction as
to compli-
ance with
certain
sections.


Provisions as
to male child
and female.

Medical
examination
of the
arrested
person or the
person in
custody.

11. (1) Except in unavoidable circumstances, no male child below the age of fifteen
years or a female shall be arrested after sunset and before sunrise, and where such
unavoidable circumstances exist, the police officer making the arrest shall, by making a
written report, obtain the prior permission of the immediate superior officer not below the
rank of an inspector for effecting such arrest. if the case is one of extreme urgency, he shall,
after making the arrest. forthwith report the matter in writing to his such immediate superior
officer, with the reason for arrest and the reaun for not taking prior permission as aforesaid
and shall also make a similar report to the Magistrate within whose jurisdiction the arrest
has been made.

(2) Where a female is to be arrested, then, unless the circumstances otherwise require
and unless the police officer arresting is a female, the police officer shall not actually touch
the person of the woman for making the arrest.

Explanation: The provisions of sub-section (2) are in addition to the provisions of
section 6.

(3) A female in custody shall be escorted by the Matron or Female Warden or Female
Police Officer, if required to leave the female enclosure and such matron or female warden or
female police officer shall remain with the female who is in custody or in prison till her return
to the enclosure or release from the custody or the jail.

(4A female relative of the female in custody shall be allowed to accompany the female
who is in custody during her transit from one enclosure to another or for the purpose of
being taken to the court or for investigation,

(5) A male child of less then fifteen years of age in custody shall be allowed to be
accompanied by his relative during his transit from one enclosure to another or for the
purpose of being taken io the court or for investigation.

12. (J) Where under section 54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or otherwise,
a magistrate directs the examination of the body of an arrested person or a person under
custody, the said examination shall be conducted by a Registered Medical Practitioner or
through a Government Hospital available, as the Magistrate may, direct.

(2) A female arrested or in custody shall be examined by and under the supervision of
only a lady medical practitioner as the magistrate may direct and the examination shall be
conducted with strict regard to decency.

(2) The medical practitioner to whom an arrested person or a person in custody is
forwarded under sub-section (/) or (2), shall without delay examine him/her and prepare a
record and specifically record the following details about the person examined:—

(J) the name and address of the person examined and of the person by whom he/
she was brought:

(2) the age of the person;

(3) the injury external and internal, if any, on the person;

(4) general imental condition of the person;

(5) other material particulars and any other relevant details; and
(6) where the person is a womaa, Whether or not she is pregnant.

(4) The report of the medical practitioner shall precisely state the reasons for any
conclusion arrived at by the medical practitioner and the exact time of commencement and
completion of the medical examination.

(5) The medical practitioner shall without delay forward his report to the Magistrate
who had directed the examination of the body.

20

25

30

35

40

45

2 of 1974


of 1974,

20

25

30

35

40

45

(6) The person examined shall be entitled to a copy free of cost of the report of the
medical practitioner under this section as soon after the Magistrate received the report under
sub-section (5).

13. (/) Every information relating to the commission of a custodial crime or offence if
given orally to an officer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or
under his direction and be read over to the informant and every such information whether
given in writing or reduced to writing as aforesaid shall be signed by the person giving it,
and the substance thereof shall be entered in book to be kept by such officer in such form as,
may be prescribed in this behalf,

(2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub-section (J)shall be given forthwith,
free of cost, to the informant and shall also be forwarded immediately to the Vigilance
Commissioner or the District Vigilance Commissioner as the case may be.

(3) Any person (including Legal Aid Ceatre or Non-Governmental Organisation or: any
friend or relative) aggiicved by a refusal on the Part of an officer in charge of a police station
to record the information referred to in sub-section (/) may file a petition giving the substance
of such information—

(a) before the Chief Judicial Magistrate in case of custodial offences other than
those involving death of the victim, or

(6) before the Sessions Judge in case of a custodial offence involving death,

(4) The person filing a petition under sub-section (3) shall also forward a copy of the
Petition to the Vigilance Commissioner or the District Vigilance Commissioner, as the case
may be.

(5) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Sessions Judge, as the case may be, if satisfied
on a preliminary enquiry that there is a prima facie case may himself hold enquiry into the
complaint made under sub-section (3) or direct other Judicial Magistrate or Additional
Sessions Judge, as the case may be to hold enquiry and direct the ministerial officer of the
Court to make a complaint to the Competent Court in respect of offence that may appear to
have been committed.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 190 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, the Competent Court shall on acomplaint made under sub-section (5) take
cognizance of the offence and try the same.

(7) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Sessions Judge may obtain the assistance of
the Vigilance Commissioner or the District Vigilance Commissioner or any public servant or
authority as he may deem fit in holding the enquiry under sub-section (5).

14, (J) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 where the court convicts a public servant of a custodial offence including an offence
resulting in death or bodily injury, being an offence constituted by an act of such public
servant against a person in his custody, the provisions of this section shall apply.

(2) The Court, when passing judgement in any case to which this section applies,
shall order that the Governmentiin connection with the affairs of which such public servant
was employed at the time when such act was committed, shall beliable jointly and severally
with such public servant to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in
the order,

(3) An order for payment of compensation under this section may also be made by an
appellate court or by the High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of
revision.

(4) While rewarding compensation in day subsequent suit relating to the same matter,
the civil court shall take into account any sum paid or recovered as compensation under this
section,

Information
of custodial
crimes and
procedure
thereafter.

‘Compensa-
tion in
custodial
offence.


(5) The amount awarded under this section shall not be less than:
(a) rupees twenty five thousand in case of bodily injury, not resulting in 0
(b) rupees two lakh, in case of death.

(6) In fixing the amount of compensation under this section, the court shall, subj
the provisions of sub-section (5), take into account all relevant circumstances, including
(but not necessarily limited to) the following:

(a) the type und severity of the injury suffered by the victim;

(6) the mental anguish suffered by the victim;

(c) the expenditure incurred or likely to be incurred on the treatment and
rehabilitation of the victim;

(d) the actual and projected earning capacity of the victim and the impact of
loss on the persons entitled to compensation and other members of the family;
(०) the extent, if any, to which the victim himself contributed to the injury;
(@ the expenses incurred in the prosecution of the case.
(7) In case of death or permanent disablement of the victim, the court may take

(8) Pending finai determination of the proceeding, the Court may award, by way in —
interim relief, such compensation as it may think proper in the circumstances case |
any stage of the case, even before judgenv:nt of conviction is passed.

(9) The Government may recover any amount paid by it as compensation
section wholly or parily as it may think proper, from the delinquent public servant,

No previous 15. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 197 of the Code of Crimin
sanction of Procedure, 1973, no previous sanction of the Central or State Government shall be ne

Government for prosecution of a police officer or a public servant accused of any custodial
aitines alleged to have been committed by him.

prosecutions.

Punishment

16. Whoever. being a police officer or a public servant —

for knowingh
fate (a) knowingly disobeys any direction of any law prohibiting him from re
any direction attendance at any place of any person for the purpose of investigation into
eS offence or other matter,
(6) knowingly disobeys any other direction of the law regulating the manner.
which he shall conduct any investigation or arrest, to the prejudice of any ०
shall be punished with imprisonment fora term which may extend to one year or
fine or with both.
Vigilance 17. (1) Every State Government and the Government of a Union Territory

Commissioner notification in the official Gazette, appoint a person to be known as the Vigil
(id District Commissioner for Custodial Offences.

Commissioner. (2) The functions and powers of the Vigilance Commissioner shall be to—

(a) exercise superintendence over all investigations and prosecutions with:
to custodial offences;

(b) give directions to the concerned officers in all matters relating to investig
of and prosecution for custodial offences;

(c) review the progress of investigations and prosecution with respect to


20

25

30

35

40

45

(@) tender advice to the Government on all matters relating to custodial offences;

(0) call for information from any concerned officer or authority about custodial
offences and about action taken on his recommendation or advice;

(0 collect or cause to be collected such statistics or data and other information
as may be necessary for appropriate and effective discharge of the functions of the
Commission;

(g) hold any inquiry pursuant to sub-section (7) of section 13; and

(h) discharge any other function as may be prescribed.

(3) The Government may, in consultation with the Vigilance Commissioner, appoint,
by notification in the Official Gazette, a District Vigilance Commissioner for each District.

The government may authorise a District Vigilance Commissioner to have jurisdiction
over another district aiso for which no separate District Vigilance Commissioner has been
appointed.

(5) A District Vigilance Commissioner shall have such powers and perform such function
as may be entrusted to him by the Vigilance Commissioner appointed under sub-section (0)
and shall discharge his duties subject to his directions.

(6) The qualification for appointment as Vigilance Conumissioner or District Vigilance
Comunissioner and their terms and conditions of service shall be such as may be preseribed,

(7) The Government may, in consultation. with Vigilance: ‘Commissioner, make rules
with respect to strength of the staff of the Vigilance Commissioner or District Vigilance
Commissioners and their conditions of service.

(8) The Government shall in making any rules or regulations governing matters relating
to euistodial offences, consult its Vigilance Commissioner,

(5) All directions relating to recording and investigations of and prosecution for,
custodial offences given by the Vigilance Commissioner or the District Vigilance Commissione,
shall be binding upon the officer concerned,

(10) The Vigilance Commissioner shall present annually a consolidated report on his
functioning and on the administration of this Act to the Government, and the Government
shall cause a copy thereof, together with its memorandum, to be laid before each House of
the State Legislature within four months from the date of the receipt of the Teport by the
Government or till the Legislature meets, next, whichever is later.

18. (7) The State or the Union Territory Government, as the case may be, may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions
of the Act,

(2) In particular, and without Prejudice to the generality of the foregoing process, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely —

(a) the form of the register as to information in respect of custodial crimes or
offences maintained under section 13;

(b) the qualifications for appointment as Vigilance Commissioner or District
Vigilance Commissioner and their terms and conditions of service under sub-section
(6) of section 17;

(c) the strength of the staff and their conditions of service under sub-section
(7) of section 17:

(4) any other power or functicn of the Vigilance Commissioner to be prescribed
under clause (A) of sub-section (2) of section 17,

Power to
make rules,


Rules to be
laid before
Legislature.

19, Every rule made by the Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be
after it is issued or made, before each House of the Legislature, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
‘successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that ihe rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only.
in such moditied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Incidents of custodial crimes are a matier of serious concern and a disturbing factor in
the society. They reflect ‘betrayal of custodial wust by a public servant against the detenceless
Citizen.” As the Supreme Court has observed in Kishore Singh V. State of Rajasthan (AIR 1982
$0624)--

“nothing is more cowardly and unconscionable than a Person in police custody being
beaten up, and nothing inflicts a deeper wound on our Constitutional rights."

The constitutional and statutory framework in India contains a number of Provisions
safeguarding the liberty and the life of an individual. Nevertheless, there is a pressing need
10 supplement these sufeguards to deal effectively with Custodial offences which represent
an onslaught on the law, human dignity and human right of the defenceless and vulnerables.
There are important judicial pronounceme: ison the subject. In addition the Law Commission,
the National Police Commission, the National Human Rights Commission, etc. have all made
several recommendations.

Provisions against custodial crimes require amendments to a number of central Acts
like the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 and others. Instead of these scattered amendments, itis, however, desirable
to have a comprehensive legislation on the Subject for the convenience of those in custody,
their relatives, the concerned o als and the human rights organizations,

The Bill seeks to provide for prevention of and Protection against custodial crimes, for
compensation in case of custodial offences, for appointment of Vigilance Commissioners
and District Vigilance Commissioners, and for Matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto,

New Deut; G.M. BANATWALLA
August 8, 2001.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Insection 14, Sub-section (2) provides for payment of compensation by Government/
public servants concerned to the victims of custodial offence. In section 17, Sub-section (1)
provides for appointment of Vigilance: Commissioner for custodial offences and Sub-section
(3) provides for District Vigilance Commissioners, sub-section (6) authorises the Government
of the State or the Union territory to determine their terms and conditions of services. Sub-
section (7) of the said section 17 provides for the staff of the Vigilance Commissioners and
the District Vigilance Commissioners. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of respective state, as the
case may be,

A rough estimate of non-recurring expenditure to every State is about rupees fifteen
lakh to set up the office of the Vigilance Commissioner and the District Vigilance
Commissioners. The recurring expenditure towards pay and allowances by each State is
estimated to be approximately rupees fifty lakh per annum.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Sub-section (/) of section 13 of the Bill authorises the Government of the State or the
Union territory, as the case may be, to prescribe the form of the register as to information in
respect of custodial offences.

2. Sub-section (6) of section 17 empowers the concerned Government to prescribe by
rules made under the Act, the qualifications for appointment as Vigilance Commissioner or
District Vigilance Commissioners and to fix their terms and conditions of service.

3. Sub-section (7) of section 17 lays down that the strength of the staff for the Vigilance
Commissioner and the District Vigilance Commissioners and their conditions of service be
prescribed by the Government concerned.

4. Section 18 of the Bill empowers the State or the Union territory Government to make
tules, by notification in the official Gazette, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of
the Bill. In particular, such rules may provide for all or any of the matters mentioned in
paragraphs | and 2 above.

5. Section 19 provides that rules made under the Bill are required to be laid before the
Legislature.

6. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are generally matters of procedure
or administrative details and it is not practicable to make detailed provisions for them in the
Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BLL

to provide for prevention of and protection against custodial crimes for compensation in
cases of custodial offences for appointment of Vigilance Commissioner and District
Vigilance Commissioners for custodial offences and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri 6.06. Banatwalla, M.P.)