THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2009
By
SHRI INDER SINGH NAMDHARI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called  the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After article 371-I of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"371J. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3) of article 170 or in
any other law for the time being in force, until the readjustment under article 170 takes
effect on the basis of the first census taken after the year 2026, the total number of
seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Jharkhand shall consist of not less
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  92 of 2009
Insertion of
new article
371J.
Special
provisions
with respect to
the State of
Jharkhand.
5
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
than one hundred and fifty members chosen by direct election from territorial
constituencies in that State.
(2) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Jharkhand
and the division of the State into territorial constituencies under clause ( 1) shall be
readjusted by such authority and in such manner as the Parliament may, by law,
determine:
Provided that such divison of the State of Jharkhand into territorial constituencies
shall take effect from such date as the President may, by order, specify and until such
divison of territorial constituencies takes effect, any election to the Legislative Assembly
of the State of Jharkhand may be held on the basis of territorial constituencies existing
before such division.".
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Jharkhand was created in the year 2000 by carving out certain territories
from the State of Bihar after a long and peaceful agitation by the people of that State. At the
time of creation of the new State, the Legislative Assembly of the State of Bihar had three
hundred and twenty-four members. Consequent to the formation of the State of Jharkhand,
the new State Legislative Assembly was allotted eighty-one seats. The State of Bihar also
had a Second Chamber, that is, the Legislative Council. However, at the time of creation of
new State, the State of Jharkhand was not compensated for the loss of Council seats. It
would have been appropriate if the number of seats in the new Legislative Assembly were
increased at that time itself. Similar exercise was undertaken at the time of creation of
Uttarakhand by carving out territories from the State of Uttar Pradesh. In lieu of seats of the
Legislative Council, the new State Assembly was given additional seats, even though the
population of  Uttarakhand is far less than that of Jharkhand.
Moreover, the population of Jharkhand is approximately three crores. Therefore, it
would only be fair to increase the number of seats in Legislative Assembly, as it would enable
the Legislators to perform their duties in their constituencies in a more satisfactory manner.
Even though the number of constituencies has been frozen till the year 2026 by the
Constitution, the State of Jharkhand may be made an exception since it is a very important
State and is the source of mineral wealth in the country. The development of the State is of
paramount importance. If this Constitution (Amendment) Bill is enacted, it will pave the way
for the development of the State and the strengthening of its democratic institutions.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; INDER SINGH NAMDHARI
July 31, 2009.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Inder Singh Namdhari, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4201LS(S5)—05-11-2009.