As introduced in Lok Sabha
Short title and 
commencement.
Bill No. 92 of 2024
THE NATIONAL YOUTH COMMISSION BILL, 2024
By
Smt. Smita Uday Wagh, M.P.
A
BILL
to constitute a Youth Commission for the purpose of evolving and implementing programmes 
for educating and empowering the youth and to function as protector of the rights of  
youth and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Youth Commission Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Commission; 
(b) “Commission” means the National Youth Commission constituted under 
section 3; 
Definitions.
5

2
(c) “member” means a member of the Commission; 
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(e) “youth” means a person who has attained eighteen years of age but has not 
completed thirty five years of age. 
CHAPTER II
Constitution of the Commission
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the commencement 
of this Act, by notification in the Gazette, constitute a Commission to be known as the 
National Youth Commission to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the 
functions assigned to it under this Act. 
(2) The Commission shall consist of,— 
(a) a Chairperson; and 
(b) such number of members not more than ten, out of which one shall be a 
woman, one each shall be a person belonging to the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled 
Tribe and one shall be a qualified legal practitioner,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Chairperson and the members of the Commission shall be youth. 
(4) The Central Government shall appoint a person who holds, or has held, a 
post not below the rank of an Additional Secretary to the Central Government as the 
Secretary of the Commission. 
(5) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at New Delhi. 
4. (1) The Chairperson and members of the Commission shall hold office for a period 
of three years from the date on which they assume office: 
Provided that the Chairperson shall continue to hold such office until his successor 
is appointed in accordance, with the provisions of section 3 and assumes office, or for six 
months, whichever is earlier. 
(2) The Chairperson or member may, at any time, by writing under his hand addressed 
to the Central Government, resign from his office. 
(3) A casual vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or member, caused by reason of 
death, removal or resignation or otherwise, shall be filled by fresh appointment and the 
person so appointed shall hold office for the remaining period of the term of the person in 
whose place he is appointed. 
(4) The Central Government may, by order, remove the Chairperson or any member 
from his office if he,— 
(a) is adjudged as an insolvent; or 
(b) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent Court; or 
Constitution of 
the Commission.
Term of office 
and conditions 
of service of the 
Chairperson and 
the members.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30

3
(d) without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, is absent from three 
consecutive meetings of the Commission; or 
(e) is in the opinion of the Government, abused his official position so as to render 
his continuance in office prejudicial to the interest of the youth or to the public interest: 
Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause unless he has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(5) Where the Chairperson or a member cease to be a youth he shall cease to hold the 
office. 
(6) The Chairperson or a member shall not be eligible to hold office for more than two 
terms. 
(7) The general superintendence, direction and administration of the day-to-day affairs 
of the Commission shall vest in the Chairperson and he shall be assisted by the other 
members. 
(8) The Chairperson shall be a full-time officer having the rank of Secretary to 
the Central Government and shall be paid with such salary and allowances, as may be 
prescribed. 
(9) The members shall be paid with such allowances or sitting fees, as may be 
prescribed, for attending the meetings of the Commission. 
5. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with such officers 
and other employees as may be required for the proper functioning of the Commission. 
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service 
of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the Commission shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 
6. The salary and allowances payable to the Chairperson and the allowances or 
sitting fees payable to the members and the administrative expenses including the 
salary, allowances and pension payable to the officers and other employees referred to 
in section 5 shall be paid out of the grants referred to in sub-section (1) of section 12. 
7. No act or proceedings of the Commission shall be invalid on the ground merely of the 
existence of any vacancy in the Commission or any defect in its constitution. 
8. (1) The Commission shall meet at such places and at such time as the Chairperson 
may think fit and the Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 
(2) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the signature 
of the Chairperson or any other member authorised by the Commission in this behalf and 
other instruments executed by the Commission shall be authenticated by the signature of 
the Secretary or any other officer of the Commission authorised by the Chairperson in this 
behalf. 
(3) The Commission may, for the purpose of transacting any business before it or for 
considering any special issue, invite persons not exceeding two, having specialized knowledge 
in the matter, but they shall have no right to vote in the meetings of the Commission. 
CHAPTER III
Powers and Functions of the Commission
9. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of the Commission 
to guide, assist, promote and develop, for the welfare of the youth and to perform such 
functions as the Central Government may, from time to time, assign to it. 
Staff of the 
Commission.
Salary, 
allowances and 
administrative 
expenses to 
be paid out of 
grants.
Vacancies etc. 
not to invalidate 
the proceedings 
of the 
Commission.
Meetings of the 
Commission.
Functions of the 
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
35
40
30

4
(2) The Commission may, in furtherance of its object, perform the following functions, 
namely:— 
(a) co-ordinate the Government departments for securing better education and 
employment opportunities to youth;
(b) function as a protector of youth affairs of the country;
(c) include and educate the dignity of labour among the youth;
(d) collect sector-wise data of youth of the country according to age, education, 
field, economical condition to formulate policy for youth;
(e) undertake promotional and educational research so as to suggest the  
Central Government better ways of ensuring employment opportunities to the youth;
(f) monitor occupational hazards faced by the youth in the unorganized sector;
(g) formulation of policies and programmes according to clustered data with the 
help of experts;
(h) formation of Youth Hubs at different levels;
(i) engagement and coordination for implementing policies with Universities, 
College, Institutes, Government and non-Governmental organizations at State, national 
and international level, Nehru Yuva Kendra Sanghathan, National Service Scheme, 
National Cadet Corps, Model Career Centre (MCC), National Green Corps (NGC) and 
United Nations;
(j) establish and developed Youth Development Institute in each districts;
(k) coordination with Youth Affairs and Sports ministries at National and State 
level;
(l) implementing schemes and programmes by Government and non-Governmental 
organizations for youth at different levels;
(m) monitoring sector-wise training of youth at different levels;
(n) formulation of different programmes with the help of all engaged systems;
(o) monitoring implementation of all the programmes;
(p) Union Public Service Commission / Maharashtra Public Service Commission 
competitive exam Training Center;
(q) formation of Local Youth Organizations working under supervision of National 
Youth Commission;
(r) Anti-Drug Campaign;
(s) establishing district level health-care centers specifically dealing in counselling 
into depression and anxiety;
5
10
15
20
25
30

5
(t) conducting Mission – Ek Ghar Ek Rojgar; and
(u) vouch for dialogue between the youth and various educational institutes, 
Universities, non-Governmental organisations, International Forums for policy 
recommendations.
10. (1) The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out its functions, utilize the 
services of,— 
(a) any officer of the Central Government with prior permission of the  
Central Government; or 
(b) any officer of the Central Government-owned Corporations or of the local 
Authorities with the consent of such Corporation or local Authority and with the 
concurrence of the Central Government. 
(2) The Commission shall, while performing its functions under section 9, have all the 
powers of a Civil Court trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of 
the following matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on 
oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; 
(e) appointing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and 
(f) for any other matter, as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Commission shall, while conducting the enquiry under section 9, afford 
opportunity to all parties to present their views by themselves or through authorised 
representative. 
(4) The findings of the Commission on any enquiry conducted under this Act shall be 
communicated to the Central Government with its recommendation for appropriate action 
or relief to the parties to the dispute. 
11. The Commission shall, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, and 
subject to such terms and conditions as may be required by the Central Government in this 
matter, receive money from any organization or person by way of donation, contribution or 
in any other name, for creating endowments and for providing prizes to encourage the youth 
in various literary, cultural and sports activities. 
CHAPTER IV
Finance, Accounts and Audit
12. ( 1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide to the Commission by way of grant, such 
sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the 
purpose of this Act. 
Powers of the 
Commission.
5 of 1908
Donations, 
contributions 
etc. to the 
Commission.
Grants by the 
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30

6
(2) The Commission shall spend such sums out of the grants as it may deem fit for 
performing the functions under this Act and such sums shall be treated as expenditure 
payable out of the grants referred to in sub-section (1). 
13. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner as may be prescribed in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General. 
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General and any expenditure incurred in respect of such audit shall be paid by the 
Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor General and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have the same rights and 
privileges as usually the Comptroller and Auditor General has in connection with the audit 
of Government accounts and, in particular shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any 
office of the Commission. 
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor 
General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report 
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Government by the Commission and the  
Central Government shall, within a period of six months from the date of its receipt, cause 
the report to be laid before the Parliament. 
14. (1) The Commission shall, as soon as may be, after the end of each financial year, 
submit to the Central Government an annual report giving a full account of the activities and 
programmes undertaken during the previous financial year, together with a status statement 
of the youth, in such form and on such date, as may be prescribed. 
(2) A copy of the report received under sub-section (1) shall be laid before the Parliament 
within six months after it is received by the Government. 
CHAPTER V
Miscellaneous
15. No suit, or prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Commission, 
the Chairperson or any member or Secretary or any officer or any other employee of the 
Commission acting under the direction of the Commission in respect of anything which is 
done or purported to be done in good faith under this Act. 
16. The Chairperson, members, Secretary, officers and employees of the Commission shall 
be deemed to be public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
17. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force. 
18. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Government may, by order published in the Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient, for removing 
the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be issued after the expiry of a period of two years from 
the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid 
before the Parliament. 
Accounts and 
Audit.
Annual report of 
the Commission.
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith.
Chairperson, 
members, 
Secretary and 
officers of the 
Commission 
to be public 
servant.
Application of 
other laws not 
barred.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
35
40
30
45 of 1860

7
19. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, 
the Chairperson, allowances and sitting fees payable to the members; 
(b) allowances and other benefits payable to other officers engaged for duties under 
clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) of section 10; 
(c) the summoning and holding of the meetings of the Commission and the quorum 
for the meeting; 
(d) the powers and functions of the Secretary of the Commission; 
 (e) the form of annual statement of accounts to be maintained; 
(f) the form of annual report to be prepared; and 
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before the Parliament while it is in session for a total period of fourteen days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, the Parliament makes 
any modification in the rule or decides that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule. 
Power to make 
rules
5
10
15
20

8
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country has one of the largest youth population in the world. According to census 
data we have a population of forty-two crores (approx.) in the age group of fifteen to thirty-
five years out which male youth population is 21.76 crores and female youth population is 
20.43 crores (approx). 
The purpose of bringing this Bill is to have a National Youth Commission for the purpose 
of evolving and implementing programmes for educating and empowering the youth. The 
National Youth Commission can work on motto of “Atmavat Manyet Jagat” which means 
“Consider World Like your own self”.
With the vision of inculcation of values of patriotism, nationalism among youth and 
strive for world peace, promotion and protection of physical, moral, spiritual and intellectual 
well-being of the youth as well as developing innovative and scientific attitude among the 
youth with traditional value system, the need for setting of a National Youth Commission 
has been felt for a long time. 
 The aim of the constitution of National Youth Commission is to mobilize and organize 
dynamic youth of nation for resolution of problems of community and to undertake issues 
pertaining to their constructive development and hence to utilize this power for overall 
sustainable development of nation. 
In view of the above, our Nation needs an institutional mechanism with the objectives to 
formulate skilled and flourished youths especially from rural and tribal areas, to devise young 
generation for their perennial and overall development, to mould energetic young human 
resources for sustainable development of the community, to manoeuvre competent youths 
in policy making, involvement in different welfare activities of Government for national 
building and also to make available platform on national level as well as globalisation of 
traditional Indian eco friendly skill. 
World’s superpowers are struggling for the young workforce whereas our country is the 
youngest country in the world and in India there is wide human resources which is youth. 
But the fact is these human resources are not utilized in proper way and grievously youth of 
our nation has neutrality about participation in Government initiatives mainly in supporting 
good governance and policy making. Youth are the nation builders and they have capacity 
to transform the face of the nation.
In order to organize the youth in proper way with achieving the both goals of their 
development and nation building, it demands a powerful focused system comprehend all the 
youth development activities under common aegis.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                                                      SMITA UDAY WAGH 
July 9, 2024.

9
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National Youth Commission. 
Clause 5 provides for appointment of Officers and employees of the Commission. Clause 
6 provides for payment of salaries, allowances and administrative expenses in respect 
of the National Youth Commission. Clause 12 provides for the payment of grants by the  
Central Government to the Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure 
of about rupees five crore may be incurred per annum.
A non-recurring annual expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be incurred.

10
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to constitute a Youth Commission for the purpose of evolving and implementing programmes 
for educating and empowering the youth and to function as protector of the rights of  
youth and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Smt. Smita Uday Wagh, M.P .) 