Bill No. 92 of  2020
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR CREATION OF
SMALL STATES BILL, 2020
By
SHRI MALOOK NAGAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to constitute the National Commission to explore possibilities and prepare blueprints
for creation of small States; make recommendations thereto to the
Central Government and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Creation of Small States
Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions.
5
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ''Commission'' means the National Commission for Creation of Small States
constituted under section 3; and
(b) ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Commission to be known as the National Commission for Creation of Small States for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The headquarters of the Commission shall  be at Bijnor in the State of
Uttar Pradesh.
(3) The Commission shall consists of—
(a) ten members to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(b) two members each from the House of the People and the Council of States,
representing the States of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and other States having
scope for creation of new States, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the
respective Houses; and
(c) one member  each from the renowned institutions associated with the
movement or demand of small States for the last twenty years, to be nominated by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The members of the Commission shall elect one of the members from amongst
themselves to act as the Chairperson of the Commission.
(5) The term of the Commission shall be three years:
Provided that the Central Government may, on the expiry of term of three years, extend
the term of the Commission till such time as it may deem necessary, from time to time;
(6) The Commission shall meet at least once in every two months.
(7) The Central Government shall provide such number of Officers and staff to the
Commission as it deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(8) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, members, Officers and staff of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(9) The Chairperson and members of the Commission shall not be deemed to be holding
the office of profit under any law for the time being in force.
4. The Commission shall—
(a) explore the possibilities of creation of small States in the country;
(b) prepare the blueprint of demands for small States and examine such demands
in detail and forward reports thereon to the Central Government;
(c) recommend the creation of small States to the Central Government; and
(d) recommend to the Central Government for inclusion of language, being spoken
in small States to be created, in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the Commission for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Constitution of
the National
Commission
for Creation of
Small States.
Functions
of the
Commission.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Power to
make rules.
10
15
20
30
35
25
40

3
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At the time of independence, there were big States in the country but after independence
many small States were formed which together strengthened their cultural identities alongwith
making socio-economic progress. One such example is the State of Gujarat which has not
only progressed economically but also established its cultural identity not only in India but
also abroad after it came into existence on bifurcation of erstwhile Bombay province. Similarly,
the States of Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Goa, Uttarakhand, Jharkhand, Andhra
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Telangana were also formed after independence and statistics
show that they have made reasonable progress. But, the demand for new States is still on
and the movements in this regard are also taking place. The architect of the Constitution
Baba Saheb Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar had also envisaged the concept of the smaller States for
overall development  in the year 1955. He had proposed to trifurcate the State of Uttar
Pradesh on administrative basis in Eastern, Western and Central Uttar Pradesh. On
21 November, 2011 the then Chief Minister of U.P. Kumari Mayawati Ji had sent the proposal
of division of the State of Uttar Pradesh in four parts to then Central Government after
passing it in Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly  but the division of the State of Uttar
Pradesh is still pending because of the apathy of Central Government. According to population
and its size, the State of Uttar Pradesh is such a big State that it equates the fifth largest
country of the world. It is one of the major reasons that even after so many years of
independence, the State of Uttar Pradesh is backward in comparison to other States in the
matter of law and order, education, health and development. The population density of the
State of Uttar Pradesh has risen to such a level that without dividing it into four parts its
development does not seem to be possible.
The capital city Lucknow, is situated at a distance of seven hundred kilometers from
many districts of western Uttar Pradesh. The headquarters of all departments of the State are
situated in Lucknow and Allahabad (Prayagraj). There are no headquarters of any department
in western Uttar Pradesh. The High Court of Allahabad (Prayagraj) of the State is also located
at a distance of eight hundred and fifty km from many districts of the western Uttar Pradesh.
The citizens of this area are required to spend more time and money to reach High Court for
pursuing their cases. For the efficient governance and development, this big State is required
to be divided at least into four parts.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to constitute a Commission to explore the possibilities,
blue prints and recommend to the Central Government to divide the State of Uttar Pradesh to
create four smaller States and also to divide other big States to create smaller States in order
to fulfil the long pending demand of the people of the State and overall development of
backward regions of the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MALOOK NAGAR
February  27, 2020.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of National Commission for Creation of
Small States. Clause 5 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees
one hundred crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to constitute the National Commission to explore possibilities and prepare blueprints for
creation of small States; make recommendations thereto to the Central Government
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Malook Nagar, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5828LS(S3)—13-03-2020.