54 of 1141. 
As INTRODUCED IN 1.oJ[ S.u.A Off 
8m No. 93 of 1976 
THE ELECTRICITY (SUPPLY) AMENDMENT BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Electricity (Supply) Amendment Short 
Act, 1976. title 
and Ctml-
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 8th day of mence-
October, 1976. ment. 
10 
%. In section 1 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (hereinafter \.. Amend-referred to as the principal Act), for su~section (3), the follOwing sub- ment of 
section shall be substituted, namely:- .ection L 
"(3) This section and sections 2, 3, 4, 4A, 4B, 4C, 15A, 18A, 26A, 
28 to 34 (both inclusive), sub-section (2) of section 39, section 42, 
sub-section (3) of section 43 and sections 57, 57A, 57B, 58, 75A, 76, 
77, 77A, 77B, 77C, 82 and 83 and the provisions of the Sixth and 
Seventh Schedules shall come into force at once.", 

~ . 
... tol 
..akaa2. 
3. In section 2 of 'the principal Act,-
(a) after clause (4). the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(4A) "Generating Company" means a company formed-
(0.) either by the Central Government or by any State S 
Goverrunent; OT 
(b) jointly by the Central Government and one or more 
State Governments or by two or more State Governments, 
and registered under the Companies Act, 1956;'; 1 of lUI. 
(b) in clause (5),- 10 
(i) after the words "including any buUding and plant", the 
brackets and words "(with step-up transformer, switchgear, cables 
or other appurtenant equipment, if any)" shall be inserted; 
(ii) the words "for transforming, converting or distributing 
electricity" shall be omitted; IS 
(c) in clause (6), for the words and figures "but, the provisions of 
section 26 of this Act notwithstanding, does not include the Board", 
the words, figures and letter "but, the provisions of section 26 or 26A 
of this Act notwithstanding, does not include the Board or a Generat-
ing Company" shall be substituted; ao 
(d) after clause (8), the following clause shall be inIerted, 
IWIlely:-
• (8A) "power system" means a system. under the control· ot 
the Government or any Board or Generating Company or other 
agency and having one or more- 3S 
(i) generating stations; or 
(ii) main transmission lines and su~stations; or 
(iii) generating stations and main trammtlilloD lbIea and 
su~stations;'; 
(e) in clause (9), for the warda and figures "made Under section 30 
78", the words IImade under this Act" shall be substituted; 
.(f) after clause (11), the following clauses shall be inIerted, 
namely:-
'(llA) "sub-station" means a station for transforming or con-
verting electricity for the transmiSSion or distribution thereof 3$ 
and includes transformers, convertors, switchgear, capacitors, 
synchronous condensors, structures, cables and other appurtenant 
equipments and any buildings used for that purpose and the IIlte 
thereof, a site intended to be used for any such purpose and any 
buildings used for housing the staff of the su~stat1on: 40 
(11B) "tie-line" means a line for the transfer Of electricity 
between two power systems together with SWitehgear and ether 
works necessary to, and used for, the control of such Uae;'; 

..;; 
t 
• 
10 
30 
35· 
45 
(9) in clause (13), after the words "the Board", the wol'da " ... 
Generating Company" shall be inserted. 
to laMCtion 3 of the principal Act,-
(1) in sub-section (1),-
(a) in clause (i), for the words "and particularly.to __ 
Jrdinate the activities of the planning agencies", the words "for-
mulate short-term and perspective plaDs for power development 
and co-ordinate the activities of the planning agencies" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) for clause (iiil), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(iii) collect and record the data concernin,g the genera-
tion, distribution and utilisation of power and carry out 
studies relating to cost, efficiency, losses, benefits and such 
like mattersj"; 
(0) after clau$e (iv), the following clauses shall be inserte4, 
ll8IIlely: -
"(v) advise any State Government, Board, Generating 
Company or other agency engaged in the generation or 
~pply of electricity on such matters as will enable such 
Gov.emment, Board, Generating Company or agency to 
operate and maintain the power system, under its ownership 
or control, in an improved manner and, where necessary, in 
co-ordination with any other Government, Board, Generating 
Company or other agency owning or having the control ot 
another power system; 
(vi) promote and assist in the timely completion of 
schemes sanctioned under Chapter V; 
(vii) make arrangements for advancing the skill of 
persons in the generation and supply of electricity; 
(viii) carry out, or make arrangements for, any investi-
gation for the purpose of generating or transmitting e1eo-
~ricity; 
(i.l) promote research in matters aff~iDg the genera·-
tion, transmission and supply of electricity; 
(.%) advise the Central Government on any matter on 
which its advice is sought or make recommendation to that 
Government on any matter if, in the opinion of the Autho-
rity, the recommendation would help in improving the Seme-
ration, distribution and utilisation of electricity; and 
(,ti) discharge such. other :functions as . may be entrusted 
to it by or Wlder any other law."; 
(2) in sub-section (2), for the words "not more than six: members", 
the ..... s '~.t more tban fourteen members of whom not more tbaIl 
eiPt thall .. full-time memlters" shall be substituted; 
(3) after sub.aection (2), the following sub-aection shall be 
~ed, n~Y:--

Amend-
mentof 
pelton 4. 
"(2A) A full-time member shall be a person who has e~ri­
~nc. of. and has shown capacity in,-
(a) design, construction, operation and maintenance of 
generating stations; 
(b) transmission and supply of electricity; 
(c) applied research in the field of electricity; 
(d) applied economics; or 
(e) industrial, commercial or financial matters."; 
(4) in sub-section (3). for the words "ODe of the members", the 
, 
words "ODe of the full-time members" shall be substituted; 10 
(5) after sub-section (4). the following sub·section ahan he 
inserted. namely:-
If (4A) The Chairman of the Authority and the other full-time 
members shall receive such salaries and allowaDCes as may be 
determined by the Central Government and the other members IS 
shall receive such allowances and fees for attendiJl& the meetiDp 
of the Authority, as the Central Government may prescribe. 
(4B) The other terms and conditions of ernee of the mem-
bers of the Authority [iDdudin,. subject to the provisioDl of .. h-
section (4), their terms of ofticeJ shall be such as the Centrai2Q 
GovernmeDt may prescribe."; 
(6) in sub-section (5),-
(i) for the words "be directly or indirectly concerned or 
interested in or have any share or interest", the words "have any 
share or interest for his own benefit, whether in his own name or 2S 
otherwise," shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "fuel, solid or liquid, for the generation of 
electricity", the words "fuel, in whatever form, for the generation 
of electricity or in the manufacture of electrical equipment" shall 
be IUbstituted; 30 
(7) for sub-section (7). the following sub-sections shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(7) The Chairman of the Authority may, by order, appoint 
any two or more members of the AuthOrity to act on behalf of 
the AuthOrity in relation to any matter referred to in clause (ii) 3' 
of sub-section (1). 
(8) No act or proceeding of the Authorit1 shall be invalid 
merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy in, or any,· 
defect in the Constitution of, the AuthOrity .... 
I. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
(II) for the words "State Electricity Board", the words "State 
Electricity Board, Generating Company," shall be substituted; 
(b) after the words "Or his own use", the words "or consuIBiJl. 
electricity" shall be inserted: 

• 
(c) for the words "and returns", the words u, returns or other 
information" shan be substituted. 
6. After section 4 of the prinCipal Act, the followini sections shall be 
Inserted, namely:-
"4A. (1) In the discharge of its functions, the Authority shall be 
guided by such directions in matters of policy involving public in-
terest as the Central Government may give to it in writing. 
(2) If any question arises as to whether any such direction relates 
to a matter of policy involving public interest, the decision of the Cen-
10 tra! Government thereon shall be final. 
4B. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes 0 t this 
Chapter. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
IS foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
3S 
(a) the functions and duties of the Authority and the manner 
in which such functions and duties shall be exercised and per-
formed, Wlder sub-section (1) of section 3; 
(b) the terms anQ conditions of service of the Chairman and 
other members of the Authority, (including the allowances and 
fees payable to members, but not including the salaries and al-
lowances payable to the Chairman and other full-time members, 
of the Authority) under sub-section (4A) and sub-section (48) 
of section 3; 
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this 
Chapter shall. be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more sucees .. 
sive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Housel 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
4C. The Authority may make regulations, not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made by the Central Gov-
ernment thereunder, to provide for all or any of the following matten, 
namely:-
(4) summoning and holding of meetings of the AuthOrity, the 
times and places at which such meetings shall be held, t.he eo.-
duct of business thereat and the number of members requirei .. 
45 constitute a quorum; 
lnaertion 
of new 
aectioa. 
oiA,d 
and4C. 
I)kec. 
tiona 
by 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
the 
Authp-
rity. 
Power 
of 
Central 
Govern-
meat to 
make 
rules. 
Power 
ot Autho-
rity to 
make 
regula.. 
tioDl. 

Substi-
tution of 
new 
beadinl 
for 
beadin& 
under 
Ch~JIt 
Inser-
tion of 
new 
aectlOil 
15A. 
Forma-
tion, 
objects. 
juris-
dictJoQ, 
etc. of 
General. 
iDl 
Com-
panies. 
• (b) any other matter arising out of the function. of the 
Authority under this Act for which it is ll8CeIIAtY <lr expedieQt te 
make reeulations.". 
7. In Chapter ITI of the principal Act, for the heac:Utw "&rAft ~ 
TRIClTY BOARDS", the following heading shall be substituted, namely:- S 
"STA'l'B ELECTRICITY BoARDS. GENERATING CoMPANDS. STATZ ELEcrRIClTY 
OoRatmTA'Rft COUNCIlB AND Lrx1At. ADVJ80RY CIMMuiUS·'. 
:I. After aeetion 16 of the principal Act, thefol»winl aeetiou shall be 
m.nted, namely:-
U15A. (1) The Ceatral Govenameat or any state Government, 01' 10 
the CentraJ·Gcrftnuneut an4 one 01' more State GeveI'lllll.eDU, or two 
or'mOJle'8iIItelGovennneats, jeibtly may fol'lll. GeIl .. tiDt'O'-.... y 
with such name as may be specified in the m.emorandum of ..... tioa 
.t dlec ...... r. 
(2) The main objects of a Generating Company shall be- IS 
(i) establishing, operating and maintaining generating 
aatHma.and tie-JiDes, sub-!stations.and main traBsmission Unes con-
nected therewith; 
(ii) operating and maintaining such generating stations, tie-
lines, sub-stations and main transmission lines as are assigned to 30 
it by the Government or Governments forming the Generating 
Company (hereinafter referred to as the promoting government). 
(3) The Generating Company shall carry on Ita aGIhItles wltblll 
suc:hareas as the promotingpvemll'Mmt or :prometillg governments 
may, from time to time, lPIC'fy in IIIIa Mbalt. 2S 
~4) Such 'Ruzaber of the JDeIDbers of tlaeBeard ., ~inetors of • 
~iDg·Co"""7·88tbe pJOIIleting pYel'Dlll8llttlabaks ...... , where 
·tIae.e-are '8101'8 plOlllllttiDg pv8l'D1lleote tbaa .... as . may Ita· ..... 
1IJIIOII .,. lIIeIl premetiag fOvemments, may lie • ..,. ..... fIdWime 
__ 5 daaeof. 
30 
(5) A full-time member of the Board of directors of a Generating 
Company shall be a person who has experience of, and bas shown 
capacity in,-
(4) design, construction. operation and maintenance of 
generating stations; 
(b) transmission and slIPply ot elect.dci.ty; 
(e) applied economics; 
(d) organising workers; 
(e) . industrial, commercial or financial matters; or 
35 
(1) administratiOft in a GovemmeDt ·J!)epar ttilent nr otlutr 40 
establishment. 

10 
IS 
7 
(6) The provisions of section 9 shall. so far as may be, apply to 
every member of the Board of directors of a Generating Company as 
they apply to a member of the Board. 
(7) A company within the meaning of section 3 of the Companies 
Act, 1956, formed before the commencement of the Electricity (Su{::ply) 
Amendment Act, 1976, by the Central Government or any State Gov-
ernment or the Central Government and one or more State Govern-
ments, or two or more State Governments, jointly and functioning on 
such commencement, having as ita main objeets all or any of the 
matters specifted in sub-section (2), shall be deemed, for aD purposes, 
to' be a 'Generating Company under this Act". 
t. In section 16 of the principal Act,-
(1) in sub'section(2), for the words "the member& of the Board", 
the word's "the members of the Board and. if there are any Generating 
Company or Generating Companies operating in the State, one re-
presentative of the Generating Company or each of the Generating 
Companies, to be nominated by the Generating Company concerned," 
shall be substituted: 
(2) in sub-section (5),-
(G) in clause (i) and clause (ii) , for the words .cthe Board". 
the words "the Board and the Generatil:l.g Ccnnpay or Generating 
Companies, i~ any, operating in the State" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (iii), for the words "the Board", the words 'Ithe 
Boani or the Generating Company or Generating Companies, if 
~S any, operating in the State" shall be substituted. 
1'0. In Chapter IV of the principal Act, in the hea.d.i.llg. for thf:' words 
"STATE ELEc'l'RICITY Bo~, the words "STATE ELEcnucrrv BoARDS AND 
CDIIlATING COMPANIl!'S" shall be substituted. 
11. For section 18 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
30 substituted, narnely:-
3S 
"18. Subjeet to the provisions of this Act. the Board shall be 
charged with the following general duties, namely:-
(a) to arrange, in co-ordination with the Generating Company 
or Generating Companies, if any, operating in the State, for the 
supply of electricity that may be required within the State and 
for the transmission and distribution of the same, in the most 
efficient and economical manner with particular reference to those 
areas which are not for the time being supplied or adequately 
supplied with electricity; 
(b) to supply electricity as SOGn - practicable to a licensee 
or other person requiring such supply if the Board is competent 
under this Act so to do; 
(c:) to exercise such control in relatiell to the generation, 
ctistrfbution and utiUsatien of electricity wiilfllin the State u Ie 
Jft'6~ed for by or under this "-t; 
Amend-
meat!tIf' 
aectlOQ,l e. 
Amend-
mentof 
heading 
under 
Chapter 
IV. 
Sub.tl-
tution ot 
new 
aectlOIll 
tor sec-
tion 18. 
General 
duties 
otthe 
Board. 
I < 

Dutte. 
01 
Genera-
Unc CompaDJ. 
Substi'.u-
tionof 
new 
section for . 
aectlon 
20A. 
Leasing 
out, etc., 
of gene-
ratin, 
Btatiou. 
Amend-
ulent Of 
sectioa 
.. .J 
8 
(d) to collect data on the demand for, and the use of, elec-
tricity and to formulate perspective plans in co-ordination with 
the Generating Company or Generating Companies, if any, operat-
ing in the State, for the generation, transmission and supply of 
electricity within the State; S 
(e) to prepare and carry out schemes for transmiSlion, dis-
tribution and generally for promoting the use ot electricity within 
the State; and 
(1) to operate the generating stations under ita control in 
co-ordination with the Generating Company or Generating Com- 10 
panies, if any, operating in the State and with the Govemment or 
any other Board or agency having control over a power syNm. 
18A. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Generating Com-
pany shall be charged with the following duties, namely:-
(a) to establish;, operate and maintain such generating IS 
stations and tie-lines, sub-stations and main transmission lines 
connected therewith, as may be required to be established by the 
promoting government Or promoting governments in ~lation to 
the Generating Company; 
(b) to operate and maintain in the most efficient and economi- 20 
cal manner the generating stations, tie-lines, sub-stations and main 
transmission lines, assigned to it by the promoting government or 
promoting governments in co-ordination with the Board or 
Boards, as the case may be, and the Government or agency hav-
ing control over the power system, if any, connected therewith; 2S 
and 
(c) to carry out. subjt"-.t't to the provisions of section 21, de-
tailed investigations and prepare schemes, in co-ordination with 
the Board or Boards, as the case may be, for establishing generat-
ing stations and tie-lines, sub-stations and transmission lines con- 30 
nected therewith, in such manner as may be specifted by th~ 
Authority. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of its duties under sec-
tion 18, the Board shall, until a Generating Company begins to operate 
in any State, perform the duties of a Generating Company under this 35 
section in that State.". 
12. For section 20A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"20A. The State Government may, in respect ot any generating 
station owned by it (including transmission lines and other worb 40 
connected therewith) make arrangements with the Board or a 
Generating Company for its operation and maintenance on such terms 
and conditions as may be agreed upon between the State Governmarit 
and the Board or the Generating Company, as the case may be.". 
D. In section 21 of the principal Act, in the opening paragraph,- 4S 
(a) for the words "The Board may", the words uThe Board or 
a Generating Company may" shaJl be substituted.; 

9 of 1910. 
8 of 1910. 
9 of 1910. 
9 of 1910. 
:J of 1910. 
P of 191\). 
9 
(b) for the words "in the opinion 01. the Board", the words "in 
thie opinion of the Board or the Generating Company, as the case 
may be," shall be substituted; 
(~) the words "and in such manner as the Authority may, from 
~ time to time, specify" shall be inserted at the end. 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
40 
14. After section 26 of the principal Act, the f~lowing section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"26A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(2), nothing in the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, shall be deemed to 
require' a Generating Company to take out a licence under that Act, 
or to obtain sanction af the State Government for the purpose of 
carrying on any of its activities. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, sections 12 to 19 (both 
inclusive) of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 and .clauses XIV to 
XVII (both inclusive) of the Schedule thereto, shall, as far as may 
be, apply in relation to a Generating Company as they apply in re-
lation to a licensee under that Act (hereafter in this section ref-
erred to as the licensee) and in particular a Generating Company 
may, in connection with the performance of its dUties, exercise-
(a) all or any of the powers conferred on a licensee by sub-
section (1) of section 12 of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, as 
if-
(i) the reference therein to licensee were a reference to 
the Generating Company; 
(ii) the reference to the terms and conditions of licence 
were a reference to the provisions ~ this Act and to the 
articles of association of the Generating Company; and 
(iii) the reference to the area of supply were a reference 
to the area specified under sub-section (3) of section 15A in 
relation to the Generating Company; 
(b) all or any of the powers conferred on a licensee by sub-
section (1) of section 14 of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, as 
if-
(i) the references therein to licensee were references to 
the Generating Company; and 
(ii) the Generating Company had the powers of A licen-
see under the said Act. 
(3) The provisions of section 30 of the Indian Electricity Act, 
1910, shall not~ply to the transmission or use of energy by a 
Generating Company. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that sec-
tions 31 to 34 (both inclusive) of the Indian Electricity AC't, 1910, 
shall apply to a Generating Company.". 
lS. In section 27 of the principal Act, for tne words "The Board", the 
4~ wQrds "The Board qr ~ G~neratin8 Company" shall b~ substituted. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
20A. 
Applica-
bilityor 
the'provi-
siona of 
Act 9 ot 
1910 to 
GeIlerato-
ingCom-
paDil'. 
Amend-
ment 
of sec. 
tion 27. 

Substi_ 
tution of 
new head-
ing for 
heading 
under 
Chapter 
V. 
Substi-
tutionof 
new 8eC-
tiona 
for 
sectiona 
28 and 
29. 
Pre-
paration 
and 
sanction-
ing of 
schemes. 
Submia-
8iOl101 
schemes 
for con-
curren~ 
of Autho-
rity, etc. 
10 
16. In Chapter V of the principal Act, for the heading, the following 
heading shall be substituted, namely:-
liTHE WORKS AND TRADING PROCEDURE OF THE BoARD AND THE GENERA'r-
ING COMPANY". 
17. For sections 28 and 29 of the principal Act, the following sections S 
shall be substituted, namely:-
1'28. (1) For the efficient performance of its duties under this Act, 
the Board or a Generating Company, as the case may be, may prepare 
one or more schemes, relating to the establhhment or acquisition of 
generating stations, tie-lines, sub-stations or transmission lines as are 10 
referred to in clause (e) of section 18 or clause (e) of sub-section (1) 
of section 18A, as the case may be. 
(2) The Board 'Or, as the case may be, the Generating Company, 
which has prepared a scheme, may sanction such scheme either gene-
rally or in respect of any part of the area specified in the scheme and IS 
where a scheme has been sanctioned in respect of any part of the 
area, such scheme may subsequently be sanctioned in respect o£ any 
other part of that area: 
Provided that where the scheme is of the nature referred to in 
sub-section (1) of section 29, the scheme shall not be sanctioned 20 
(Generally or for part of an area) by the Board or the Generating 
Company except with the previous concurrence of the Authority. 
(3) Every scheme sanctioned under this section shall be pub-
lished in the Official Gazette and in such local newspapers as the . 
Board or, as the case may be, the GeneratiI'lg Company may consider 25 
necessary. 
29. (1) Every scheme estimated to involve a capital expenditure 
exceeding one crore of rupees shall, as soon as may be after its pre-
paration, be submitted to the Authority for its concurrence. 
(2) Before finalisation of any scheme of the nature referred to 30 
in sub-section (1) and the submission thereof to the AuthOrity for 
concurrence, the Board or, as the case may be, the Generating Com-
pany shall cause such scheme, which among other things shall con-
tain the estimates of the capital expenditure involved, salient features 
thereof and the benefits that may accrue therefrom, to be pub1i~hed 35 
in the Official Gazette of the State concerned and in such local news-
papers as the Board or the Generating Company may consider neces-
sary along with a notice of the date, not being less than two montha 
after the date of such publication, before which licensees and other 
persons interested may make representations on such scheme. 
(3) The Board or, a'S the case may be, the Generating Company 
may, after considering the representations, if any, that may have bet"n 
received by it and after maldng suc:h inquhies ~~ \~ ~hinks tit. 

11 
modify the scheme and the scheme so finally prepared (with or with-
out modifications) shall be submitted by it to the Authority along 
with the representations. 
(4) A copy of the scheme finally prepared by the Board or, as 
5 the caSe may be, the Generating Company under sub-'Sectioll: (3) 
shall be forwarded to the State Government or State Governments 
concerned: 
Provided that where the scheme has been prepared by a Gene-
rating Company in relation to which the Central Government is the 
10 promoting government Or one of the promoting governments, a copy 
of the scheme finally prepared shall be forwarded also to the Central 
Government. 
(5) The Authority may give such directions as to the form and 
contents of a scheme and the procedure to be followed in, and any 
15 other matter relating to, the preparation, submission and approval of 
such scheme, as it may think fit. 
(6) In respect of any scheme submitted to the Authority for its 
concurrence under sub-section (1), the Board or, as the case may be, 
the Generating Company shall, if required by the Authority so to 
20 do, supply any information incidental or supplementary to the scheme 
within such period, being not less than one month, as may be speci-
fied by the Authority.". 
18. In section 30 of the principal Act,- Amend-
(a) for the opening paragraph, the following shall be substituted, ment ot .ection namely:-
30 
35 
4S 
"The Authority shall, before concurring in any scheme sub-
mitted to it under sub-section (1) of section 29, have particular 
regard to, whether or not in its opinion-"; 
(b) in clause (a),-
(i) the words "by the Board" shall be omitted; 
(ii) for the words "shall satisfy itself", the words "shall 
satisfy itself, after consultation with the State Government, the 
Central Government, or such other agencies as it may deem 
appropriate," shall be substituted; 
(c) after clause (e), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(1) in the case of a scheme in respect of thermal power 
generation, the location of the generating station is best suited 
to the region, taking into account the optimum utilisation of fuel 
resources, the distance of load centre, transportation facilities, 
water availability and environmental considerations; 
(g) the scheme conforms to any other technical, economic 
or other criteria laid down by the Authority in accordance with 
the national power policy evolved by it in pursuance of the pro-
visions contained in clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 3 .... 
30. 

Substi-
tution 
of new 
.ections 
for sec-
tions 31, 
32 and 33. 
Concur-
rence of 
Autho-
rity to 
scheme 
submitted 
to it by 
Board 
or Gene-
rating 
Company. 
Power to 
alter or 
extend 
schemes. 
Provi-
sions 
applica-
bleto 
scheme 
prepared 
by State 
Govern-
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
34. 
19. For sections 31, 32 and 33 of the principal Act, the following sec-
tions shall be substituted, namely:-
"31. (1) Where a scheme is submitted to the Authority under 
sub-section (1) of section 29, the Authority may, having regard to 
the matters referred to in section 30, either concur in the scheme S 
without modification or require the Board or, as the case may be, the 
Generating Company to modify the scheme in such manner as the 
Authority specifies in the requisition so as to ensure that the scheme 
conforms to the national power policy evolved by the Authority in 
pursuance of the provisions contained in clause (i) of sub-section 10 
(1) of section 3 and in either case the Authority shall also communi-
cate its decision to the State Government or State Governments con-
cerned: 
Provided that where the scheme was submitted for concurrence 
by a Generating Company in relation to which the Central Govern- 15 
ment is the promoting government or one of the promoting govern-
ments, the decision shall be communicated also to that Government. 
(2) Where under sub-section (1) the Authority requires that a 
scheme may be modified, the Board or, as the case may be, the Gene-
rating Company may prepare a revised scheme in accordance with 20 
such requisition and submit it to the Authority for concurrence and' 
thereupon the Authority shall, if satisfied that the revised scheme 
compli~ with the requisition, concur in the same. 
32. The Board or, as the case may be, the Generating Company 
may, from time to time, alter or extend a scheme by a supplemen- 25 
tary scheme prepared and sanctioned in the manner hereinbefore 
provided: 
Provided that any alterations or extensions of a scheme which 
are, in the opinion of the Board or, as the case may l}e, the Generat-
ing Company, minor in character may be made without preparing 30 
a supplementary scheme: 
Provided further that where any alteration or extension of the 
nature referred to in the first proviso is made in respect of a scheme 
concurred in by the Authority, details of such alteration or extension 
shall be intimated to the Authority as soon as may be after such 3S 
alteration or extension is made. 
33. The provisions of sections 28 to 32 (both inclusive) shall, so 
far as may be, apply also in relation to a scheme prepared by a State 
Government for the generation, transmission or distribution of elec-
tricity.". 40 
20. Section 34 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-sec-
tion (1) thereof and after sub-section (1), as so re-numbered, the follow-
fng SUb-section snaIl be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any 
scheme made thereunder, no generating station owned by a Generat- 4S 
ing Company shall be designated as a controlled station.". 

13 . 
11. Section 38 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
22. Section 39 of the priJicipal Act shall be re-nuntber.d III sub-section 
(1) thereof and after sub-section (1), as so re-numbered, the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
S "(2) Where a Generating Company has been established having 
its activities wholly or partly in a State, the State Government may 
direct the Board to make over any generating station established or 
acquired by the Board to the Generating Company subject to such 
terms and conditions as may be specified in the direction and the 
10 'Board shall comply with such direction: 
Provided that where the Central Government is the promoting 
government or one of the promoting governments in relation to the 
Generating Company, no direction shall be made by any State Gov-
ernment under this sub-section without the concurrence of t"le Cen-
IS tral Government.". 
20 
23. In section 41 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "the Board", wherever they 
occur, the words "the Board or a Generating Company" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "The Board may", the 
words "The Board or a Generating Company may" shall be substi-
tuted. 
24. Section 42 or the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section 
(1) thereof and after sub-section (1), as so re-numbered, the following 
25 sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) A Generating Company may, for the placing of wires, poles, 
wall-brackets, stays, apparatus and appliances for the transmission 
of electricity, or for the transmission of telegraphic or telephonic 
communicatior\s necessary for the proper co-ord'ination of the war,ks 
30 of the Generating Company, exercise all or any of the powers which 
the Board may exercise under sub-section (1) and subject to the con-
ditions referred to therein.". 
35 
25. In section 43 the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the follow· 
ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) A Generating Company may, on such terms as may be 
agreed upon, enter into arrangements for the sale of electricity ge-
nerated by it-
(a) with the Board constituted for the State or any of the 
States wherein such Generating Company is oper~tingj or 
(b) with any other persOD with the consent of the Govern-
ment or Governments which, in relation to that Generating 
Company, is the promoting government or promoting govern-
ments.". 
~iutM 
of sec-
tion 38. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
39. 
Amend-
mento! 
section 
41. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
42. 
Amend-
mentof 
IeCtion 41. 
.. 

Amend-
mentof 
section 44. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
72. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
73. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
74. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
75. 
tnaer-
tionof 
new 
section 
75A. 
Annual 
reports 
anel 
account. 
of Gene-
rating 
Company. 
14 
16. In section 44 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), in the opening paragraph, after the words 
"created by a Central Act", the words "or any Generating Company" 
shall be inserted; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sUb-section shall be in- 5 
Berted, namely:-
"(2A) The Board shall, before giving consent under sub-
section (1), to the establishment or acquisition of a new gene-
rating station or to the extension or replacement of any major 
unit of plant or works, consult the Authority, in cases where the 10 
capacity of the new generating station or, as the case may be, the 
additional capacity proposed to be created by tlle extension or 
replacement exceeds twenty-five thousand kilowatts.". 
27. In section 72 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "the Board", the words "the Board or a Gene- 15 
rating Company" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words, "or that the Board is unable so to develop", 
the words "or the Generating Company so to develop" 'Shall be subs-
tituted. 
28. In section 73 of the principal Act, for the words "the Board shall 20 
co-ordinate its activities", the words "the Board and the Generatin~ 
Company shall co-ordinate their activities" shall be SUbstituted. 
•. In section 74 of the principal Act,-
(a) . for the words "servant of the Board", the words "servant 
of the Board or of a Generating Company" shall be substituted; 2S 
(b) for the words "authorised by the Board", the words "autho-
rised by the Board or by the Generating Company I as the case may 
be," shall be substituted; 
(e) for the words "duties by the Board", the words "duties by 
the Board or by the Generating Company, as·the case may be," shall 30 
be substituted. 
30. In section 75 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),-
(a) for the words "or person", the words "or person or agency" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) the follOWing proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:- 35 
"Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed 
to empower the Board to reqUire a Generating Company to fur-
nish it with any information or accounts.". 
31. Mter section 75 of the principal Act, the following sectit:>n shall 
be inserted, namely:- 40 
"75A. (1) A Generating Company shan, before the expiry of 
the 31st December of each year, submit to the promoting govern-
ment, or where there are more than one promoting government to 
all such promoting governments, a report giving an account of the 
activities, if any, which are likely to be undertaken by such Gene- 45 
rating Company in the ensuing year together with a statement of 

lot 1956. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
15 
the estimated capital and revenue receipts and expenditure for 
that year in such form as may be specified by the promoting 
government or, as the case may be, the promoting governments. 
(2) A Generating Company shall, as soon as may be after the 
end of each year, prepare a report giving an account of its activities 
during the previous year and shall, within six months from the date 
of closure of the year, forward to the promoting government, or 
where there are more than one promoting government, to all such 
promoting governments, the report together with a statement of 
accounts, in such form and containing such particulars as may be 
specified by the promoting government or the promoting govern-
ments, as the case may be, a copy of the balance-sheet and profit and 
loss account and the auditor's report, in relation to the accounts of the 
year aforesaid. 
(3) For the purpose of preparing the statement of accounts 
referred to in 'Sub-section (2), the depreciation to be ,lrovided 
every year shall be calculated in accordance with the same method 
as laid down by or under this Act for calculating depreciation in 
relation to the Board. 
(4) The provisions ot sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of the prOVisions contained in the 
Companies Act, 1956, in relation to reports, statement of accounts 
and other documents required to be prepared or kept or submitted 
by a company within the meaning Of section 3 of that Act.". 
32. In the Fifth Schedule to the principal Act,-
(a) in the heading, for the words "BY BOARD", the words "BY 
BOARD OR GENERATING COMPANY" shall be substituted; 
(b) in paragraph I and paragraph II, for the words "the Board", 
wherever they occur, the words "the Board or the Generating C~m-
30 pany" shall be substituted. 
35 
45 
.. 
33. In the Sixth Schedule to the principal Act, in paragraph II, after 
sub-paragraph (3), the following sub-paragraph shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(4) On the purchase of the undertaking, after the expiry, 
or on the revocation, of its licence or otherwise, all amounts of 
rebate lying undistributed to the consumers on the date of such 
purchase shall be handed over to the purchaser who, in turn, shall 
enter the same in his books of account, under the heading Con-
sumers' Rebate Reserve and any amount lying undistributed in 
that Reserve shall be carried forward for distribution to the 
consumer concerned: 
Provided that the share of money in the Consumers' Rebate 
Reserve payable to the con'Sumers who are not traceable or who 
have ceased to be consumers in relation to that undertaking, may 
be utilised in the development works of the purchaser.". 
Amend-
mentol 
Fifth 
Schedule. 
Amend-
ment 
olSixth 
Schedule. 

Repeal 
and 
savini. 
16 
34. (1) The Electricity (Supply) Amendment Ordinance. 1976, is 
hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action. taken 
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended 5 
by this Act. 
13 of 1978. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The country experienced serious power shortages during the last 
few years affecting the overall economy. A study in depth revealed that 
it was necessary to restructure and reorganise the electricity supply 
industry. The Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. forms the basis for the 
organisational structure of the electricity supply industry in the country. 
It was, therefore, considered necessary to,) amend c~rtain provisions of 
that Act and the Electricity (Supply) Amendment Bill, 1976, was 
introducad in the Rajya Sabha mainly to achieve the following objec-
tives. 
2. It wa'S proposed to enlarge the scope and functions of the Central 
Electricity AuthOrity in the interest of overall power development and 
to strengthen the Central Electricity Authority to unjertake much 
larger responsibilities in evolving a national power policy, preparation 
of perspective and rolling plans, aSSisting in the timely completion of 
the power project3, maximising output from the existing power plants, 
developing a national grid and initiating programmes for research, 
development and training of persOnnel, etc. 
3. With a view to develop expertise in the construction and operation 
of power generating stations, it was considered necessary to provide for 
creation of Generating Companies both by the Centre and the States 
mainly for p'.)wer generation. Provisions were, therefore, proposed to be 
made in the Act for the establishment of Generating Companies by the 
Central and State Governments, individually or jointly, which would be 
responsible for the construction and operation of power stations, as well 
as for the allocation of functions and duties in relation to the generation 
and supply of electricity between the Generating Companies and the 
State Electricity Boards. 
4. Certain modifications also were proposed to be made as to the 
existing procedure relating to the preparation and sanctioning of schemes 
for the establishment, and the acquisition of generating stations, tie-
lines, sub-station'S or transmission lines. It was proposed to provide 
that every scheme prepared by a State Electricity Board or Generating 
Company and estimated to involve a capital expenditure exceeding one 
crore of rupees shall be submitted to the Central Electricity Authority 
for its concurrenCe so that the scheme may conform to the national 
power policy evolved by the Authority. 
5. Since the Bill was not passed before both the Houses of ParJia-
ment were prorogued' and as the matter was of great urgency, an Ordi-
nance, namely, the Electricity (Supply) Amendment Ordinance, 1976, 
was promulgated for the same purpose. The Bill seeks to replace t.he 
Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI, 
The 23rd UctobeT, 1976. 
17 
K. C. PANT. 
~. t" 

§ub-section (2) of section 3 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, 
provides that the Central Electricity Authority shall consist of not more 
than six members. Clause 4(2) of the Bill seeks to amend this sub~ 
Section so as to provide for the appointment of not more than fourteen 
hlembers of whom nbt more than eight shall be fuiI-time members. 
Under sub-section (3) o~ section 3 of t~e Act, as amende~ by clause 4(4) 
bf the Bill 6ne of the full-tiIne members shall be the Chairman of tht'! 
Central Electricity Authority. Sub-sections (4A) and (413) newly pro-
posed to be insetted in section 3 by clause 4 (5) of the Bill provides :fbt 
the payment of salary and lillowahces tb the Chairman and other full· 
time membets &lhd allowances ~nd fees to the part-time members, as 
well as to prescr:/.be theit terms and conditions of service. At present, 
Under the exiSting provisions of the Act, for the six members (including 
th~ Chairman) the expenditure on pay and allowances, office expendi-
ture, etc., works out to Rs. 3.75 lakhs approximately per annum. With 
the increase in the number of members including eight full-time 
members, the total annual expenditure on pay and a:llowances, etc., would 
go up to about Rs. 5.0 lakhs. Thus, the increase in annual expenditure 
on account ()f members' salary, etc., would be of the order of about 
Rs. 1.25 lakhs when eight full-time members are in position. 
2. Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 15A. Sub-section (1) 
of this section envisages the formation of Generating Companies by the 
Central Government either by itself or jointly with one or more States. 
There are already three Generating Companies formed by the Central 
Government Apart from that, there are no immediate plans to form 
other such Generating Companies. Further expenditure in this regard 
will arise only as and when a decision is taken in that behalf and the 
expenditure on that account cannot now be estimated. 
3. There is DO other recurring or non-recurring expenditure envisag-
ed in the Bill. 
18 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The new section 4B proposed to be inserted in the Electricity (Supply) 
Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), by clause 6 of the 
Bill, empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Act. The various matters which may be provided 
for in such rules have been referred to in detail in sub-section (2) of that 
section. These mainly relate to the functions and duties of the Central 
Electricity Authority, the manner of exercise of such functions and duties 
and terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members 
of that Authority. 
2. The new section 4C proposed to be inserted in the principal Act by 
clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Electricity AuthOrity to make 
regulations to provide for the summoning and holding of meetings of that 
Authority, the conduct of business at such meetings and for other matters 
arising out of the functions of the Central Electricity Authority for which 
it may be necessary or expedient to make regulations. 
3. The matters which the Central Government may provide for in 
rules are matters of detail necessary for the effective administration of 
the provisions of the principal Act and· the matters regarding which the 
Central Electricity Authority is empowered to make regulationS' are 
matters of procedure. Delegation of legislative power is. therefore, of a 
normal character. 
l~ 

Short 
title, 
extent 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
Inter-
pretation. 
Cons-
titution 
of the 
Central 
Electri-
clty 
Autho-
rity. 
1. (1) 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ELECTRICITY (SUPPLY) ACT, 1948 
(54 OF 1948) 
• • • • • 
(3) This section and sections 2, 3, 4, 57, 57A, 57B, 58, 76, 77, 77A, 77B, 
77C, 82 and 83 and the provisions of the Sixth and the Seventh Schedules 
shall come into force at once. 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
• • • • • 
(5) "generating station" or "station" means any station for 
generating electricity, including any building and plant uSed for 
that purpose and the site thereof, a site intended to be used for a 
generating station, and any buildings used for housing the operating 
staff of a generating station, ~nd where electricity is generated by 
water-po~er, inclunes penstocks, head and tail works, main and 
regulating reservoirs, dams and other hydraulic works, but doeS: not 
in any case include any sub...ostation for transforming, converting or 
distributing electricity; 
(6) "licensee" means a person l'lcensed under Part II of the 
Indian Electricity Act, 1910 to supply energy or a person who has 9 of 1910. 
obtained sanction under section 28 of that Act to engage in the busi-
ness of supplying energy but, the provisions of section 28 of this Act 
notwithstanding, does not 'include the Board; 
• • • • • 
(9) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under section 
78; 
• • • • • 
(1.1) "year" means, in relation to the Board, the year commenc-
ing on the 1st day of April; 
• • • • • 
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a body callen the 
Central Electricity Authority generally to exercise such functions and 
perform such duties under the Act and in such manner as the Central 
Government may prescribe or direct, and 'in particular to-
(i) develop a sound, adequate and uniform national power 
policy, and particularly to co-ordinate the activities of the planning 
agencieSi in relation to the control and util'isation of national power 
resources; .. r 
• • • • 
20 

21 
(iii) carry out investigations and to collect and record the data 
concerning the generation, distribution anrt utilisation of power and 
the development of power resources; and 
• • • • • 
(2) The Authority shall consist of not more than six members ap-
pointed by the Central Government. 
(3) The Central Government shall appoint one of the members to be 
the Chairman of the Authority. 
• • • • • 
(5) No full-time member of the Authority shall be directly or in-
directly concerned or interested in or have any share or interest in any 
company or other body corporate or an aslsociation of persons (whether 
incorporated or not), or a firm engaged in the business of supplying 
electrical energy or fuel, solid or liquid, for the generation of electricity. 
• • • • • 
(7) The Authority may act by two of its members in all matters. 
4. It shall be the duty of each State Electricity Board, State Govern-
ment Electricity Department or other licensee or person supplying elec-
tricity for public or private purposes, or generating electrllcity for its or 
his own use, to furnish to the Authority such accountll, statistics and 
returns relating to the generation, supply and use of electricity as it may 
require and at such l1imes and in such form anrt manner as it may 
direct. 
CHAPTER III 
STATE ELECTRICITY BOARDS 
16. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The State Electricity Consultative Council shall consist of the 
~embers of the Board and such other persons bein'g, not less than eigb' 
and not more than fifteen as the State Government or the State Gov-
ernments concerned may appoint after consultation with such representa-
tives or bodies representative of the following interests as the State 
Government or the State Governments concerned thinks or think fit, 
that is to say, local self-government, electricity Supply industry, com-
merce, industry, transport, agriculture, labour employed in the electricity 
supply industry and consumers of electrllcity, but so that there shall be 
at least one member representing each such interest in the Council. 
• • • • • 
(5) The fur.dions of the State Electricity Consult.ative CouncH 
shall be as follows:-
(i) to advise the Board on major questions of policy .nd major 
schemes; 
Power 
to require 
counts, 
statistics 
and 
returns. 
State 
Electri. 
city 
Consul-
tative 
Coun-
ciL 

General 
duties 
of the 
Board. 
Power to 
acquire 
projects, 
etc., on 
lease. 
:?owers of 
Board in 
relation 
to water-
power. 
Other 
tunctioDi 
of the 
lJoml. 
22 
(ii) to review the progress and the work of the Board from 
time to time; 
(1.ii) to consir\er such other matters as the Board may place 
before it; and 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND DunES OF STATE ELECTRICITY gOARDS 
18. Subject to the provisions of this Act the Board shall be charged 
with the general duty of promoting the co-ordinated develoJpment of 
the generation, supply and ctstribution of electricity within the State 
in the most efficient and economical manner, with particular reference 
to such development in areas not for the time being served or adequately 
served by any licenSee, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing provisions 'it shall be the duty of the Board-
(a) to prepare and carry out schemes sanctioner\ under Chapter 
V· J 
(b) to supply electricity to owners of controlled stations and 
to licensees whose stations are closed down under this Act; 
(c) to supply electricity as soon as practicable to any other 
licensees or persons requiring such supply and whom the Board 
may be competent under this Act 90 to supply . 
• • • * • 
20A. Without prejudice to the generality of the power of the Board to 
acquire any property, the Board may acquire from the State Govern-
ment on lease any project relating to the generation of electricity and 
all transmission lines ann other works connected w.i.th such project or 
any part of such project, transmission lines or other works on such 
terms and conditions, including terms and conditions relating to the 
operation and maintenance thereof as may be agreed upon between the 
State Government and the Board. 
21. The Board may, with the previous approval of the State Govern-
ment, take such measures as in the opinion of the Board are calculated 
to advance the development of water-power in the State, and may orga-
nise ann carry out power and hydrometric survey work and cause to 
be made such maps, plans; sections and estimates as are necessary for 
any of the said purposes: 
Provided that where any such measures relate to a source of water-
power already operated upon by a licensee under a licence. the Board 
shall g\ve the licensee notice of sttch measure and an opportunity to be 
heard on any representations he may desire to make in that behalf and 
may consider such representation . 
• • • • • 
27. 'The Board shall have sqch furth~r :POwer~ an4 duties as are 
provide4 in thi~ l\ct, 

CHAPTER V 
THE BOARD'S WORKS AND TRAJ>ING PROCEDURE 
28. With a View to rationalising the production and supply of eiectri· 
city in any area the Board may from time to time prepare a scheme, 
not inconsistent with this Act, for that area, in which provision may 
be made for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(11) the establishment of the Board's own generating stations; 
(h) the designation of generating stations, whether existing 
stations or new stations, as controlled stations at which electricity 
shall be generated for the purposes of the Board; 
(c) the interconnection, by means of main transmission lines to 
be constructed or acquired by the Board, of any generating stations 
with any others and with any systems of licensees; 
(d) where a scheme relates to a specified area, the interconnec-
tion of the system of the Board in that area with the system of the 
Board in any other area with respect to which a scheme is in being 
or may subsequently be made; 
(e) the construction or acquisition of such other main trans-
mission lines as the scheme may require; 
(f) the use by the Board of any transmission lines or main 
transmission lines of any licensee; 
(g) such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions 
as may appear necessary or expedient for any of the purpose'S 
aforesaid': 
Provided that no scheme or a part of a scheme which is estimated 
to result in a capital expenditure exceeding fifteen lakhs of rupees 
shall be prepared by the Board without prior consultation with the 
State Government: 
Provided further that a scheme shall not, without the consent of the 
owner,-
(i) designate as a controlled station any generating station 
belonging to a person other than a licensee; 
(ii) authorize the use or acquisition of a transmission line or 
a main transmission line belonging to a person other than a licensee. 
29. (1) A scheme prepared for any area under section 28 may, 
subject to the provisions of this section, be sanctioned by the Board 
either generally or in respect of any part of the area and' where a 
scheme has been sanctioned in respect of part of the area, it may subse-
quently be sanctioned in respect of other parts of that area. 
(2) Every scheme sanctioned under this section shall be published 
in the Official Gazette and in such local newspapers as the Board may 
consider necessary: 
Prepara-
tionof 
schemes. 
PubUca-
tionand 
sanction.. 
ingof 
8Chemes. 

Matters 
to-be 
consider-
edby 
the 
Authority. 
Provided that it shall not be neceS'Sary to so publish any scheme 
which is estimated to result in a capital expenditure not eJ«:eeding 
twenty-five lakhs of rupees. 
(3) Before sanctioning any scherrte which is estirrtated to result in 
a capital expenditure exceeding 'One crore of rupees the follOWing 
llrocedUre shall be adopted, namely:-
(i) The Board shall send a copy of the scheme to the State 
Government and to the Authority and caUSe such scheme to be 
published in the Official Gazette and in such local newspapers as: 
the Board may consider necessary; and the Board shall give public: 
notice of the date, not being less than two months after the date' 
of the notice, by which licensees and other persons interested may' 
make representations thereon and when publishing such a scheme! 
the Board shall show estimates of the capital expenditure involvedi 
and of the initial and ultimate revenues anticipated from the sale: 
of energy, meter rentals and other services. 
(ii) The Board, after considering any such representations and! 
after making such inquiries, if any, as it thinks fit, may sanction. 
the scheme either without modification or subject to such modifi-
cations as it thinks fit, and either generally or in respect of any .. 
part of the area specified in the published scheme: 
Provided that no such scheme shall be sanctioned by the 
Board without prior consultation with the Authority and until any 
recommendations which the Authority may, in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act, make upon such consultation have received 
due consideration by the Board: 
Provided further that where the recommendatioIl! of the 
Authority in regard to any scheme are not accepted by the Board, 
the Board shall not sanction the scheme without the previous con-
sent of the State Government. 
(4) In respect of any scheme to which the provisions of sub-section 
(3) apply, the Board shall, within one month after being requested by 
the Authority so to do, supply the Authority with all such informa-
tion incidental or supplementary to the scheme as may be specified in 
the request. 
30. The Authority shall, before making any recommendations in 
respect of a scheme upon which it has been consulted under the first 
proviso to clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section 29, have particular 
regard to whether or not in its opinion-
(a) any river-works proposed by the Board will prejudice the 
prospects for the best ultimate development of the river or its 
tributaries for power-generation, consistent with the requirements 
of irrigation, navigation and fiood-control, and for this purpose 
the Authority shall satisfy itself that an adequate study has been 
made of the optimum location of dams and other river-works; 
• • • • • 

25 
31. Where the Authority has been consulted under the first pro-
viso to clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section 29 in respect of a scheme, 
it shall forward its recommendations thereon to the Board, sending a 
copy thereof to the State Government, within six months from the date 
of the receipt by it of the scheme: 
Provided that if the Board fails to supply in due time any informa-
tion requested under sub-section (4) of section 29, the period within 
which the Authority shall forward its recommendations shall be cor-
respondingly ~creased. 
32. The Board shall carry out and give effect to a scheme as soon 
as reasonably practicable after it has been sanctioned and where so re-
quired published. . 
33. The Board may from. time to time alter or extend a scheme by 
a supplementary scheme made and sanctioned in the manner herein-
before provided: 
Provided that any alterations or extensions of a scheme which are 
in the opinion of the Board and the Authority m~or in char&cter may 
be made without preparing a supplementary scheme. 
• • • • • 
38. The Board shall itself establish a new generating station in 
any area in which it is required by any sanctioned scheme to be situated, 
but the Board may, with the sanction of the State Government, make 
arrangements with any licensee or other person for the establishment of 
a new generating station required by a sanctioned scheme, if in the 
opinion of the Board it is desirable so t.o do. 
• • • • • 
41. (1) Where the Board considers it necessary to use for any of 
its purposes any transmission lines or main transmission lines of a 
licensee, the Board shall have power to use such lines to the extent to 
which the capacity thereof is or thereafter remains surplus to the re-
quirements of the licensee for the transmission of electricity, on pay-
ment of charges calculated in accordance with the provisions of the 
Fifth Schedule. 
(2) The Board may by agreement with any licensee or other person, 
use any transmission line or main transmission line of that licensee or 
person for such time and upon such terms as may be agreed. 
• • • • • 
44. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force or in any licence, but subject to the provisions 
of this Act, it shall not be lawful for a licensee, or any other person, not 
being the Central Government or any Corporation created by a 
Central Act except with the previous consent in writing of the Board, to 
establish or acquire a new generating station or to extend or replace any 
major unit of plant Or works pertaining to the generation of electricity 
in a generating station: 
PrOvided that such consent shall not, except in relation to a con-
trolled station, be withheld unless within three months from the date of 
J:eceipt of an application-
Recom-
menda-
tions of 
the 
Authority. 
Carrying 
out of 
schemes. 
Power to 
alter Or 
extend 
schemel. 
Provision 
of new 
genera-
ting 
stations. 
Use by 
Board 
of trans-
mission 
lines. 
Restric. 
tion on 
establish-
ment of 
new gene. 
rating 
stations 
IT."major 
additions 
or re-
place-
mentof 
plant in 
generating 
stations. 

Water-
power 
conces-
sions to 
be grant-
ed only 
to the 
Board. 
Co-or41ill'" 
tion bet-
ween the 
Board's 
schemes 
and 
multi-
purpose 
schemes. 
Powers 
or entry. 
(a.) for consent to the establishment or acquisition of a new 
generating station, the Board-
(i) gives to the applicant being a licensee an undertaking 
that it is competent to, and will, within twenty-four m.lnthi 
from the said date, afford to him a supply of electricity sutJi·· 
cient for his requirements pursuant to his application; or 
(ii) shows to the applicant that the electricity required by 
him pursuant to his application coul4 be more economically 
obtained within a reasonable time from another appropriate 
source; 
(b) for consent to the extension of any major unit of plant, or. 
works as aforesaid, the Board-
(i) gives to the applicant being a licensee an undertaking 
that within twenty-four months from the said date either the 
station to which the application pertains will become a con-
trolled station in terms of section 34, or the Board will make 
a declaration to the applicant in terms of section 35 offering him 
a supply of electricity sufficient for his requirements pursuant 
to his application. or the Board will make a declaration to him 
in terms of section 36; or ' 
(ii) shows to the applicant that the electricity required by 
him pursuant to his application could. be more economically 
obtained within a reasonable time from another appropriate 
source or by other appropriate means; 
(c) for consent to the replacement of any major unit of plant 
or works, the Board-
(i) gives to the applicant being a licensee an undertaking 
that within eighteen months from the said date either the 
station to which the application pertains will become a con-
trolled station in terms of section 34 or the Board will make 
a declaration to him in terms of section 36; or 
(ii) shows to the applicant that the electricity required by 
him pursuant to his application could be more economically 
obtained within a reasonable time from another appropriate 
source or by other appropriate means . 
• • • * • 
72. The State Government shall not grant any concession for the 
development or use of water-power for any electrical purpose to any 
person other than the Board, unless the State Government is of opinion 
that it is rtot expedient for the Board or that the Board is una.ble so to 
develop or use the water-power concerned. 
73. Where a multipurpose scheme for the development of any river 
in any region is in operation, the Board shall co-ordinate its activities 
with the activities of the persons responsible for such seheme in so far 
as they are inter-related. 
74. Any officer or servant of the Board generally or specially au-
thorized by the Board in this behalf may at any reasonable time after 

27 
giving the owner or occupier reasonable notice enter upon any land or 
premises and there do such things as may be reasonably necessary for 
the purposes of lawfully using any transmission lines or main transmis-
sion lines, or of making any survey, examination or investigation preli-
minary or incidental to the exercise of powers or the performance of 
duties by the Board under this Act. 
7~ • • • • • 
(3) The Board may at any time by notice in writing require any 
licensee or person supplying electricity for public or private purposes 
or generating electricity for his own use to furnish it with such informa-
tion and accounts relating to such supply or generation and in such form 
and manner as the notice may specify . 
• • • • 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 41) 
• 
CHARGES FOR USE BY BOARD OF TRANSMISSION LINES AND M"IN 
TRANSMISSION LINES 
I. The following charges and allowances shall be made in respect of a 
year of account for the use by the Board of main transmission lines or 
transmission lines (hereafter in this Schedule referred to as lines), 
namely:-
(a) the actual cost of maintenance .of the lines, including rene-
wals thereof not chargeable to capital account; 
(b) sums paid in respect of the lines for insurance and as rents, 
rates and taxes (including all taxes payable on income and profits): 
(c) the proporti':>n of management and general establishment 
charges properly attributable to the lines; 
(d) any other expenses on revenue account properly attributable 
to the lines; 
(e) interest on the depreciated cost of the lines shown in the 
books of the undertaking and properly attributable to the lines 
(whether defrayed out of capital or revenue) and interests on such 
working capital as is properly attributable to the lines: 
Provided that for the purpose of ascertaining the prinCIpal on 
which interest is payable within the meaning of this clause, there 
shall be left out of account any part of principal interest on Which is 
charged to capital; 
(f) an allowance for depreciation of an amount determined in 
respect of the lines in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 
VI of the Sixth Schedule. 
II. If the lines are used partly by the Board and partly by the licensee 
o'wning them, or if the arrangement for their use comes into force or 
determines otherwise than at the beginning or end of a year of account, 
the charges and allowances referred to in paragraph I shall be the proper 
proportion thereof having regard to ~e use made of the. lines hy. ~he 
Board and the period of such use dunng the year and WIth the addttIon 
of the cost of such additional transmission losses as may have been in-
curred by the licensee as a result of the Board's user of the lines. 
• • • • • 
Annual 
reports, 
atatisticlil 
and 
returns. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. 
(Shlri K. C. Pant, 
Minister of Energy.) 