Ags InTRopuCeD 1n LOK SaBHA ON

Ti MAL «२

Bill No. 93 of 1992

| PARLIAMENT (PREVENTION OF DISQUALIFICATION)
AMENDMENT BILL, 1992
A -
BILL
her to amend the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act,
r 1959
_ Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
India as follows:—

“4. This Act may be called the Parliament (Prevention of Disquali- short
tion) Amendment Act, 1992. : title,

2. In section 3 of the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) amend_
1959 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause (i), ment of
or the words, brackets and figures, “and (it) the office of chairman or section 3.

of any statutory or non-statutory body specified in Part Tl of
Schedule;”, the following shall be substituted, namely:—

“, (i) the office of chairman or secretary of any statutory or
non-statutory body specified in Part II of the Schedule and (iii) the
office of deputy chairman of the non-statutory body specified in Part
IM of the Schedule;”. .

3. In the Schedule to the principal Act, after Part II, the following 4 nena.
shall be added, namely:— ORT

‘the
“PART IIL PI _ Schedule,
Bopy UNDER THE CENTRAL GoveRNMaetT
Planning Commission.”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Joint Committee on Offices of Profit (Tenth Lok Sabha)
their Second Report examined the composition, character, functions, be
of four Commissions constituted by the Government of India and 1
emoluments and allowances payable to their chairpersons, vice-cl
persons, members, ete., with a view to consider whether the hold
offices of these Commissions would incur disqualification under
102 of the Constitution. The Committee, has recommended the
ment of the Schedule to the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualifica
Act, 1959, to prevent, inter alia, the holder of the office of deputy al
man, Planning Commission from incurring disqualification for ४७
chosen, or for being, a member of Parliament. Further, the Fl
Commission of India in Reference case No. 1 of 1990 between Shri
Subhaiah and Shri Ramakrishna Hegde has held that the office of de
puty chairman, Planning Commission js capable of “profit” being deriv
ed as a definite salary is attached to that office and the fact t
the incumbent did not draw any salary did not materially alter the
tus of that office being an “office of profit”.

2. In view of the above, it is proposed to amend the Parliem
(Prevention of Disqualification) Act, 1959 so as to prevent the holder
the office of deputy chairman, Planning Commission from inet
disqualification for being chosen, or for being, a member of Parlia

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

New Deum;

The 6th May, 1992. K. VIJAYA BHASKARA REDDY,


ANNEXURE
ExTRACT FROM THe PARLIAMENT (PREVENTION Or DISQUALIFICATION)
Act, 1959
(10 6७ 1959)

रू * * * ®

3. It is hereby declared that none of the following officers, in so far
as it is an office of profit under the Government of India or the Gov-
ernment of any State, shall disqualify the holder thereof for being
chosed as, or for being, a member of Parliament, namely:—

® * * * *

(®) the office of chairman, director or member of any statutory
or non-statutory body other than any such body as is referred to in
clause (४), if the holder of such office is not entitled to any remu-
neration other than compensatory allowance, but excluding (i) the
office of chairman of any statutory or non-statutory body specified in

Part I of the Schedule and (i) the office of chairman or secretary of
any statutory or non-statutory body specified in Part II of the
Schedule;

* * j ees * *

Certain
offices
of
profit
not to
disqua-
lity.


re a : LOK SABHA

A 3
‘BILL i
further to amend the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification)
1959.

(Shri K. Vijaya Bhaskara Reddy, Minister of Law, Justice and |
Affairs.) 4