As INTRODUCED IN LoK SI\UHA ON 
. . 
· 6 A, ,'. 
"- u 1988" 
Bill No. 93 of 1.86 
THE NATIONAL SECURITY GUARD BILL, 1986 
CLAUSES 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. De~itio!l'!l. 
3. Persons subject to this Act. 
CHAPTER II '" 
CONSTl'lO'l'lON OF THB S!lCUlU1Y GUAm) AND CONM'lttONS OF SERVICE 01' THE 
MEMBERs OF THE SZCUJU'lY GUAJU) 
4. Constitution of the Security Guard. 
5. Control, direction, etc. 
6. Liability for service outside India. 
7. Resignation and withdrawal from the post. 
8. Tenure of service under the Act. 
9. Termination of service by Central Government. 
10. Dismissal, removal or reduction by the Director-General and by 
other officers. 
11. Certificate of termination of service. 
12. l1eHI rictions respecting right to form assoqiations, freedom of 
speech, etc. 
13. Remedy of aggrieved persons other thm officers. 
14. Remedy of aggrieved officers. 
CHAPTER III 
OFFllNCBS 
15. OJfenees in relation to the terrorists and other persot\s in arms 
against the Union, and punishable with death. 
16. Offences punishable more severely on active duty than at other 
times. 
17. Mutiny. 
18. Desertion and aiding desertion. 
19. Absence without leave. 
20. Striking or threatening superior oftleer. 
21. Disobedience to sUperior oftictU'. 

ii 
CLAUSI'S 
22. Assault and obstructiO'll. 
23. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct. 
24. Il1-treating a subordinate. 
25. Drunkenness. 
28. Pennittlng'~cape of person in custody. 
27. Irreguiarity i in eonaection with, atll88t or,-con1bNment: 
28. Escape from custody. 
29. Offences in resp~.t of property.. , 
30. Extortion and exaction. 
31. Making away with equiprri~!ll. 
32. Injury to property. 
33. False accusations. 
34. Falsifying official documents and false declarations. 
35. False declaration on appointment. 
36. Offences relating to Security Guard Court. 
37. False evidence. 
38. Unlawful detention of pay!, 
39. Unbecoming CO'llduct. 
40. ''Violation of good order an~' tiiscip'1tne. 
41. Mi'SCellaneous offences. 
42. Attempt. 
43. Abetment of offenc~ that have been comnutted. 
44. Abetment of offences that' have nGt been committed. 
45. Civil offences. 
46. Civil offences not triable by a 'SecUrity GU&,rd Court. 
CHAPI'ER IV 
PUNISHMENTS 
47. Punishments awardable' 'by Security Guard Courts~ 
48. Alternative punishments awardable by Secw-ity Guard Courts. 
49. Combination of punishm~nts. 
50. Punishments otherwise than by Security Guard Courts. 
51. Minor punishments. 
52. Limit of punishments unaer'"~eri' 51. 
53. Punishment of officers of or tbelO1W the rank of Squadron Com-
~ by oftilel'S DDt ,beh)w .the,oI'aakof,·,lnIIpeotoreGeneral. 
54. Punishment of p&rsc:ms of!1bel'ank ot'AI811tMlt Commander. 
CHAPl'ER V 
Amo:sT AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL 
55. Custody of offenders . 
. 56. Duty of Commander in regard to ~tiOrt. 
57. Interval between c-.rlMtttal a1td"~ . 
• 

ill 
CLAvsa 
58~ Arrest; by' ciVil authorities. 
59. Captu.res of deserters. 
60. Inquiry!in~ abs~W'tthoUt leave. 
CHAPTER VI 
SI!lCt1lUTY GUAlU> COURTS 
61. Kinds. of Security Guar~ .Courts . 
. 62.' Power to convene a General SecUrity Guard COUrt. 
63. Power to convene a Petty Security Guard Court . 
. 64. Contents of warrants -issued. under 'SeCtions 62 and 63. 
65. Composition of General Security Guard Court. 
66. Composition of a Fetty Seowi\y .• Guard Court. 
67. Summary Security Guard Court. 
68. Dissolution of a Security Gual'd Court. 
69. Powers of a Ge!U!T111 Seeurity Guard Court. 
70. Powers of·: a Petty Seeu.tity Guard Court. 
71. Powers of a Summary Security Guard Court. 
:72. ProhibitiO'll of second' trial. 
73. Period of limitation- for trial. 
74. Trial, etc., of offender who ceases to be subject to this Act. 
75. Application of Act during term of sentence. 
76. Place of trial. 
77. Choice' between criminal court and Security Guard Court. 
78. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offettder. 
CHAPl'ERvn 
PROCEDU'Rt OF S~umTY GUARD COURTS 
79. Presiding Officer. 
80. Judge AttorneYII, etc. 
81. Challenges. 
82. Oaths of'membeirs, Judge Attotney and Witfte8s. 
83. Voting by members. 
84. General r,ule as to evidence I of 1872. 
85. Judicial notice. 
86. Summoning witnesses. 
87. Documents exempted from production. 
88. Commissions for examination of witnesses. 
89. Examination of witness on coIJUllission. 
90. Conviction of olIence not charged. 
91.- Presumption as to signatures. 
92. Appointment paper. 
93. Pre'aumption as to ce'rtain documents. 
94. Refl"rence by accused to Government officer. 

iv 
6.Atrsts 
95. Evidence of previoUs canvictiona and general cbarac\W. 
96. Lunacy of accused. 
97. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused fwtrial. 
98. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section M. 
99. Release of lunatic accused. 
100. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives. 
101. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial. 
102. Order for disposal of property regarding which oftence is com-
mitted. 
103. PoWers of Security Guard Court in relation to proceedings 
under this Act. 
CHAPTER vnI 
CONFlIUI4ATION AND llEVISION .. 
104. Finding and sentenCle not valid, unless confirmed. 
105. Powe.r to confirm finding and sentence of General Security 
Guard Court. 
106. Power to confirm finding and sentence of Petty Security GJ,lard 
Court. I 
107. Limitation of powers of confirming authority. 
108. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute 
sentences. 
109. Revision of finding or b-entence. 
110. Finding and sentence of a Summary Security Guard Court. 
111. Transmi'SsiO'll of proceedings of Summary Security Guard ·Court. 
112. Alteration of finding or sentence in certain cases. 
113. Remedy against order, finding or b'entence of Security Guard 
Court. 
114. Annulment of proceedings. 
CHAPTER IX 
115. Form of sentence of death. 
116. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment. 
117. Execution of sentence of imprisonment. 
118. Temporary custody of offender. 
119. Execution of sentlnce of impri'Sonment in special cases, 
120. Conveyance of prisoner from place to place. 
121. Communication of certain ·orders to prison omeers. 
122. Executian of sentence of fine. 
123. Informality or error in the order or warrant. 
124. Pardon nnd remission. 
1:~5 CUllcellation of conditional pardon, release on parol. or 
remission. 

v 
CLAUilS 
126. Suspension of sentence of imprisonment. 
127. Orders pending suspension. 
128. Release on suspension. 
129. Computation of period of suspension. 
130. Order after suspension. 
131. Reconsideration of case after suspension. 
132. Fresh sentence afte.r suspension. 
133. ScQPe of power of suspension. 
134. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal. 
r .. ··· CHAPrER X 
MIscl!:LoLANEOUS 
135. Rank structure. 
136. Deductions from pay and allowances. 
137. Powers and duties CO'llferable and imposable on members of the 
Security Guard. 
las. Protection for acts of members of the Security Guard. 
139. Power to make rules. 
140. Provisions as to existing National Security Guard. 

5 
10 
Bill No. 93 of 1986 
THE NATIONAL SECURITY GUARD BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
t01Jrovicle ior thE constitution and regulation of an armed fn·ree of 
the Union for combating terrorist activities with a view to 'Protecting 
Stah!s a.gatnst internal disturbance . .; and for matter.~ ,;cnmt>cted 
ther,'with. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of rnd~a asfollows:-
CHAPTER I 
PuuMINABY 
.! 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Security Guard Act, 1986. Short title 
and 
(2) It sh.aH. come into .foreeon . such date as the Central Government commence-
ms" by noti,OcationiEl theOmcial Gazette, appoint. ment. 
,2. '(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
(a) "active duty", in relation to a pe,son subject to this Act. 
means any duty as a member of the Seeu,rity Guard during the 
period in which such perSdll is attached to, or forms part of, a unit 
of the Security Guard-
(i) which is engaged in operations against terroris.ts or any 
person in arms against the Union; 01' 

2 
(ii) which is operating at a picket or engaged O'll patrol 
or any other duty, in relation to combating terrorist activity; 
(b) "Assi:;tallt Commandcr" mcans a person appointed or in 
pay as an Assistant Commander Grade I, Assistant Commander 
Grade II or Assistant Commander Grade III: 
(c) "civil offence" means an offence which is triable by a 
criminal court or by a special Judge appointed under the Criminal 
Law Amendment Act, 19502: 
(d) "civil prison" means any jailor place used for the deten-
5 
46 of 1952 
tion of any criminal prisoner under the Prisons Act, 1894, or under 109 of 1894. 
any other law for the' time being in force: 
(e) "combatised tradesman" means a person appointed or in pay 
as a combatised tradesman; 
<I> "Commander", when used in any provision of this Act with 
reference to any unit of the Security Guard, means the officer whoae 15 
duty it is to discharge with respect to that unit, the functions of a 
Commander in regard to matters of the description referred to in 
that provision; 
(g) "criminal court" means a court of ordinary criminal justice 
in any part of India and includes a court of a special Judge appointed ~o 46 of 19.52. 
under the Criminal Law Ameondment Act, 1952: 
(h) "Deputy Inspector-General" means a Deputy Inspector-
General of the Security Guard appointed under section 5; 
(i) "Director-Genera!" and "Additional Director-GeneraP mean, 
'respectively' the Director-General and an Additional Director- 2;1 
General of the Security Guard appointed under section 5; 
(j) "Group" means a unit of t~e Security Guard constituted as 
a GroUip by the Cen tral Government; 
(k) "Grou.p Commander" means a Group Commander 
Security Guard appOinted under section 5; 
(l) "Inspector-Ge'lleral" means an Inspector-General 
Security Guard appointed under section 5; 
of the 
of the 
:10 
(m) "Judge Attorney.General", "Additi(',nal Judge Attol'lley-
General", "Deputy Judge Attorney·General" and "Judge Attomey" 
mean, respectively, the Judge Attorney-General, an Additional Judge 35 
Attomey-General, a Deputy Judge Attorney-General and a Judge" 
Atto~ of the Security Guard appointed in the appropriate rank 
by the Central Government; 
(n) "member of the Security Guard" means an officer, an As-
sistant Commander, a Ranger or a combatised tradesman; 40 
(0) "notification" means a notification published in the Oftlctal 
Gazette; , 
(p) 'offence" means any act or omission punishable under this 
Act and includes a civil offence; 
(q) "oftlcer" means a person appointed orin pay as an oftlce.r 4; 
of the Seeurity Guard; 

46 of 1860. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
30 
3 
(r) "prescribed" weans prescribed by rules; 
(a) "Ranger" means a Ranger Grade I and a Ranger Grade I,l 
of the Security Guard; 
(t) "rUle" -means- a rule made under this Attj 
(11.) "Security 'Guard" means the National Securi,y' Guard; 
(v) "Security Guard Court" means a Court refe~fed to ip. sec-
tion 61; 
(w) "Security Guard custody" means the arrest or conf\nement 
of a member of the Security Guard according to rules; -. 
(;r;) "superior officer", when used in relation to a person sub-
jeCt to this Act, means,-
(i) any member of the Security Guard to whose collUll8Dd 
such person is for the time being subject in accordance Wtth 
the rules; 
(ii) any officer of a higher rank or class; 
and includes, when~uch person is not an officer, an Assistant' CO'lh .. 
mander or a Ranger of a higher rank or class; 
(y) "terrorist" means any person who, with intent to over-awe 
the Government as by law estabUshed or to strike terror in the 
people or any section of the people or to alienate any section of 
the people or to adversely affect the harmony amongst different 
sections of the people, doe~ any act or thing by using bombs, dyna-
mite, or other explosive substances or intlammable substances or fire-
a.rm~ or other lethal weapons or poisO'lls or noxious gases or other 
chemicals or any other SUbstances (whether biological or other. 
wise) of a hazardous nature, in such a manner as to ca~ ~r as is 
likely to ca~se, death of, or injuries to, any person or persons or 
damage to, or destruction of, property or disruption of -any supplies 
or services essential to the life of the community; 
--~f" 
(z) all words and expressions used and not. defined. in this Act 
but defined in the Indian Penal Code shall have the meanings res-
pectively assigned to them in that Code. . 
(2) In this Act, references to any law not in force in any.State 
shall be construed as references tn the corresponding law in force in that 
35 State. 
3. (1) 'l'he following persons appointed (whether on deputation or 
in any other manner) in the Security Guard shall be subject to this Act, 
wherever they maybe, namely:-
(a.) officers and Assistant Commanders; and 
(b) Rangers and combatised tradesmen. 
(2) Every person subject to this Act shall remain so subject final 
repatriated, retired, released, discharged, removed or dismissed from the 
Security Guard in accordance with the provisions of this ACt and the 
ea. , .. ~.' _:" ..... , ru1 . r " • 'MI,8.!11Il • - t ,,,,r • ___ ._ .. ~ 
f., 
PersonA 
subjectt«t 
this Act. 
, 

Constitu-
tionOf 
the Secu-
rity 
Guard. 
Control, 
direction, 
etc. 
Liability 
for service 
olutside 
India. 
Resig-
nation 
and with-
drawal 
from the 
poIt. 
renate 01. 
iervice 
uaderthe 
Act. 
nrmilla. 
tion df 
Mrviu by 
C41Ittai 
Geverllo 
ment. 
tlismislal. 
removal or 
reduction 
by the 
Direetor-
General and 
by other 
otftcera. 
.... _ ... ', ..... ___ .~._ ...... _ ... _ .r 
••• 
, , , 
CHAPTER U 
CoNSTITUTION OF TJU: Sr.cUBlTY GUARD AND COND1'l1IONS or sERVICZ OF TIm 
MEMBERs OF THE SzeUlUTYGUARD 
4. (1) Tbere sball be aD armed force of the Union called the NatMmal 5 
Security Guard for combatinJ terrorist adivities with a viewt to protect 
States apiut internal disturbances. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Security G~d ahan 
be constituted in such manner as may be prescribed. a.nd the concijtiona 
of service of the members of the Security Guard shall be such as may 10 
be prescribed. 
5. (1) The ge~eral superintendence, direction and control of the 
Security Guard shall vest in, and be exercised by, the Central Govern-
ment and subject thereto a,nd to the provisions of this Act and the rules, 
the cOIII.IQIUld and supervision of the Seearity . Guard shall vest in an 15 
ofIicer to be appointed by the Central Government as the Director 
General of the Security Guard. 
(2) The Director-General shall, in the discharge of his duties under 
this Act, be assisted by such number of Additional Diredors-Ge.ueral, 
Inspectors-General, Deputy Inspectors-General, Group Commanders and lIO 
other oftieers as may be appointed by the Centlall Government. 
S. Every member of the Security Guard shall be liable to serve in 
any part of India as well as outside India. 
7. No member of the Security Gu.trd shall be at liberty-
(a) to resign his appointment during the term of lUs engagement; 
or lI5 
(b) to withdraw himself from all or any of the duties of his 
appointment, 
except with the previous permission in writing of the prescribed autho-
rity. 
8. Every person subject to this Act shan hold office during the pleasure 30 
of the President. 
t. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, the Central Gov-
ernment may dilmiss or remove from service any person subject to this 
Act. 
10. (1) The Director-General, any Additional Director-General or any 35 
Inspector-General may dismiss or remove from service or reduce to a 
lower grade or rank or the ranks, "any person subject to this Act other 
than an officer. 
(2) An officer not below the rank of a Deputy Inspector-General or 
any prescribed officer may dismiss or remove from the service any 40 
person under his command other than an officer or an Assistant Com-
mander. 

a , . 
(3) Any such officer as is mentioned in sub-section (2) may reduce 
to a lower grade or rank or the ranks any person under his command 
except an officer or an Assistant Commander. 
(4) The l"xercise of any power under this section shall be subject to 
5 the provisions of this Act and the rules.· 
11. An Assistant Commander, or a Ranger or a combatised tradesman Certificate 
who is retired, release<i, discharged; removed or dismissed from the of termina·· 
service shall be furnished by the officer to whose command he is subject, lion. ~f 
with a certificate setting forth- service. 
10 (a) the authority terminating his service; 
(b) the cause for such termination; and 
(c) the fUll period of hi'S service in the Security Gua.rd. 
12. (1) No person subject to this Act shall, without the previous sanc- Reetrictioal 
tion in writing of the Central Government Or of the prp.scribed authortty,- respectin. 
ri.bl lID 
15 (a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade fl rmaaaoa.. 
union, labour union" political association or with any class of trade lions, f.-
unions, labour unions Or political aSSOciations; Or dom hOI IIPOOC , ttGo 
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any society, 
institution, association or organisation that is not recognised as part 
20 of the Security Guard or is ri.ot of a purely social, recreational or 
religious nature; or 
(c) communicate with the press or publish or caUSe to be pub-
lished any book, letter or other document except where such com-
munication or publication is in the bonafid~ discharge of his duties 
25 or is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific character flr Is of a 
prescribed nature. 
Explanation.-If any question arises as to whether any society, insti-
tution, association or organisation is of a purely sociaL, recreational Of 
religious nature under clause (b) of this sub-section, the decision of the 
30 Central Government thereon shall be final. 
(2) No person subject to this Act shall participate in, or address, any 
meeting ·or take part in any demonstration organised by any body of per-
sons for any political purposes Or for such other purposes as .may be 
prescribed. 
35 13. (1) Any pel'Bon subject to this Act other than an officer who deems R~o4y of 
himself wronged by any superior or other officer may, complain to the :::::04 oilier 
officer under whose commana he is serving. thaa 
(2) When the officer complained against is . the officer to whom any ofticel'l. 
complaint should, under sub-section (1), be preferred .. the aggrieved per-
40 Bon may complain to such officer's next superior officer. 
(3) Every offtcer receiving any such complaint shall make as complete 
an investigation into it as may be possible for' givin~ full redress to the 
complainant; or when necessary, refer the complatnt to a superior 
authority. ! 
(4) The Director-General may revise any decision made under any of 
45 the foregoing sub-sections, but, subject thereto, ~uc~ decision shall be 
ftqaJ. ''';: f flo, l-''''1''~''''''-'''' • ~ 
_. I 

Remedy of 
qarieved 
oftIcers. 
Ofrences in 
relation to 
the terro-
rists and 
other per. 
IOns in arms 
against the 
UQi()n and 
pun_ble 
with ,death. 
Offences 
punishable 
more seve· 
rely on 
active duty 
than at 
other times. 
Mutiny. 
-I 
14. Any oftlcer who deems himself wronged by hit! Commander or any 
other superior officer and who, on due application made to his Commander 
or such other superior officer, does not receive the redress to which he 
considers hil;nself ,entitled, may complain to the Director-General or the 
Central Government through proper ch~nnel. 5 
CHAPTER III 
OFFENCEs' 
15. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences.. that is to say,-
(a) shamefully abandons place of his duty or misbehaves in such 10 
manner as to show cowardice during operations; 
(b) treacherously holds COITe'spondence with, or communicates 
intelligence to, a terrorist or any person in arms against the Union; or 
(c) directly or indirectly assists any terrorist with money, arms. 
ammunition, sto.res or supplies or in any other manner whatsoever; or 15 
(d) knowingly does any act calculated to imperil the success of 
the Security Guard or the military, naval, air forces or any other 
armed force of India or any forces co-operating therewith or any part 
of such forces, 
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court. be liable to suffer death 20 
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
16. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say,-
(a) forces a safeguard, or forces or uses criminal force to asen-
try; or 25 
(b) breaks into any house or other place in search of plunder; or 
(c) being a sentry sleeps upon his post, or is drunk; or 
(d) without orders from his superior officer leaves his guard, 
picket, patrol or post; 
shall, on cohviction by a Security Guard Court,-
(1.' if he commits any such offence when on active duty, be liable 
to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen 
years or such less punishment as is in this''Act mentioned; and 
(ii) if he commits any such offence when not on active duty, be 
liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven 35 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
17. Any person subject to this 'Act who comtnits any of the following 
offences, that is to .say,-' ' 
(a) begins,incites. causes or conspires with any other person to 
cause any mutiny in the Security Guard or in the military, naval, air 40 
forces or any other armed force of India or any forces co-opetat1ng 
therewith; or 
(b)jolns in any Buch'mutiny; or" 

(c) being present at any such mutiny, does not use his utmos(; 
endeavours to suppress the same; or 
(d) knowing or having reason to believe in the existence of any 
such mutiny, or of any intention to mutiny or of any such conspiracy, 
5 does not, without delay, give infonnation thereof to his Commander 
or other superior oftlcerj or -
(e) endeavours to seduce any person in the Security Guard or 
in the military, naval air forces or any other armed force of India 
or any forces co-operating therewith frOm his duty or allegiance to 
10 the Union, . 
Ihall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer death 
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
18. (i) Any person su6ject to this Act who deserts or attempts to 
desert the service shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court!-
15 (a) if he commits the offence when on active duty or when 
10 
under orders for active duty, be liable to suffer death or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and 
(ll) if he commits the offence under any other circumstances, be 
liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
(2) Any person suoject to this Act who knowingly harbours any such 
deserter shall, on conviction by a Security· Guard Court. be liable to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three' years 01." such less 
punishment as, is in this Act mentioned. 
IS (3) Any person subject to this Act who, being cognizant of any deser-
tion or aHempt at desertion of a person subject to this Act, does not forth-
with give notice to his own or some other superior officer, or take any 
!l!teps in his power to cause such person to oe apprehended, shall, on con-
viction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
30 term wliich may extend to two years at siich"less punishment as is in this 
Act mentioned. 
(4) For the purposes of this Act, a person deserts,-
(a) if he absents from his unit ·or the place of duty at any time 
with the intention of not repo,rting back to such unit or plaCe, or 
who at any time and under any circumstances when absent from hiw 
unit or place of duty, does any act which shows that he has an 
intention of not re.porting to such unit or place of duty; 
(b) if he absents himself without leave with intent to Avoid any 
I active duty. 
400 19. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say,-
U (a) absents himself without leave; or 
(b) without sufficient cause overstays leave granted to him; or 
(e) being on leave of absence and. having received information 
f1."om the appropriate authoritv that any unit or part thereof to which 
he belongs, has been ordered on active duty, fails, without sufficient 
cause, to rejoin without delay; or 
(d) without sufficient cause fails to appear at the time fixed at 
the parade Or phce appointect'for exercise or duty; or 
Deaertioa 
aod·aicUDt 
desertion. 
Absen. 
without 
leave. 

StrildD,or 
tbreateninl 
luperior 
offiecr. 
Disobe-
dience to 
IUperior 
officer. 
Assault and. 
obitruction. 
r-o,' .• 
I . -, 
(e) when on parade, or on the line of marcn, without luftlcient 
~use or without leave from his superior officer, quits the parade or 
line of march; or 
(f) when in camp or elsewhere, is fOimd beyond any limit. fixed. 
or in any place prohibited, by any general,1ocal or other order, with- :) 
out a pass or written leave from his superior officer; or 
(g) without leave from his superior officer or without due cause 
absents himself from any school when duly ordered to attend there: 
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to sufter im~ 
prisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such less 10 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
20. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the follOwing 
offences, that is to say,-
(a) uses criminal force to or assaults his superior officer; or 
(b) uses threatening language to such officer; or 15 
«~) uses insubordinate language to such officer, 
shall on conviction by a Security Guard Court,-
(i) if such officer is at the time in the execution of his office or, 
if the offence is committed on active duty, be liable to . suffer im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such 20 
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and 
(ii) in other cases, be liable to suftler imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to ten years or such Tess punishment as is in this 
Act "mentioned: 
Provided that in the case of any offence specified in clause (c), the 25 
imprisonment shall not exceed five years. 
21. (1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys, in such manner 
as10 show a wiiful defiance of authority, any lawful command given p~r­
sonally by his superior officer in the execUtion of his office whether the 
same is given orally, or in writing or by signal or otherwise. shall, on 30 
conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to "suffer imprisonment 
for a ~ which may extend to fburteen years or such less punishment 
as is ~n this Act mentioned. 
(2) Any pers(\n subject to this Act who disobeys any lawful command 
given by his superior officer shall, on conviction' by a Security Guard 35 
Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
22. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say,- " 
(a) being concerned in nny quarrel, affray or disorder, refuses 40 
to obey any officer, though of inferior rank" who orders him Into 
arrest, or uses criminal force to or assaults any such officer; or .. 
(b) uses criminal force to, or assaults any person, whether sub. 
ject to this Act or not, in whose custody he is lawfully placed, and i 
whether he is or is not his superior officer; or ~ 

, .. 
(c) resists an escort whose duty. it is to apprei-end him or have 
him in charge; or . 
(d) breaks out of barracks, camp or quarters; or 
(e) refuses to obey any general, local or other order, 
5 shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to 'IU1fer iJD. 
prisonmentfor a term which may extend, in the case of offences specified. 
In clauses (c£> and (e), to two years, and in the case of the offences speci-
fied in the other clauses, to ten years, or in either case such less punish-
ment as is in this Act mentioned. 
10 23. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say,-
(a) is guilty of any disgraceful conduct of a cruel, indecent or 
unnatural kind; or 
(b) malingers or feigns or produces disease or infirmity in 
IS himself or intentionally delays his cure or aggravates his. disease or 
infirmity; or 
(c) with intent to render himself or any other person unfit for 
service, voluntarily causes hurt to himself or that person, 
shall, on conviction b~ a Security Guard Court, be liable, to suffer im-
20 prisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
24. Any officer, Assistant Commander or Ranger Grade I, who uses 
criminai force to, or otherwise ill-treats, any person subject to this Act, 
being his subordinate in rank or position, shall, on conviction by a Security 
1Z5 Guard Court be liable to, suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act men· 
tioned. 
25. (1) Any l>8rson subject to this Act, who is found in a state of 
drunkenness, whether on· duty or not, shall, on convicnon by a Security 
30 Guard Court, ,be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months or such less punishment as is in this Act, men-
tioned. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person shall be deemed 
to be in a state of drunkenness if, owing to the infiuence of alCOhol or 
35 any drug whether alone or in combination with any other substance, he 
is unfit to be· entrusted with his duty. or with any duty which he may 
be called upon to perform Or behaves in a disorderly manner or in a 
manner likely to bring discredit to the Security Guard. 
, 26. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
40 offences, that is to 8ay,-
(a) when in command of a guard, picket, patrol, detac;hment or 
post, releases without proper authQI'ity, whether wilfully or without 
reasonable excuse, any pera.on committed to his charge, or refu_ to 
.receive any prisoner or perSODSO committedj or 
Certain 
forms of 
dislracefu1 
conduct. 
IIl-lreatina: 
a sub-
ordinate. 
Drunkell-
nell. 
Permit-
tine 
escape or 
person ba 
eustody. 

Irregulari· 
ty in COD-
nectioD 
witb 
arreat or 
conliM-
ment. 
Escape 
from 
custody. 
Offences 
in respect 
of pro-
perty. 
(b) wilfully or without reasonable excuse allows to escape aDy' 
person who is committed to his charge, or whom it is his duty to 
keep or guard, 
Ihall, on conviction. by a Security Guard Court, be liable, if he has acted 
wilfully, to su1fer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 5 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he has 
DDt acted wilfully, to suffer impr.isoDmellt for a term which may extend 
to ,two years o.r such less punisbment as is in tbh; Act mentioned. 
%7. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the iollowinS 
oifences, that is to say,- 10 
(a) unnecessarily detains a person in arrest or confinement 
without bringing him to trial, or fails to bring his CIlSe before the 
proper authority for investigation; Ql' 
(b) baving committed a person to Security Guard custody fails 
without reasanable cause to deliver at the time of such committal, or 15 
as soon as practicable, and in any case within forty-eight hours 
thereafter, to the officer or other person into whose custody the 
person arrested is colJlIPitted., an account in writing signed by 
himself of the offence with which the person so committed is 
charged, , ...... i 20 
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
28. Any person subject to this Act who, being in lawful custody, 
escapes or attempts to escape, shall, on conviction by a Security Guard . 
Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 115 
tlvee years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. . 
29. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say,-
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the Government, 
or to any Security Guard mess, band or institution, or to any person 30 
aubject to this Act; or . 
(b) dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any 
such property; or . 
. (c) commits c.riminal breach of trust in respect of any INch 35 
property; or 
... :. ... I...~ &.-.-
. (d) diahonestly receives or retains any such property in respect 
uf which any of the oftences under clauses (4), (b) and (c) has been 
committed, knowing or havinl reason to believe the commi&lliO'n of 
sllch oftance; or, 40 
(e) Wilfully destroys or injures any property of the Govern-
ment entrusted ~ him; or 
(f) does any other thing with intent to defraud, or to cause 
wrongful gain to one person or wrongful loss to another person, 
lball, on conviction by a SecUrity Guard Cou.rt, be liable to suffer im- 45 
pr~D!D!ent for a term which may extend to ten years or such less 
pwalshment as is in thiJ Act meDtioneci. 

11 
30. Any person subjeet to this Act .who commits any of the foUowine 
offences, that is to say,-
l!1xtOl'-
tiOll anti 
exaction. 
(a) commits extortion; or 
(b) without proper authority exacts from any person money, 
5 provision~ or service, 
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
3L Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
10 offences, that is to say,-
(a) makes away with, or is concerned in making away with, any 
arms, ammunition, equipment, instruments, tools, clothing or any 
other thing being the property of the Government issued to him for 
his use or entrusted to him; or 
15 (b) loses by neglect anything mentioned in clause (a); or 
(e) sells, pawns, destroys or defaces any medal or decoration 
granted to him, 
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend, in the case of the offences 
20 specified in claUSe (a), to ten years, and in'the case of the offences 
spedfied in the other clauses, to five years, Or in either cale such less 
punishment as"is in this Act mentioned. 
32. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say,-
25 (a) destroys or injures any property mentioned in clause (a) of 
section 31,. or any property belonging to any Security Guard. mess, 
hand or institution, or to any person subject to this Act; or 
(b) commits any act which causes damage to, or destruction of, 
any property of the Government by fire or in any other manner 
30 whatever; or 
(c) kills, injures, makes away with, ill-treats or loses, any 
animal entrusted to him, 
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be'liable, if he has acted 
wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
35 years or 'Such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he has 
acted without reasonable excuse, to suffer imprisonment for a tenn which 
may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned. 
Makioa 
aW'&7 
with. 
equip-
ment. 
Injury 
tet 
property. 
33. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
40 offences, that is to say,-
False 
accUJa_ 
tiou. 
45 
(a) mak~ a false accusation against any person subject to thi8 
Act, knowing or having reason to believe such ~ccusation to be 
false; or 
(b) in making a complaint against any person subject to' thi. 
Act makes any statement af!ectiug the character of such perIOn, 

Falsify-
ing 
oftlcial 
docu-
ments 
and 
false 
declara-
tions. 
False 
decla-
ration on 
appoint-
ment. 
Offences 
relating to 
Security 
Guard 
Court. 
knowing or having reason to believe such statement to be' false, or 
knowingly and wilfully suppresses any material fact, 
shall, on conviction by a SecUrity Guard Court, be liable to suffer im-
prisonme'llt for a term which may extend to three years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 5 
34. Any person 'SUbject to this Act who commits any of the following 
oftences, that is to say,-
(4) in any report, return. list. certificate. book or other document 
made or signed by him, or of the contents of which it is his duty to 
ascertain the accuracy, knowingly makes, or is privy to the making! 10 
of, any false or fraudulent statement; o.r 
(b) in any document of the description mentioned in claUse (4) 
knowingly makes, or is privy to the making of, any omission, with 
intent to defraud; or 
(c) knowingly and with intent to injure any person, or know- 15 
ingly and with intent to defraud, suppresses, defaces, alters or makes 
away with any document which it is his duty to preserve or produce; 
. or 
(d) whe.re it is his official duty to make a d~laration respecting 
any matter, knowingly makes a false declaration; or 20 
(e) obtains for himself, or for any other person, any pension. 
allowance or other advantage or privilege by a statement which is 
false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not 
believe to be true, or by making or using a false entry in any book 
or record, or by making any document containing a false statement, 25 
or by omitting to make a true entry or document containing a true 
statement, I ; j "i i; 
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprison-
ment for a term w.hich may extend to ten years or such less punishment 
as is in this Act mentiofted. 30 
35. Any person having become subject to this Act who is discovered 
to have made at the time of ''Sppointment a wilfully false statement or 
declaration in connection with his appointme'llt, shall, on conviction by 
a S(·curity Guard Court, be liable to. suffer imprisonment for a term which • may extend to three years or sud\leSS punishment as is in this Act 35 
mentioned. 
\ 
36. Any person subject to this Act ''tlI/'ho commits any of the follOWing 
offences, that is to S8y,-
(a) being duly summoned. or ord~red to attend as a witness before 
a Security Guard Court, wilfully or ~ithout reasonable excuse, makes 40 
default in attending; or ' 
(b) refuses to take an oath 0 make an aftlrmation legally 
required by a Security Guard Court ·0 be taken or made; or . . 
(c) refuses to produce or deliver any docume'llt in his power 01'" 
control legally required by a Security Guard Court to be prOduced or 45 
delivered by him; or l' 
(d) refuses, when a witness, to nswer any question whiCh he is 
by law bound to answer; or, : 

18 
(e) is guilty of contempt of the Security Guard Court by U8ing 
insulting or threatening language, or by causing any interruption or 
disturbance in the proceedings of such Court, 
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to sutfer imprison-
5 ment for a term which may extend to three years or such less puni'Shment 
as is. in this Act mentiO'lled. 
37. Any person subj,ect to this Act who, having ~n duly sworn or 
afftrmed before any Security Guard Court, or before any gfficer competent 
under this Act to administer oath or affirmation or before a Court of 
10 inquiry constituted U'11der this Act, makes any statement which is false, 
and which he eithe,r knows or believes to be false 'Or does not believe to 
be true, shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less 
punishment 8'S is in this Act mentioned. 
15 38. Any officer, Assistant Commander or Ranger Grade I who, hav.ing 
received the pay of a person subject to this Act unlawfully detains o.r 
refuses to pay the same when due, shall, on conviction by a Security 
Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to five year'S or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
Falae 
evi4ence. 
Unlaw. 
fuldeten. 
tionof 
pay. 
20 39. Any officer or Assistant Commander who behaves in a manner Ulllbe-
unbecoming of his position and the character expected of him shall, on _ co mini 
conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to be dismissed or to conduct. 
suffer such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
40. Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any act or omission 
25 which, though not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and 
discipline of the Security Guard shall, on conviction by a Security Guard 
Court, be liable to suff~ imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
fl. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
30 offences, that is to say,-
35 
45 
(a) being in command of any detachment or post or on the march, 
and receiving a complaint that anyone under his command has beaten 
or otherwise maltreated or opp,ressed any person, or has caused dis.-
turbance at any public place, or committed any riot or tresspass, fails 
to have due reparation made to the injured person or to report the 
case to the proper authority; or 
(I1) by defiling any place of worship, or otherwise intentionally 
insults the religion, or wounds the religious feelings of any person; or 
(e) attempts to commit 'Suicide, and in such attempt does any act 
towards the commission of such offence; or 
(d) being below the rank of an Assistant Commander, when oft 
duty, apnears without proper authority, in or about camp, or in Of 
about, or when going to, or returni~g from, any town, carrying a rifte, 
sword or other offensive w~apon; of 
(e) directly or indirectly accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept, 
or attemPts to obtain, for himself Or for any other ~on, any grati-
fication as a motive or reward for procuring the appointment ot any 
Violation 
otgood 
order 
and disci. 
pline. 
Miscel-
laneous 
offences. 

Attempt. 
Abetment 
ef olfences 
that have 
been com-
mitted. 
Abetment 
.toffences 
that 
have 
not been 
com-
mitted. 
'. paraoft, or leave of absence, promotion or any other advantage «' 
indulgence fo.r any person in the service; or 
(J) commits any offence against .the property or person of any 
inhabitant of, or resident in, the country in which he is serving, 
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprison- 5 
ment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment 
as is in this Act mentioned. 
42. Any persOn subject to this Act who attempts to commit any of the 
offences specified in sections 15 to 41 (both inclusive) and in such attempt 
does any act towards. the commission of the offence shall, on conviction 10 
by a Security Guard Court, wh~e no express provision is made by this 
Act for the punishment of such attempt, be liable,-
(a) if the offen.ce attempted to be committed is punishable with 
death, to sufter imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and 15 
(b) if the often.ce attempted to be committed is :punishable with 
imprisonment, to suifer imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one-half of the longest term provided for that offence or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
43. Any person subject to this Act who abets the commission of any 20 
of the offences specified in sections 15 to 41 (both inclusive) shall, on 
conviction by a Security Guard Court, if the act abetted is committed in 
consequence of the abetment and no express provision is made' by this 
Act for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer the punish-
ment provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act 25 
mentioned 
44. (1) Any person subJect to this Act who abets the commission of 
any of the offences punishable with death under sections 15, 17 and sub-
section (1) of section 18 shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court. 
if that offe'llce be not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no 30 
express provision is m.ade by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, 
be liable to suffer imprisonment. for a term which may extend to fourteen 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. 
(2) Any person subject to this Act w.ho abets the commission of any 
of the offences specified in sections 15 to 41 (both inclusive) and punish- 35 
able ~ith imprisonment shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court. 
if that offence be not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no 
express provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, 
be liable to sufPer imprisonment for a term which may extend to one-half 
of the longest term provided for that offence or such leiS punishment as 
is in this Act mentioned. 40 
65. Subject to the provisions of seCtion ~, any person subject to thil 
Act who at any place in, or beyond, India commits any civil offence shall 
be deemed to be pilty of an offence against thi. Act and, if charged 
therewith U'llder this section shall be liable to be tried by a Seeuri.ty Guard 
Court and, on conviction, be puniihable as follows, that is to say,- 45 
(4) if the offence i. one which would be punishable under any 
law in force in India with death, he shall be liable to suffer any punish-

15 
ment, assigned for the offence, by the aforesaid law and such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and 
(b) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, 
assigned for the offence by the law in force in India,· or imprisonment 
5 for a term which may extend to seven years, or such less punishment 
as Is in this Act mentioned. 
48. A perSdll subject to this Act who commits an offence of murder or 
of culpable homicide not amounting to mu.rder against, or of rape in 
relation to, a person not subject to this Act shall not be deemed to be 
10 guilty of an offence under this Act and shaUl. not be tried by a Security 
Guard Court, unless he commits any of the said offences,-
'5 
(a) while on active duty; or 
(b) at any place outside India. 
CHAPTER IV 
PuNISHMENTS 
47. (1) Punishments may be inflicted in respect of offences committed 
by persons subject to this Act and convicted by Security Guard Courts 
according to the 'Scale following, that is to say,-
(a) death; 
flO (b) imprison:ment which may be for the term of life or any other 
lesser term but excluding im12risonm.ent for a term not exceeding 
three months in Security Guard custody; 
(c) dismissal from the' service; 
(d) imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in 
Security Guard custody; 
(e) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade in the case 
of a Ranger Grade I; , 
(f) fo.rfeiture of seniority of rank and forfeiture of all or any part 
of the service for the purpose of promotion where promotion depends 
upon leng1;h of &en?ce; 
(g) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increment or pensio? 
or other prescribed purpose; 
(h) severe reprimand or reprimand except in the case of persoml 
below the rank of Ranger Grade I; 
(i) forfeiture in the case of a person sentenced to dismissal from 
35 the se.rvice of all arrears' of pay and allowances and other pubUc 
money due to him at the time of such dismissal; 
u) «eduction from pay and allowan~es to make good any proved 
loss or damage oceulODed by the' o1fence for which he is convicted.' 
(2) Each of the punishments specifled in sub-section (1) shal1 be 
.. deemed to be inferior in degree to every punishment preceditng it in the 
above Beale. 
Civil 
offences 
not 
triable 
by-
Security 
Guard 
Court. 
Punish. 
ments 
award. 
able by 
Security 
Guard 
Courts. 

Alter. 
native 
punish. 
ments 
award. 
able -by 
Security 
Guard 
Courts. 
Combina-
tion ot 
punish. 
ments. 
PuDish-
menta 
other. 
wise 
than 'by 
Security 
Guard 
Courts. 
Minor 
punish· 
ments. 
18 
48. Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Security Guard Court may, 
on convicting a person subject to this Act of any of the offences specified 
in secticms 15 and 44 (both inclusive) award either the particular puni'Sh-
ment with which the offence is stated in the said sections to be punishable 
or, in lieu thereof, anyone of the punishments lower in the scale set out 5 
in section 47 regard being had to the nature and degree of the offence. 
49. A 'Sentence of a ~urity Guard Court may award in addition to, 
or without anyone other punishment: the' punishment specified in clause 
(c) of sub-section (1) of sectian 47 and anyone 0,1' more of the punish-
ments specified in clause (e) to (j) (both inclusive) ot'that sub-section. 10 
SO. Punishments may also be inflicted in respect of offences committed 
by persons subject to this Act without the intervention of a Security Guard 
Court in the manner stated in sections 51 and 53. 
51. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 52, a Commander of and 
above the ra·nk of a Group Commander may, in the prescribed manner 15 
proceed against a person subject to this Act other than an oftlcer or an 
Assistant Commander. who is charged with an offence under this Act 
and award such person, to the extent prescribed, one or more of the 
following punishments, that is to say.-
(a) imprisonment in Security Guard custody up to twenty-eight ~o 
days; 
(b) detention up to twenty-eight days; 
(c) confinement to the lines up to twenty-eight days; 
(d) extra guards or duties; 
(e) deprivation of any acting rank provided sU'ch rank has not 25 
been held by him for more than two years; 
(1) severe reprimand or reprimand; 
(g) dc:ductions from his pay 'and allowances Ilf any sum required. 
to make r,ood any 1083 or damage occasioned by the offence for which 
he is pun:shed. 30 
(2) If a group is being temporarily commanded by an o~·:er of the 
rank of Squadron Commander or a Team Commander, such officer shall 
have full powers of a Commander as specified in sub-section (1). 
(3) Subject to the' provisions of section 52, a Squadron Commander or . 
a Team Commander commanding a squadron or a team or any detach- 35 
ment shall have the power to proceed against a person subject. to this Act, 
other than an officer or an Assistant Commander, who it charge~ with 
an offence under this Act and award such person to the extent prescribed, 
one Qr more of the puni~hments specified in clauses (4) to (d) and (g) of 
sub-section (1) provided that the maximum limit of punishment awardedl'4° 
under each of the clau!les (a), (b) and (c) shall not exceed fourteen days. 

11 
52. (1) In the case of an award of two or more of the punishments 
specified in clauses (a), (b), (c) and (eI) of sub-section (1) of section 51, 
the punishments specified in clause (c) or clause (d) shall take effect on1'y 
at the end of the punishment specified in clause (a) or clause (b). 
5 (2) When two or more of the punishments specified in the said clauses 
(a), (b) and (c) are awarded to a person conjointly, or when already 
undergoing one or more of the said punishments, the whole extent of the 
punishments shall not exceed in the aggregate fifty-six days. 
(3) The punishments specified in the said clauses (G), (b) and (c) 
10 shall not be awarded to any person who ios of the rank of Ranger Grade 
I or was, at the time of comInitting the offence for which he is punished, 
of Nch tank. . 
(4) The punishment specified in c1ause (1) of 'Sub-section (1) of 
sectiOO1. 51 shall not be awarded to any person below the rank of Ranger 
15 Grade I. 
20 
53. An officer not below the rank of an InspectOl'-General may, in 
the prescribed manner, proceed against an officer of or below the rank 
of a Squadron Commande!', who is charged with an offence under this 
Act, and award one or more of the following punishments, that is to say;-
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose 
promotion depends' upon length of service, forfeiture of 'ServiCe for 
the purpose of promotion for a period not exceeding one year, but 
subject to the right of the accused previous to the award to elect to 
be tried by a General Security Guard Court; 
(b) severe rep.rimand or reprimand; 
(c) deduction from pay and allowances of any sum required to 
make good any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of 
which he is convicted. 
54. (1) An officer not below the rank of a Deputy Inspector-General 
30 may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against ~ person of the rank of 
an Assistant Commander who is charged with an offence nnder this Act 
and award one or more of the following punishments, that is to say,-
(a) forfeiture of_ seniority, or in the case of any of them whose 
promotion depends upon the length of service, forfeiture of service 
35 for the purpose of promotion for a period not exceeding one year, but 
subject to the right of the accused previous to the award to elect to 
be tried by a General Security Guard Court; 
40 
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand; 
(c) deduction from pay and allowances of any sum required to 
make good any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of 
which he is convicted. 
(2) An officer not belOW the rank of a Group Commander may, in the 
prescri.bed manner, proceed against a person of the rank of a'll AS'Ilistant 
Commander who is charged with an offence under· this Act and award 
45 anyone or both of the following punishments, that is to say,--
(0) severe reprimand or reprimand; 
. (b) deduction fr.om p~Y. a~d ~llowances .?~ a!'1y sum required to . 
make good any proved loss or damage ?C<!aslonea by the offence of 
which he is convicted. . . 
Limit of 
punish-
ments 
under 
section 
151. 
Punish-
mentof 
officers 
of or 
below 
the rank of 
Squadran 
Comman-
ders by 
officers 
not below 
the rlUlk 
of Inspec-
tors-
General. 
Punish-
mentof 
persons 
of the 
rank of 
Assistant 
Comman-
der. 

Cuatocb'ot 
den-
clen. 
Dutyot 
Comman-
. der 
lnregard 
to deten-
tion. 
Interval 
between 
committal 
and 
trial. 
Arrest by 
civU 
authori-
ties. 
Capture 
oldeser-
ter •. 
18 
CHAPTER V 
ARREST A~1l "SOCE!lDINGS BBPORB 'DAtAL 
55. (1) Any person subject to this Act who is charged with an \)ftence 
may be taken into Security Guard custody, under· the order of any 
superior officer. 
(2) Notwithstancllng anything contained in sub-section 0), an officer 
may order into Security Guard custody any other officer, though such 
other officer ma,. be of a higher rank, engaged in a quarrel, affray or dis-
order. 
5 
H. (1) It shall be the duty of every Commander to take care that a ,e 
person under his command when charged with an offence is not detained 
in custody fJr more than forty-eight hours after the committal of such 
person into custody is reported to him, without the charge being investi-
gated. unless investigation within that period seems to him to be imprac-
ticable having regard to the public service. 15 
(2) The case of every person being detain~d in custody beyond a 
period of forty-eight hours. and the reasons therefor, shall be reported by 
the Commander to the next higher authority. 
(3) In reckoning the period of forty-eight hours specified in sub-sec-
tion (1), Sundays and other public holidays shall be excluded. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government 
may make rules providing for the manner in which and the period for 
which any perSOD BUbject to this Act may be taken into and detained in 
Security Guard custody, pending the trial by any competent authority 
20 
for any offence committed by him 25 
57. In every case where any such person as is mentioned in section 55 
and as is not on active duty. remains in such custody for a longer period 
then eight days wjthout a Security Guard Court for his trial being con-
vened, a special report giving reasons for the delay shall be made by his 
Commander and a similar report shall be forwarded at inter\'als of every 30 
eight days until a Security Guard Court is convened or such person is 
released from custody. 
58. Whenever any person subject to this Act, who is accused of an 
offence under this Act, is within the jurisdiction of any Magistrate or 
police officer, such Magistrate or police officer shall aid in the apprehen- 35 
sion and delivery to Security Guard custody of such penon upon recejpt 
of a written application to that effect signed bY his Commander or an 
officer authorised by the Commander in that behalf. 
59. (1) Whenever any person subject to this Act deserts, the Com-
mander of the unit to which he belongs, shall give information· of the 40 
desertion to Such clvil authorities as, in his opinlon, may be able to afford 
assistance towards the capture of the deserter; and such authorities shall 
thereupon take steps for the apprehension of the said d8lerter in like 
manner as if he were a person for whose apprehension a warrant had 
been issued by a lIlagtstrate, and slian deliver the deserter" whe~ appre- 45 
hended. into Security Guard custody. 

19 
(2) Any police officer may arre&t without warrant any person reason-
ably believed to be' subject to this Act, and to be a deserter and shall 
bring him without delay before the nearest magistrate, to be dealt with 
according to law. 
5 60. (1) When any person subject to this Act has been absent froIDI 
.. 
. duty without due authority for a peried of thirty days, a court of inquiry 
!hall, as soon as practicable, be appointed by an officer not below the 
rank of a Group Commander under whose command he is for the time 
being serving and such court shall, on oath or affirmation administered 
10 in the prescribed manner, inquire respecting the absence of the person, 
and the defidency, if any, in the property of the Government entrusted 
to his care, or in any arms, ammunition, equipment. instruments, clothing 
or necessaries; and if satisfied of the fact of such absence without due 
authority or other sufficient cause, the court shall declare such absence 
15 and the period there!)f and the said deficiency, if any, and transmit the 
proceedings of the court of inquiry to the officer who appointed the court 
of inquiry, for further action. 
(2) If the person declared absent does not afterwards surrender or i~ 
not apprehended, he shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be a 
20 deserter, 
CHAPTER VI 
SECURITY GUARD COURTS 
61. For the purposes of this Act there shall be three kinds of Security 
Guard Courts, that is to 'Say,-
25 (a) GeneraJ Security Guard Courts; 
(b) Petty Se,.'urity Guard Courts; and 
(c) Sumnulry Security Guard Courts. 
62. A General Security Guard Court may be convened by the Central 
Government 'or the IJirector-General or by any officer empowered in this 
30 behalf by warrant of the Director-General. 
63. A Petty Securit.y Guard Court may be convened by an officer hav-
ing power to conv~ne a General Security Guard Court or by an officer 
empowered in this behalf by warrant of any such officer. 
64. A warrant, i~~sued under section 62 or section 63 may contain such 
restrictions, reservntions or conditi.ons as the officer issuing it may think 
35 fit. 
. 65. A General Security Guard Court shaH consist of not less that flve 
ofticers. 
Inquiry 
into 
absence 
without 
leave. 
Kinds of 
Security 
Guard 
Courts. 
Power to 
convene a 
General 
Security 
Guard 
court. 
Power to 
coavene 
a Petty 
Security 
Guard 
Court. 
Contents 
of war-
rents 
issued 
under 
sections 
62 and 63 • 
eompoai-
tloP. of 
General 
Security 
Guard 
Court! 

Composi. 
tion of 
a Petty 
Security 
Guard 
·CQurt. 
Summary 
Security 
Guard 
Court. 
Dissolu. 
tion of a 
Security 
Guard 
Court. 
Powers 
of a 
General 
Security 
~ 
Court. 
Powers 
of a 
Petty 
S:curily 
Guard 
Court. 
Powers 
of a 
Summary 
~urity 
Guard 
"Court. 
H. A Petty Security Guard Court shall consist of not less than three 
omcers. 
67. {1) A Swnm.a.ry Security Guard Court may be held by the Com-
mander of any unit of the Security Guard and he alone shall constitute 
the Court. 5 
(2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout by two other per-
sons who shall be officers or Assistant Commanders or one of either, and 
who shall not as such, be sworn or affirmed. 
Provided that the persons attending the Court for the trial of an 
officer shall not be of a rank lower than the rank of that ofti~er unless in 10 
the opinion of the convening ofticer recorded in the convening order, ofti~ 
cers of such rank m'e not, having due regard to the exigencies of public 
service, available. 
. G8. (1) If a Security Guard Court after the commencement 'of a trial 
is reduced below the minimum number of officers required by this Act, it 15 
shall be dissolved. 
(2) If, on account of the illness of the concerned Judge Attorney or, 
a'S the case may be, Deputy Judge Attomey-General or Additional-Judge 
Attorney-General or of the accused before the finding, it is impossible 
to continue the trial, a Security Guard Court shall be dissolved. 
(3) The authoritv or officer who convened a Security Guard Court 
may dissolve the same if it appears to it or him that the exigencies of the 
service or necessities of discipline render it impossible or inexpedient to 
continue the said Security Guard Court. 
20 
(4) Where a Security Guard Court Is dissolved under this section. the 25 
accuSed may be tried again. 
69. A General Secu.rity Guard Court shall have the power to try any 
person subiect to this Act for any offence pu'llishable thereunder and to 
pass any sentence authorised thereby. 
70. A Petty Se::urity. Guard Court shall have· the power to try any 30 
person subject to tl,is A':'t other than an officer or an Assistant Com· 
mander for anv offence made punishable thereunder and to pass any sen~ 
tence authorised by this Ad other than a sentence of death. or imprison-
ment for a term exceeding two years. 
71. (1) Subject to the provisions of su~section (2), a Summary Secl1~ 35 
rity Guard Court may t,~y any offence punish'lhle under this Act. 
(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate action and reference 
can, without detriment to aiscipline, be made to the officer empowered to 
C'onvene n Pettv Secnrltv Force Court for H'e trial of the aUep,ed offender, 
~n officer holding a ~ummary Security Guard Court shall not try without 4" 

21 
such reference any offence punishable under any of the sections 15, 17 and 
45, or any offence against the officer holding the Court. 
(3) A Summary Security Guard Court may try any person subject to 
this Act and under the command of the officer holding tne courr, except 
5 an officer. or an Asslstant Comma~der. . 
10 
(4) A Summary Se<:urity Guard Court may pass any sentence which 
may be passed under this Act" except the sentence of death or of impri-
sonment for a term exceeding the limit specified in sub-section (5). 
(5) The limit referred to in sub-section (4) shall be,-
(a) one year, if the officer holding the Security Guard Court 
holds the rank not below that of a Group Commander. 
(b) three mon.ths, in any other case. 
72. (1) When any person subject to this Act has been acquitted or 
convicted of an offence by a Security Guard Court or by a criminal court 
15 or has been dealt with under section 51 or section 53 or aectioll 54, he 
shall not be liable to be tried again for the same offence by a Security 
Guard Court or dealt with under the said sections. . 
(2) When any person subject to this Act, has been acquitted or cop.-
victed of an offence by a Security Guard Court or has been dealt WIth 
20 under section 51 or section 53 or section 54, he shall not be liable to be 
tried again by a criminal court for the same offence or on the same facts. 
73. (1) Except as provided by sub-section (2), no trial by a Security 
Guard Court of any person subject to this Act for any offence shall be 
commenced after the expiration of a period of three years from the date 
21: of such offence . . ) 
30 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to a trial for an 
offence of desertion or for any of the offences mentioned in section 17. 
(3) In the computation of the period of time mentioned' in sub-section 
(1), any time spent by such person in evading arrest after the commis· 
sian of the offence, shall .be excluded. 
74. (1) Where an offence under this Act had been committed by any 
person while subject to this Act, and he has ceased to be so subject, he 
may be taken into and kept in Security Guard custody and tried and 
punished for such offence as if he continued to be so subject. 
(2) No such person shall be tried for' an offence, unlesi! his trial com-
35 mences within six months after he had ceased to be subject to this Act: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to the 
trial of any such person for an offence of desertion or for any of the offen-
ces mentioned in section 17 or shall affect the jurisdiction of a criminal 
court to try any offence triable by su: h court as well as by a Security 
40 Guard Court. 
'IS. (1) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced by a Security 
Guard Court to imprisonment, this Act shall apply to him dUl'ing the term 
of hJs sentence, though fie is dismissed from the Security Guard. or has 
otherwise ceased to t:e subject to this Act, and he may be l:ept. rer'loved. 
45 imprisoned and punished as if ,he continued to be subject to this Act. 
Prohibi. 
tion of 
seco~ 
trial. 
PeriOd 
I)f limi-
btion for 
trial. 
Trial, 
etc., of 
offender 
w.ho 
ceases 
to be 
subject 
to thi. 
Act. 
Applica-
tion of 
Act 
during 
term of 
sentence. 

Placeot 
trial. 
Choice 
between 
criminal 
court 
and 
Security 
Guard 
Court. 
Power of 
crimina'l 
court to 
require 
delivery 
of 
offender. 
Presiding 
officer. 
Judie 
Attor-
neys, 
etc. 
Challen-
.et. 
22 
(2) When a peu~on subject to this Act is sentenced by a Securi17 
Guard Court to death, this Act shall apply to him tro the sentence is car-
ried out. 
'16 .. Any person subject to this Act who commits any oftence against it 
may be tried and punished for such offence in any place whatever. 5 
77. ~en a criminal court and a Security Guard Court have each 
jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in the discretioll of the 
Director-General, or the Inspector-General or the Deputy Inspector-Gene-
ral, within whose command the accused person is serving or such other 
officer as may be prescribed. to decide before which court the proceedings 10 
shall be instituted, and, if that offi~er decides that they shall be instituted 
before a Security Guard COllrt, to direct that the accused person shall be 
detained in Security Guard custody. 
78. (1) When a criminal court having jurisdiction is of the opinion 
that proceedings shall be instituted before itself in respect of any alleged 15 
offence, it may, by written notice, reqUire the officer referred to in sec-
tion 77 at his option, either to deliver over the offender to the nearest 
Magistrate to be proceeded against according to law, or to postpone pro-
ceedings, pending a reference to the Central Government. 
(2) In every such case, the said officer shall either deliver ovel' the 20 
offender in complianCe with the requisition, or shall forthwith refer the 
question as to the court before which the proceedings are to be insti-
tuted, for the determination of the Central Government whose order 
upon such reference shall be flnal. 
CHAPTER VII 
PROCEDURE OF SEcuRITY GUARD COURTS 
'19. At every General Security Guard Court or Petty Security Guard 
Court, the senior member shall be the p.residing officer. 
80 Every General Security Guar4 Court shall, aad every Petty Mu-
rlty Guard Court may, be attended by a Judie Attomey or a Deputy 30 
Juqe Attorney-General or an Add:tional Judge Attorney-G~eral, or, 
if .DO sueh oBiter is available, an omcer approved by the Judie AttoI1l8),-
General or by any officer authorised in this behalf by the Judart' Attol'lley-
GenE'rai. 
&1. (1) At all trials by a General Security Guard Court or by a Petty 35 
Security Guard Court, as soon as the court is assembled, the names of 
the Ipl'esiding oflleer and members shall be read over to the accused, 
who shall thereupon be asked whether he objects to being tried by any 
officer sitting on the court. 
(2) If the accused objects to such officer, hi'S objection and ~1s0 th~ 40 
reply thereto of the offi.ce objected to shall be heard and recorded, and 
the remaining officers of the court shall, in the absence of the cha1lel1ged 
offtcer, decide on the obj~tion. . . 
(3) If the objection is allowed by one-half or more of. the votes ttIf 
the ofB~rs entitled to vote, the obj~ction shall be allowed, and the me~ 45 
her objected to shall retire, and hllg vaeancy may be ftlled in the PHI-

10f 1872. 
edW',manner, by another ,~, subject to the same rilhtot' the aceased 
to object. 
(f) When no ehallenge i'8 made; or when a chaUengehas been made 
and, disallowed" 'or the plaee dI. everyolftcer 'lucoeI8fully challenged has 
5 been filled by another officer to whom no objection is m,ctde .r allowed, 
the court shall proceed with the trial. 
82'. '(1) An oath or affinnation in the prescribed manner shall be ad-
ministered, to every member of every SecUrity Guard Court and to the 
Judge Attorney, or, as the c~se may be.; the Deputy Judge Attorney-
10 Gener.al Or the Additional Judge Attorney-General or the oftk:er-appl'ov-
ed under section 80, before the commencement of the trial. 
(2) Every person giving evidence before a Security Guard Court shall 
be examined after being duly sworn or afftrmedtn the' prescr1bedform. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall not apply where the wit.-
15 ness is a child under twelve years of age and the Security Guard Court 
is of the opinion that though the witness understands the duty of speak-
ing the truth, he does not understand the nature of an oath or affinna-
tion. 
83. (l) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), fNery 
20 decision of a Security Guard Court shall be passed by an absolute ma-
jority of votes; and where there is an equality of votes on either the 
finding or the sentence, the decision shall be in favour of the aecused. 
(2) No sentence of death shall be passed by a General Security Guard 
Court without the concurrence of at least two-thirds of the members of 
25 the Court. 
(3) In matters, other than a challenge Or the finding or sentence, the 
presiding officer shall have a casting vote. 
84. The Indian Evidence Act, 1872, shall. subject to the provisions of 
this Act, apply to all proceedings before a Security Guard Court. 
30 8~. A Securit~ Guard Court may take judicial notice of any matter 
withm the general knowledge of the members as officers of the Security 
Guard. 
81. (1) The convening officer, the presiding officer of a Security Guard 
Court, the Judge Attorney or, as the case may be, the Deputy Judge 
31: Attorney-General or the Additional Judge Attorney-General or the 
:> officer approved under section eo or the Commander of the accused per-
son may, by summons under his hand, require the attendance, at a time 
and place to be mentioned in the summons" of any person either to give 
evidence or to produce any document or other thing. 
40 (2) In tbe case 01 a witness who is subject', to this, Act, the SummoBS 
shall beHnt to his Commander and such officer shall serve it upon him 
accordingly. 
(3) In the case of any other witness, the summons shall be sent to 
the magistrate within whose jur'sdietion 'he may be, or resides, and 'such 
Oaths esC 
~ 
Jud., 
Attamey 
and 
witness. 
Votin, 
by 
members. 
General 
rule 
as to 
evidence. 
Judicial 
notice. 
Summon-
in. 
witnesses. 

Docu-
ments 
uempt-
eel from 
produc-
tion. 
Commis-
sions for 
examina-
tion of 
witnesses. 
Bxsmina-
1ioDol 
witnell 011 
eommls-
sioft. 
llqiatrate sbaU &ive effect to the sUDUDODI as if the witness was requ1r .. 
eel in the court of such a Magistrate. 
(4) When a witness is required to produce any particular document 
or other thing in his possesiion or power, the summons shall describe 
it with reasonable precisiOn. 5 
87. (1) Nothing in section 86 shall be deemed to effect the operation 
or sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act. 1872 or to appl, to 1 of ll'll. 
any letter, postcard, telegram or other document in the custody of the 
postal or telegraph authorities. 
(2) If any document in such custody is, in the opinion of any District 10 
Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate. Court of Session or High Court 
wanted for the purpose of any Security Guard Court, such Magistrate 
or Court may require the postal or telegraph authorities, as the case may 
be, to deliver such document to such person as such Magistrate or Court 
may direct. r 5 
(3) If any such document is, in the opinion of any other Magistrate 
or of any Commissioner of Police or District Superintendent of Police, 
wanted for any jBUch purpose, he may require the postal o.r telegraph 
authorities, as the case may be, to cause such search to be made for. and 
to detain such document pending the order of any such District Magis- 20 
trate, Chief Judicial Magistl'ate, Court of Session or High Court. 
88. (1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a Security Guard Court, 
it appears to the Court that the examination of a witness' is necessary 
for the ends of justice, and that the attendance of such witness cannot 
be procured without an amount of delay, expense or inconvenience which, 25 
in the circumstances of the case" would be unreasonable, such Court may 
address the Judge Attorney-General in order that a commission to take 
the evidence of such witness may be issued, 
(2) The Jud.ge Attorney-General JDay then, if he thinks necessary, 
issue a commission to any Chief Judicial Magistrate or Magistrate of the 30 
first class, within the local limits of whOSe jurisdiction such witness 
resides, to take the evidence of such witness. 
(3) The Magistrate or officer to whom the commission is issued, or, 
if he is the Chief Judicial Magistrate, he or 'Such Magistrate of the first 
class as he appoints in this behalf, shah proceed to the place where the . 35 
witness is, or shall summon the witness before him and shall take down 
his evidence in the same manner, and may for this purpose exercise the 
same powers, as in the trials of warrant-cases under the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure, 1973.' 2 of 19'74. 
(4) When the witness resides in a tribal area or in any place outside 40 
India, the commission may be issued in the manner specified in Chapter 
XXlII-B of the Code of Criminal ProCedure, 19'73. 2 of 19'7'. 
89.' (1) T.he :prosecutor and accused person in any case in which a 
commission is issued under section 88 may respectively forward any 
Interrogatories in writing which the Court may think relevant to the 45 
issue, and the Magistrate or officer executing the commission shall exa-
miAe the witness upon such interrogatories. 
(2) The prosecutor and the accused person may appear before sudl 
Malistrate or ofticer by counsel, or, except in the case of an accused per-

son in custody, in person, and may examine a c.rors-examine aDd. n-
examine, as the case may be, the said witness. 
(3) After a commission issued under section 88 has been duly ~e­
cuted, it shall be returned, together with the deposition of the witness 
5 examined thereunder, to the Judge, Attorney-General. 
(4) On receipt of a commission, and deposition returned under sub-
section (3), the Judge Attorn'!y-General shall forward the same to the 
court at whose instance the .commission was issued or, if such court hn 
been dissolved. to any other court convened for the trial of the accused 
10 person; and the commission, the return thereto and the deposition shall 
be open to inspection by the prosecutor and the accused person, and may, 
subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either 
the prosecutor or the accused and shall form part of the proceedings of 
the Court. 
15 (5) In every case in which a commission is issued under section 88, 
20 
25 
2 of 1974, 30 
35 
the trial may be adjourned for specified time reasO'nably sufficient for 
the execution and return of the commission. 
90. A person charged. before a Security Guard Court,--
(a) with desertion may be found guilty of attempting to desert 
or of being absent without leave; 
(b) with attempting to desert may be found guilty of being 
absent without leave; 
(e) with using criminal fo.rce may be found guilty of assault; 
(d) with using tlireatenfng language may be found guilty of 
using insubordinate language; 
(e) with anyone of the offences specified in clauses (a.), (b), 
(e) and (el) of section 29 may. be found guilty of any other of these 
offences with which he might have been charged; . 
(f) with an offence punishable under section 45 may be found 
guilty of any other offence of which he might have been found 
guilty, if the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procaciure, 1973, were 
applicable; . 
(g) with any offence under this Act may, on failure of proof 
of an offence having been committed in circumstances involving a 
more severe punishment, be found guilty of the same offence as 
having been committed in circum'Stances involving a less severe 
punishment: 
(h) with any offence under this Act may be found guilty of 
having attempted or abetted the commission of that offence, although 
the attempt or abetment is not separately charged .. 
91. In ally proceeding under this Act, any application, certificate, 
warrant, reply or other document purporting to be signed by·an oftlcer 
in the service of the Government shall, on production, be presumed to 
have been duly signed by the person by whom and in the character 1D 
lIo°'Qich it purports to have been signed. until the contrary is shown. 
Convic-
tion of 
offene. 
not 
Charpd. 
Presum-
lion u to 
sipature o 

Appoint-
meat 
paper. 
Preaump-
tioa u to 
ccrtaia do-
eumenta. 
'8 
•• (1) Any appoiatmen.t paper P'U'Porting to be sj,gned by Ul appoint-
ing authority shall in piIIOCeedinga under this Ad, ,be evidence' of the 
,person appointed having given the answers to questions which he is 
therein represented as having given. 
(2) The appointment of such persoll may be proved by the ,produc- 5 
tion of the original or a copy of his appointment paper purporting to be 
certified 10 be a true copy by the officer having the cuc:tody o,~ the ap-
pointment paper.' 
93. (1) A letter, return 'or other document respecting the service of 
any person in, or the dismissal or discharge of any person from, any lIIlit 10 
of the Security Guard, or respecting the circumstances of any person not 
having served in, or belonged to, any unit of the Security Guard, if pur-
porting to be signed by or on behalf of the Central Government or the 
Director-General, or by any other competent authority, shall be evidence 
of the facts stated in sUCh letter, return or other document. J 5 
(2) A National Security Guard List or Gazette purporting. to be publish-
ed by authority shall be evidence of the status and rank of the officers 
and Assistant Commanders therein mentioned, and of any appointment 
hel4 by them and of the group. unit or branch of the Security Guard to 
which they belong. 
(3) Where a record is made in any unit book in pursuance of this Act 
or of any rules or otherwise in the discharge of official duties, and purports 
to be signed by the, Commander or by the officer whose duty it ;s to make 
such record, such record shall be evidence of the facts therein stated. 
20 
(4) A copy of any record in a.ny unit book purporting to be certi~ed to 25 
be a true copy by the officer haVlng custody of such book shall: be eVidence 
of such record. 
(5) Where any pe.t',801l subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of 
desertion or of absence without leave, and such person has surrendered 
himself into the custody of any officer Or other person subject to thi'S Act, 10 
,or any \mit of the SecW'ity Guard, or has been apprehended by such 
oIleer at' perlon, a ceIrtificate pllr?Orting to be signed by such ofti.cer, or by 
'the Command .. of t.laeunit to which such person belongs, as the case may 
be, and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehension. 
and the manner in which. he was dressed, shall'be evidence' of ·the matters . 
so stated. ' 35 
(6) Where any person subject to this A£t is being tried on a charge of 
desertion or of absence without leave and such person has surrendered 
himself into the custody of, or has been apprehended by, a police officer 
not below the rank of an officer ill charge of a police station, a certificate 40 
purporting to be signed by such police offi~er and statin'g the fact, date and 
place of such surrender or apprehension and the manner in which he was 
dressed shall beevideslce of the matters so, stated. 
(7.), (a) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of Ii 
Government, scientific expert to whom this sub-section applies, upon any 45 
matter or tmng duly submitted to him for ex~minatlon at' analysis and 
report in the c~e of any proceeding under this Act, may be used as 
evJ,dence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Act. 
• 
-

27 
'. (~) The Security Guard Court may, if it thinks fit, 81JIIlDiml and 
exam.tneany web expert as to the subject matter of his report. 
(c) Where any such elq)ert is summoned by a Security Guard Court 
and he is unable to attend perSO'Zlally, he may, unless the court has 
5 expr_1y directed him to appear pe]8Ol1ally, depute any responsible person 
working with him to attend'the COUrt if such officer is conversant 'With 
the facts of the case and can satisfactorily depose in the court an. hi. 
behalf. : 
. (d) This sub-sectio~· applies to the Government sc,ientiftc experts, for 
2 of 1974. 10 .the time being specified in sub-~ection (4)' of section 293 of the Code of 
Crimml\l Procedure, 1973. - ,. , 
M.{l) If at any trial for deSertion or absence without leave, over-
staying leave or not rejoining when warDed for service, the accused person 
states in his defence any sufficient o.r reasonable excuse for his unauthoris-
15 ed absence, and refers in support thereof to any oftlcer in the service of 
the Government, or if it appears that any such officer is likely to prove or 
disprove the said statement in. the defence, the court shall address such 
officer and adjourn the Pl'oceedings until his reply is received. 
(2) The written reply of any officer so referred to shall, if signed. by 
~io him, be received in evidence and have the same effect as if made on oath 
before the court. 
(3) If the court is dissolved before the receipt of such reply or if the 
court omits to comply with the provisions of this section, the cdZlvening 
officer may, at his discretion, annul the proceedings and order a fresh 
25 trial. 
95. (1) When any person subject to this Act has been convicted by a 
Security Guard Court of any offence, such Security Guard Court may 
inquiry into, and receive and record evIdence of any previous convictions 
of such person" either by u Securi ty Guard Court or by a criminal court, 
30 or any previous award of punishment under section 5-1 or section 53 or 
section 54 and may further inquiry into and record the general character 
of such person and such other matters as may be prescribed. 
(2) The evidence received under this section may be either oral, or in 
the shape of entries in, or certified extracts from, books of Seculity Gua.rd. 
3 Courts or other official records; and it Iiliall not be necessary to give notice 
5 before trial to the person tried that evidence as to his previOUS convictions 
Ol' chartcter will be received. 
(3) At a Summary Security Guard Court, the officer holding the trial 
may, if he thinks fit, record any previous convictions against the offender, 
his general character, and such other matters as may be prescribed, as of 
40 his own knowledge, instead -of ;requiring them to be proved under the 
foregoing provisiolls of this sect;ion. 
Reference 
by accu· 
sed to Gov-
ernment 
omeers. 
Evidence 
of previous 
convictions 
and general 
character. 
16. (1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by. a Security Guard Court, 
it ap~.rsto the Court that the person charged is by reason of unsoundness 
Lunacy of 
accused. 
45 of mind incapable of JJ,laking his defence, or that he committed ,the act 
alleged but was by ~~ of UDSOU!l'ldness of mind incapable of knOWing 
the na~ure of the act or k;no\Ving, that it was wrong or contrary to law, 
the court shall record a finding a.ecordmgly. 

Subsequcnt 
fitness of 
lunatic 
accused for 
trial. 
Transmis-
. sion to 
Central 
Govern-
ment of 
orders 
undcr scc-
tion 97. 
keleascof 
Junatic 
acc.ued. 
• 
(I) . The preaiding .oftieer of the· court, or, in the cae of a Swrimll7 
Security Guard Court, the doer holdine the trial, shelll forthwith :report 
Ulecase to the contlrming oftlcer, or to the authority empowered to .deal 
with its finding under .section 111, as the ease may be. 
(3) The confirming ofIleer ~o rwhom the case is repGl1ed undet BUb- 5 
section (2) mey, if he does ·not confirm thelflnding,take steps to have the 
aQcused person tried by the .&me or another Security, Guard Court for 
the offence with which he was charged. 
(4) The authority to whom the finding of a Summ.ary Secu.rity Guard 
Court is reported under sub-eection (Z), and a confirming offi.eer confirm- 10 
ing the finding in any case so reported to him shall order the accused 
person to be kept in custody in the prescribed manner and ehall report 
the case for the orders of the Central Government. 
(5) On receipt of a report uader 8ub-sectton (4), .the Central Govem-
menf may ordtu' the accused peraon to be -detained in a lunatic asylum or J 5 
other suitable place of safe custody. 
17. Where any accused pe~n, ha~ been fOWld by reasan of un-
soundness of mind to be incapable of making his defence, is in custody 
or under detentian under section 96, any officer prescribed in this behalf, 
may- 20 
(a) if such person is in custody under sub-section (4) of section 
96, on the report of a medical officer that he is capable of making his 
defence, Q1' 
(b) if such person is detained in a jail under sub-section (5) of 
section 96, on a certificate of the Inspector General of Prisons, and 25 
if 'such person is detained in a lunatic asylum under the said sub-
section, on a certificate of any two or more of the visitors of such 
asylum and if he is detained in any other place under that sub-
section, on a certificate of the presc.ribed authority, that he is capable 
of maki'llg his defence, 
take steps to have such person tried by the same or another Security 
Guard Court for the offence with which he was originally charged (If, 
if the offence is a civil offence, by a criminal court. 
98. A COpy of every order made by an office.r under ~ction 97 for the 
trial of the accused shall forthwith be sent to the Central Governme'llt. 
' •• Where any person is in custody under sub-section (4) of section 96 
or UDder detention under sub-section (5)' of that sectiO'Zl,-
(a) if such person is in custody under the said 'Ylub-aection (4), 
OD the report of a medical officer, or 
Q» if such pel'SOnis detained under the said aub-seetton (5), an 
a certificate from any of the authorities 1rlefttioned: in clat1ae (b) of 
section. 97 that in the judgment of such oIlew or autherity 'lUeh 
person may be released without danger of his doing injury to himself 
or tq any other person, 
35 

\, 
, 
the Central Government may order that sUch person be released 
detained in custody, or transferred to a public lunatic asylum if he h:: 
not already been sent to such an asylum. 
100. Where any relative or friend of any person Who is in custod 
5 under sub-section, (4) of section 96 or under detention under sub-sectiO! 
(5)' of that sectiOn desires that he should be delivered to his care and 
custody, the Central Government may, upon application by suCh relative 
or friend and, on his giving security to the satisfaction of that Govern-
ment that the person delivered shall be properly taken care of "8!Ild 
10 prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other offtcer, ~d ~ 
prodUCed for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places,' 
as the Central Government may direct, order such person to be delivered 
to such relative or friend. ' , 
lot. When any property regarding which any offence appears to have 
15 been committed, or which appears to have been used for the commission 
of any offence, is produced before' a Security Guard Court during a trial, 
the Court may make such order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of 
such property pending the conclusion of the trial, and if the property is 
subject to spee'dy or natural decay may, after recording such evidence as 
20 it thinks necessary, order it to be sold 'Or otherwise dispos~ of. 
102. Af1;er the conclusion of a trial before any Security Guard Court, 
the court or the officer confirming the finding or sentence of such Security 
Guard Court, or any authority superior to such oftlcer, or, in the cale 
of a Summary Security Guard Court whose finding or 8e'ntence does not 
25 reqUire confirmation, an officer not below the rank of a Deputy Inspector-
General within whose command the trial was held, may make such order 
as it or he thinks fit for the disposal by destruction, confiscation, delivery 
to any person claiming to be entitled to possession thereof, or otherwise, 
of any property or document produced before the court or in its custody, 
30 or regarding which any offence appears to have been committed or which 
has been used for the commission of any offence. 
(2) ,Where any order has been made under sub-section (1) in respect 
of property regarding which an offence appears to have been committed, 
a copy of such order signed and certified by the authority making the 
35 same may, whether the trial was held within India or not, be sent to a 
Magistrate within whose jurisdiction such property for the time being is 
situated, and such Magistrate shall thereupon ,cause the order to, be 
Delivery of 
lunatic 
accused to 
relatives. 
Order for 
custodyaad 
disposal of 
, property 
pendinl 
trial. 
Order for, 
disposal of 
property 
re.ardiq. 
which ,oiL 
ence 
is commit-
ted. 
... carried into effect as if it were an order passed by him under the pro-
visions of the Code of Criminal Procedure', 1973. 
2 of 1974. 
40 
45 
45 of J860. 
'011974. 50 
(3) In this section, the term "property" includes in the case of 
property regarding which an o~ce appears to have be'en committed, 
not only such property as has been originally in the possession or under 
the control of any pe~on, but also anY' p.roperty into or for which the 
!lame may have been converteod Or exchl1nged, and anything acquired by 
such conversion or exchange Whether immediately or otherwise. 
103. Any trial by a Security Guard Court under the provisions of 
this Act shal1 be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning 
of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and the Security Guard 
Court shall be deemed to be a court within the meaning of sectkms ~45 
and 346 of the Code of Criminal Proeedure, 1973. . 
Powers of 
SecurJty 
Guard 
Court in 
relation to 
proceedings 
under this 
Act. 

Fln"lng 
and 
sentence 
not 
valid, 
unless 
COD-
ftrmed. 
Power 
to con· 
firm 
finding 
and 
seoteDceof 
General 
Security 
GU~d 
Court. 
Power to 
coD8rm 
tlDdiq '. 
aDd. 
seJdlaceof 
Pett,-
Security 
Guard 
Court. 
Limita-
tion of 
powerot 
con· 
firming 
lIuthorlty . 
Powers of 
confirming 
authority 
to mitigate, 
remit 
or commute 
sentences. 
l:'f(~ , 
Revi81ono! 
fiadifta or 
..atence. 
30 
CHAPl'ER VITI 
,CONFIRMATION .AND ItSVlSION " 
1M. No finding or sentence of "a General Se'curity Guard Court or a 
p~ Security Guard Court shall be valid except so far as it may be co~~ 
flrmed as p.rovi~ed by this Act. . , 5 
lOS. The findings and sentences of. General SeCurity Gmlrd Courts may" 
be confirmed by the Central Government or by any omcer empowered in 
this behalf by warrant of the Central Government. 
186, The findings and sentences of Petty Security Gua~d Courts may 10 
be confirmed by an authority or oftlcerhaving pow~r to convene a General 
Security Guard Court or by any. officer empowered in this behalf by 
warrant of such authority or o~cer. 
107. A warrant issued under section 105 or section 106 may contain 
such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the authority issuing it 
may think fit. 15 
108. Subject to such restrictions, reservation's or conditions, as may be 
contained in any warrant issued uncle; section: 105 or section 106, a confir-
ming authority may, whe~ confirming the sentence of a Security Guard 
Court, mitigate or remit the punishment thereby aW8l"ded, or commute 
that punishment for any punishment or punishments lower in the scale 20 
laid down in section 47 or may set aside the proceedings of the trial if 
found to be illegal, 
108. (1) Any finding or sentence of a Security Guard Court which re-
quires confirmation may be once revised by the order of the confirming 
authority and on such revision, the court, if 'so directed by the confirming 25 
authority, may take additional evidence. . 
(2) The court, on revision, shall ,consi'St of the same officers as were 
present whe'll the original decision was passed, unless any of those officers 
a.re unavoidably absent. " 
(3) In case of 'Such unavoidable absence 'the cause thereof shall be duly 30 
certified in the proceedings, and the C'Ourt shall proceed with the revision. 
provided that, if a General Seeu.rity Guard' Court, it still consists of ,five 
officers, or, if a Petty Security Guard Court, of three officers. 

31 
UO. The finding and sentence of a Summary Security Guard Court 
ahall not require to be confirmed, but may be carried out forthwith. 
. 111. The proceedings of every Summary Security Guard Court 'Shall, 
without delay, be forwarded to the officer not below the rank of a Deputy 
5 Inspector-General within whose command the trial/was held, o.r to the 
prescribed officer, and such ofBcer, or the Director-GeneraI or any officer 
empowered by him in this behalf may, for reasons based on the merits 
of the case, but not on merely technical grounds, 'Set aside the proceedings, 
• ,. or reduce the sentence to any other sentence which the court might have 
10 passed 
112. (1) Where a finding of guilty by a Security Guard Court, which 
has been confirmed or which does not require confirmation, is found tor 
any reason to be invalid or cannot be supported by the evidence, the 
authority which would have had powe.r under section 124 to commute 
15 the punishment awarded by the sentence, if the finding had -been valid, 
may substitute a new finding and pass a sentence for the offence apeci4ed 
or involved in such finding: 
Provided that no such substitution shall be made unless such ftndlng 
could have been validly made by the Security Guard Court on the charge 
20 and unless it appears that the Security Guard Court must have been satis-
fied of the facts estabUshing the said offence. 
(2) Where a sentence passed by a Security Guard Court which has 
been conflnned, or which does not require confirmation, not being a sent-
ence passed in pursuance of a new finding substituted under sub-eection 
2,j (1), is found for any reason to be invalid, the authority referred to in 
sub-section (1) may pass a valid sentence. 
(3) The punishment awarded by a 'Sentence passed under sub-sectioD 
(1) or sub-section (2) shall not be higher in the scale of punishments than, 
or in excess of, the punishment awarded by, the sentence for which a 
go new sentence is substituted under this section. 
(4) Any finding substituted, or any sentence ;passed under this section 
shall, for the purposes of this Act and the rules, have eft'ect as if it were 
a finding or sentence, as the case may be, of a Security Guard Court. 
113. (1) Any person subject to this Act who considers himself aggrie-
35 ved by any order passed by any Security Guard Court may present a peti-
tiO'll to the officer or authority empowered to confirm any finding or sent-
ence of such Security Guard Court, and the conflrming authority may take 
such steps as may be considered necessary to satisfy itself a's to the 
correctneRs, legality or propriety of the order passed or as to the regu-
40 larity of any proceeding to which the order re~ates. 
(2) Any person subject to this'· Act who considers himself aggrieved by 
a finding or sentence of any security Guard Court which has been con-
firmed, may present a petition to the Central Government, the Director· 
General, OT any prescribed officer superior in command to the one who 
45 confirmed such finding or sentence, and the Central Government, the 
Findbtl 
and 
sentence of 
aSwn1lW'1 
Security 
Guard 
Court . 
Trans· 
mission of 
proceed-
ings of 
Summary 
SeCurity 
Guard 
Court . 
Altera-
tion of 
finding or 
sentence in 
cert,rin 
cases. 
Remedy 
against 
order, 
ftndiDi or 
sentence of 
Security 
Guard 
Court 

Annulment 
otpro-
reedings. 
Form of 
leDtence 
of death. 
~.QI. 
meat,Qf ' 
aenteaeo 
ofi~ 
ment. 
ExeeutioD 
of ..,... 
leace of 
iDlpriaoD. 
meat. 
32 
Director-Oeneral, Of the prescr1~ ofticer, as the' case may ~, may p8ie 
such order thereon as it or he thinks fit. 
11" The Central Government, the Director-General or an Inspector-
General may aMu} the proceedings of any Security Guard Court on the 
eround that they are illegal or unjU'st, 
CHAPTER IX 
ExBCt7'D'OW OF SJIN'l'£NCE, PARDONS, REMISSIONS, ETC. 
5 
115. In awarding a sentence of death, a Security Guard Court shall, 
in its dicretlon, direct that the offender shall suffer death by being 
hanged by the neck until he be dead, or shall suffer death by being shot 10 
to death. Ii' 
11~ Whenever any person is sentenced by a Security Guard Court 
under this Act to imprisonment. the term of his sentence shall, whether 
. it has been revised or not, be reckoned to commence on, the day on which 
the orlSfnal pmceedings were signed by the presiding oftieer, or in the 15 
case of a Summary Security Guard Court, by the court: 
~ded that the period of ' detention or confinement, if any 
underJ~e by an accused person, during the investigation, inquiry or 
trial of the case in which he is sentenced and before the date on which. 
the original proceedings were signed shall be set-off against the term of QO 
his sentence and the liability of such person to undergo imprisonment 
shaD be restricted to the Mmainder, if any of the term of his sentence. 
\ . 
117. (1) Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is passed under 
this Act by a Security Guard Court or whenever 8'l1y sentence of death 
is commuted to imprisonment, the conftnning officer, or in case of a 25 
Summary Security Guard Court the officer holding the court or such . 
other officer as may be prescribed, shall, save as otherwise provided in 
sub-sections (3) and (4), direct that the sentence shall be carried out by 
conft.nem.eDt in a civil prison, ' 
(2) When a direction has been made under sub-section (1), the go 
Commoderof the person under ge'1ttence or such other officer as may 
be prescribed shaD f()rward a WBlTant in the prescribed form to the 
ofticer in charge of the prison in which such person is to be confined and 
shall, .arrange for his despatch to such prison with the warrant. 
(3) In the case, of a sentence of imprisonment for a period not ex- 35 
ceediDg three months and pass~ under this Act by a Se,curity Guard 
Court the appropriate officer under sub-sectiO'A. (1) may dlrect that the 
sen~ce shall be carried out by confinement in Security Gua1"d custody 
instead of in a civil pri'son. 
(4) On active duty, a !lentence of imprisonment may be carried. o~t 40 
b conflDe!nent in such place as the Deputy Inspector-General WIthIn 
~ose cmnmand the person sen~ced is serving or any prescribed oftlcer, 
may from time to time, appoint. 

2 of 1974. 
118. Where a sentence of imprmonment is ~ to be undergOM 
in a civil prison the offender may be kept in Seeorlty Guard custody or 
,in any other tit place, till such time as it is possible to send him to a 
civil prison. 
5 Ut. Whenever, in the opinion of an officer not below the rank of a 
Deputy Inspector-General within whose command the trial is he~ any 
sentence or portion of a sentence of imprisonment cannot for spec:ial 
reasons, conveniently be carried out in Security Guard custody in I accord-
ance with the provisions of section 117, such oftlcer may direct that such 
10 sentence or portion of sentence shall be carried 'Out by confinement in 
any civil prison or other fit place. , 
taD. A person under 'Sentence of imprisonment mayd1ll'iDg h1a 
conveyancp. from place to place, or when on board a ship, aircraft, or 
otherwise, be subjected to such restraint as is necessary for his safe 
15 condUct and removal. 
taL Wheneve.r an 'Order is duly made under this Act setting aside or 
varying any sentence, 'Order or warrant under which any person. is 
confined in a civil prison, a warrant in accordance with such order shall 
be forwarded by the officer making the order or his staff oftk:er or such 
20 other person as may be prescribed, tD the officer in charge of the' prison 
in which such persDn is confined. 
122. When a sentence of fine 'is imposed by a Security Guard Court 
under section 45, a copy of such sentence signed and certified by the 
confirming Dtlice.r, Dr where nD confirmatiDn i'S required, by the o1Rcer 
25 holding the trial may be sent to any magistrate in India, and such magis-
trate shall thereupon cause the fine tD be recovered in accordance with 
the provisions 'Of the Code of Criminal PrDcedure, 1973, as if it were a 
sentence 'Of fine imposed by such magistrate. 
123. Whenever a'ny person is sentenced to imprisonment und~ this 
3D Act, and is undergoing the sentence in any place or manner in which he 
might be confined under a lawfUl order o.r warrant in pursuance of this 
Act, the confinement of such person &hall not be deemed to be ~1 
only by reason of informality or error in, or as respects, the. order, 
warrant or other document, or tho authority by which, or in pursuance 
35 whereof such person was brought into, or, is confined in any such. place, 
and any such order, warrant or document may be amended accordingly. 
124. When any person subject to this Act has been convicted by a 
Security Guard Court of any offence, the Central Govermnent lOr the 
Director-General or, in· the case of a . sentence, wilich he could have 
40 confirmed or which did not require confirmation, an officer not l?e1ow the 
rank of Deputy In'Spector-General within wh9Se command such penon 
at the time of convietion was serving, or thelpl'escribed oftlcer may-,-
(a) either with or without conditions Which the pet80nle11te.11ced 
accepts, pardon the person or remit the whole or any part of the 
45 punishment awarded; or 
(b) mitigate the punishment awarded; or 
Temporary 
custedyof 
otfoodcr. • 
Execution 
of sentence 
of imprison. 
ment in 
special 
cates. 
Con. 
veyance 
of 
prisoDer 
from 
place to 
~ace. 
Communi. 
cation of 
certain 
orders to 
prison 
ofBcers. 
Execu. 
tion of 
sentence 
of finc. 
Informa-
lity or 
error in 
the 
order or 
warrant. 
Pardon 
and reo 
mlaiOD. 

Cancel-
Iationof 
condi. 
tional 
pardon, 
release on 
parole or 
remission. 
Sus. 
pension 
<>faen. 
tenceo1 
im-
prison· 
ment. 
Orders 
pending 
sus· 
pension. 
Release 
on sUS-
peDIIion. 
Computa. 
tioa of 
period of 
sua-
penaion. 
Order after 
IUlpcasion. 
(c) commute such punishment for any let8 punishment or punish-
ments mentioned in this Act; or 
(d) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced 
accepts, release the person on parole. . 
125. (1) If any condition on which.a person has been pardoned or 5 
released on parole or a punishment has been remitted is, in' the opinion 
of the authority which granted the pardon, release or remission not 
fulfllled, 'Buch authority may cancel the parcron, release or remission, 
and thereupon the sentence of the court 'Shall be carried into effect as if 
such pardon, release or remission had not been granted. 10 
(2) A person whose sentence of imprisonment is carried into effect 
under the provisions of su~tion (1) shall undergo anly the UBeXpired 
portion of his sentence. 
1216. (1) Where a person subject to this Act is sentenced by a 
Security Guard Coun. to imprisonment, the Central Government, the 15 
Director-General or any officer empowered to convene a General Security 
Gua.rd Court may suspend the 'Sentence whether or not the offender has 
already been committed to prison or to Security Guard custody. 
(2) The authority or officer specified in sub-section (1) may, in the 
case of an oftender so sentenced direct that until the orders of such 20 
authority or officer have been obtained the offender shall not be com-
mitted to prison o.r to Security Guard custody. 
(3) The powers conferred by sub-section (1) and (2) may be 
exercised in the case of any such sentence which has been confirmed, 
reduced or commuted. 25 
127. (1) Where the sentence referred to in section 126 is imposed by 
a Security Guard Court, other than a Summary Security Guard Court, 
the confirming officer may, when confirming the sentence, direct that the 
offender be not committed to prison or to Security Guard custody until 
the orders of the authority or officer specified in section 126, have been 30 
obtained. " 
(2) Where a sentence of imprisonment 
Security Guard Court, the officer holding 
direction referred to in sub-section (1). 
128. Where a sentence is suspended under 'Section 126, the offender 35 
shall forthwith be released from custodY. 
;].21. Any period during which the sentence is under suspension shall 
be reckoned as part of the term of 'Such sentence. 
130. The authority or officer specified in section 126 may, at any . time 
. while a sentence is suspended, order,- 40 
(a) that the offender be committed. to undergo the unexpired 
portion of the sentence; or 
(b) that the sentence be remitted. 

3i 
5 
. 131. (1) Where a sentence has been suspended, the case may at anr. 
time, and. shall at intervals of not more than four' months be reconsider-
ed by the authority or ofticer specified in section 126, or' by any 01!i.cel" 
not below the rank of a Deputy Inapector-General duly authorised by 
the authority or officer specified. in section 126. 
Recon· 
sideration 
of case 
after sus· 
pension. 
(2) Where on such recanaideration by the oftlcer so authorised it 
appears to .blm tilat me conciuct of the offender since .his convic'tlon has 
lJe~n such as to justUy a rem.iss.>on of the sentence, he sh.all refer the 
matter to the authority or officer specilled in section 126. 
10 132. Where an offender, while a IE!'Dtence on him is suspended under 
this Act, is sentenced for any other offence, then-
15 
20 
(a) if the furth~ sentence is also s~pended under this Act, 
the two sentences shall run cancurrently; 
(b) if the further sentence is for a period of three months or 
mo.re and is not suspended under this Act, the offender shall 
also be committed to prison or Security Guard custody for the 
unexpired portion of the prev,ious smtence, but both sentences shall 
run concurrently; and 
(c) if the further sentence is for a period of less than three 
months and is not suspended under this Act, the offender shall be 
so committed on that sentence only, and the previous sentence shall, 
subJect to any o.rder which may ,be passed under sectian 130 or sec-
tion 131 continue to be suspended. 
133. The powers conferred by sections 126 and 130 shall be in addi-
!2~ tion to, and not in derogation of, the power of mitigation, remission and ,) t ti commu a on. 
134. (1) Where in addition to any other sentence the punishment of 
dismissal has been awarded by a Security Guard Court, and such other 
se'lltence is suspended under section 126, then, such dismissal shall not 
take effect until so ordered by the autho.rity or ofticer speclfted in 
go section 126. 
Fresh 
lentence 
after 
sus· 
pension. 
Scope of 
power 
of IUS-
peDSion. 
Effect of 
sus· 
pension 
and 
remission 
on 
(2) If such other sentence is amrltted under section 130, the punish- dismissaL 
ment of dismissal shall al!iO be remitted. 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANlX>US 
35 
135. (1) The ofticers and other members of the Security Guard shal:l. Rank 
be classified in accordance with their ranks in the followin, categories, structure. 
name1y:-
(oIJ) Ofti~rs-
(i) Director General. 
40 (ii) Additional Director General. 
(iii) Inspector-General. 
(iv) Dep~ty Inspector-General. 
('D) Group commander. 

Deductions 
from 
pay and 
allow-
ances. 
la 
(vi) Squadron Commander. 
(vii) Team Commander. 
(b) Assistant Commander.&-
(viii) Assistant Commander Grade I. 
(iz) Assistant Commander Grade II. 
(x) Assistant Commander Grade III. 
(c) persons other than officers and Assistant Commanders-
(xi) Ranger Grade I. 
(xii) Ranger Grade II. 
(xiii) Combatised tradesmen. 10 
(2) The matters relating to inter se seniority of persons belonging 
to the same .rank shall be determined in accordance with such rules 88 
may be prescribed. 
(3) Notwithstanding' anything contained in this Act, the Director-
General may, subject to confirmation by the Central Government as 15 
provided hereinafte.r, grant to an officer or Assistant Commander Grade I 
a rB'llk, mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1) as a local rank, 
whenever considered necessary by him in the interest of better func-
tioning of the Security Guard. 
(4) An officer or Assistant Commander Grade I holding a local rank,-!;Io 
(oa) shall exercise the command and be vested with the powers 
of an officer holding that rank; 
(b) shall cease to hold that rank, if the grant of such rank is 
not confirmed within one month by the Central Government, or 
when. so ordered by the Director General or when he ce'8Ses to hold 25 
the appointment for which the rank was granted; 
(c) shall not be entitled to claim any seniority over other offi-
cers by virtue of his having held such local rank; and 
(d) shall not be entitled to any extra pay for holding such rank. 
138.(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), the following 30 
deductions may be made from the pay and allowances of an officer, 
that is to say,-
(a) all pay and allowances due to an officer for every day he 
absent3 himself without leave, unless a satisfactory explanation has 
been given and accepted by the Inspector-General under whom he 55 
is for the time being serving, and for every day of imprisonment 
awarded by a criminal court or a Security Guard Court; 
(b) any sum required to make good the pay of any person Bub-
iect to tbis' Act which the officer has unlawfully retained or unlaw-
tully refused to pay; 40 
(c) any sum required to be paid as fine imposed by a criminal 
court; !. ~ 
(d) any BUm. required to make up any loss, damage or destrl1C-
tion of pubUc property or property belonging to the Security Guard 
. which, after due investigation, appears to the Inspector-General 45 
under. whom the officer is for the time being serving, to have been 
OCGUioned by wrongful act or negUgence on 'the part of the oftlcer; 
• 

37 
(e) any sum required by an orde.r of the Central Government 
to be paid for the maintenance of his wife Or his legitimate or illegiti-
m~te child or step-child or towards the cost of any relief given by the 
saId Government to the said wife or child. 
5 (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), the following de-
du.cti?ns may be made from the pay and allowances of a person subject 
to thIS Act, other than an officer, that is to saY,-
10 
20 
(a) all pay and allowances due to him for every day of absence 
either on desertion or without leave unless a satisfactory explanation 
has been given and accepted by his Commander and for every day of 
imprisonment awarded by a criminal court, a Security Guard Court Dr 
an Officer exercising au.thority under section 51; 
(b) any sum required to make good the pay of any person sub-
ject to this Act which ,he has unlawfully retained or unlawfully 
refused to pay; 
(c) any sum required to make good such compensation for any 
expenses, loss, damage or destruction caused by him to the Central 
Government or to any building or property or any private fund 
of the Security Guard as may be awarded by his Commander; 
(d) any sum required to be paid as fine imposed by a criminal 
court; 
(e) any sum required by an order of the Central Government 
to be paid for the maintenance of his wife Or his legitimate or illegiti-
mate child or step-child or towards the cost of any relief given by 
25 the said Government to the said wife or child. 
(3) (il) No person shall be treated as absent or under imprisonment 
for a day unless the absence or imprisonment has lasted, whether wholly 
in O'lle day or partly in one day and partly in another, for six consecu-
tive hours or upwards. 
30 (ii) Any absence or imprisonment for less than a day may be reckon-
ed as absence or imprisonment for a day if such absence or imprison-
ment prevented the absentee from fulfilling any duty as a member ~f 
the Security Guard which was thereby t.hrown upon some other mem-
ber. 
35 (4) The total deductions from the pay and allowances ofa person 
made under clauses (b) to (e) of sub-section (1) or clauses (b) to (e) 
of sub-section (2) shall. not, except where he is sentenced to dismissal, 
exceed in anyone month, one-half of his pay and allowances for that 
month. 
(5) Any sum authorised by this Ad to be deducted from the pay and 
40 allowances of any persO'll mav, without prejudice to any other mode 
of recovering the same, be deducted from any public money due to him 
other than a pension. 
(6) The following shall be the authorities competent to order de-
45 ductions from pay and allowances under this Act, mmeIr:-
(a) Commanders not below the'rank of Group Commanders, in 
. Ule case of persons other thaa officers; 
(b) Inspector-Ge"e~a1, in the case of pf!icers, 

Power, 
8Dd 
38 
(7) Any authority superior to the one ordering any deduction under 
t1rl, Act shall be competent to remit the whole or 'part of the said de-
duction. 
(8) Any power conferred by the provisions of this section on an 
officer may be exercised by an officer or authority superior in command 5 
to the first mentioned oftlcer. 
duties con-
ferable 
and im· 
poublo 
.1.37. (1) The Central Government may, by general or special order, 
published in the Official Gazette, direct that, subject to such conditions 
and ~tations as may be specified in the order, any member of the 
Secunty Guard may exercise or discharge' such of the powers or dutdes IO 
under any Central Act as may be specified in the said order, being the 
powers and duties which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
an offiCer of the corresponding or lower rank is by such Cellttal Act 
empowered to exercise or discharge for the said purposes. 
on 
members 
otthe 
Security 
Guard. 
Protec-
tion tor 
actsot 
1'DenJbers 
oltho 
Security 
Guard. 
(li) The Central Government may, by general or special order public- 15 
shed in the Official Gazette, confer or impose. with the concurrence of 
the State Government concerned, any of the powers or duties which 
may be exercised or ctischarged under a State Act by a police oftlcer 
upon a member of the Security Guard who, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, holds a corresponding or higher rank. 20 
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days which mav be comprised in 
one session or in two or mote successive' sessi.ons and if. before the ex-
piry of the session immediatelv following the session or the successive 25 
sessions aforesaid, both Houc;es a~ee in making anv modification in the 
order or both Houses agree that the' order should not be made, the 
order shall thereafter have effect on1v in sueh modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment sha'l be without prejudice to the validity of anything 30 
previously done under that order. 
138. (1) In any suit or proceeding a~ainst any member of the Security 
Guard for any act done by him in pursuance of a warrant or order of a 
competent a~thority, it shall be lawful for him to plead that such act 
was done by him under the authority of such warrant or order. 35 
(2) Anv such plea may be proved bv the production of the warrant 
or order directin~ the act, and if it is so proved, the member of the 
Se'curitv Guard shall thereupon be discharged from liability in respect 
of the ~ct: so done by him, notwithstandinrt any defect in the jutisdic-
tion of the authority which issued such warrant or order. ,~ 
(3\ NotwithstandinR: anvthine: contained in any other law fot' the 
time being in force, any lee:a1 proceedine: -(w'hether civil or criminal) 
which may lawfully be brought against anv memher of the Serurity 
Guard for anything done or' intended to be done under the' powers con-
ferred by, or in pursuance of any provision of this Act 'Or the rul~, 45 
shall be commenced within three months after the act comnlained of 
'Was committed and not otherwise. and notke in writinll' of such proceed-
ine: and of the cause thereof shall be given to the defendant or his 
superior oftlcer at least one month before the commencement of such_ 50 
proceeding. 

39 
l.39: (1) The Ce'Zltral Government may, by not1ftcaUon, make·ruld 
for carrying out the provhUohs of this· Act. 
(2) I~ particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide fOt all or any of the following 
5 matters, namely:-
(a) the manner in which the Security Guard shall be constitu-
ted and the cO'llditions of service of its members under sub-sec;uan: 
(1) of section 4; 
(b) the nature of the book or letUu" or other document, the 
10 conununication or publication whereof would not be restricted by 
sub-section (1) of section 12; 
(c) the purposes other than political purposes for which a person ' 
subject to the Act shall not participate in, or address any meeting or 
demonstration under sub-section (2) of section 12; 
15 (d) the purposes for which the forfeiture' of service as a 
punishment may be inflicted under sub-section (1) of section 47; 
(e) the ma'llller in which officers may be proceeded against under 
section 5'3 and sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 54; 
<f) the manner in which and the period for which any person 
20 'Subject to this Act may be taken into and. detained in Security Guard 
custody pending his trial under sub-section (4) of section 56; 
(g) the manner in which a court of inquiry enquiring into the 
absence of person, shall administer oath or affirmation under sub-
section (1) of section 60; 
25 (h) the' manner in which a vacancy may be filled in on the 
retirement of a member of General Securitv Guard Court or a Petty 
Security Guard Court under sub-section (3) of section 81; 
(~) the manner in which oath or affirmation shall be admini .. 
tered to the members of" the Security Guard Courts and the Judge 
30 Attorney, etc., under sub-section (1) of section 82; 
(j) the manner in which a person sPYing evidence before a 
Security Guard Court shall be sworn or affirmed in under sub-section 
(2) of section 82; i 
(k) the manner in which a Security Guard Court when convict-
~ &; ing 9 pe.t"Son may inquire into under sub-section (1) of section 95; 
(1) the manner in which an accused person shall be kept in 
custody under sub-section (4) of section 96; 
(m) the form of the warrant whic.h shaH be forwarded to the 
ofticet' incharge of the prison in which a person under sentence ot 
40 imprisonment is to be conferred under sub-'Section (2) of section 117; 
45 
(11.) the IlJersO'll who shall forward the 'warrant for the confine-
ment of a person in a civil prison under section 121; 
(0) the matters rdatinst to inte-r !'Ie seniorit.v of nersons belonging 
to the same rank under sub-section (2) of section 135; 
(1') the authorities or officers to be prescribed under section 7, 
sub-section (2) of section 10, Bub-section (1) of section 12, section 77, 
Power 
tomu:e 
rules. 

Pro. 
vilion. 
asta 
existing 
National 
Security 
Guard. 
40 
section srr, section 111, sub-section (2) of section 113, sub-sections (1), 
(2) and (4) of section 117 and section 124; 
(q) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed or 
in respect of which this Act makes no provision or makes insufti· 
cient provision and provision is, in the opinion of the Central Govern· 5 
ment, necessary for the proper implementation of this Act. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a tolal period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
in two or more successive seSSions, and if, before the expiry of the session 10 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree' in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should, not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification Or annulment shall be without 15 
prejudice to the validity of anything p.reviously done under that rule. 
140. (1) The National Security Guard in existence at the commence-
ment of this Act shall be deemed to be the Security GUard constituted 
under this Act. 
(2) The members of tbe National Security Guard in existence at the 20 
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have bee ... appointed as 
such under this Act. 
(3) Anything done Ql" any action taken before the commencement of 
this Act in relation to the con'Stitution of the National: Security Guard 
referred to in sub-section (1), in relation to any person appointed, shall 25 
be as valid and as aftective in law as if such thing or action was done 
or taken under this Act: 
Provided that. nothing in this sub-section 'Shall render any person 
guilty of any offence in respect of anything done or omitted to be done 
by him before the commencement of this Act. 30 

S'f'AtEMENT OF 0&reTS AND REASONS 
For quite sometime past, terrorism has been steadily a'suming 
menacing proportions in the country. These elements have been 
indulging in wanton killings, arson, looting and other heinous crimes 
such as hijacking, mass murders, etc. with the object to overawe the 
Government to terrorise. create fear and panic in the minds of cltizens 
and to disrupt communal peace and harmony. With a view to effectively 
combating such terrorist activities in diiferent States and to protect the 
States against internal diaturbances, the Central Government decided to 
raise a special armed f~,*, Consequently, the" National Security Guard 
was raised in the middle of 1984 when the Directorate-General of 
National Security Guarcl was set up under the command of a senior 
police officer designated u the Director-C'nmeral of the National Security 
Guard. 
2. The National Seeurity Guard shall serve as a contingency 
deployment force to deal with terrorist activities in various States. 
However, considering tbe Dature nnd purpose of the force and the 
o!xperience gained dlll'iDg the last two yeal'S, it has been felt that the 
force should be regulated by a selt-contained l'Itatute which will provide 
Jr its special npeds more RarticularIy in matter!: of disciplinp. 
3. While taking care, that the National Security Guard does not lose 
its character as an armed force of the Union charged with combating 
terrorist activities within the country, the Bill seeks to ensure that 
highest standards of efficiency and discipline are maintained in this Force. 
Accordingly, the drafting the present Bill, the proviSions of the Army 
Act, 1950 and the Border Security Force Act, )968 have been borne in 
mind. 
4. The Bill provides for the constitution ot the National Security 
Guard and for deeming the existing National Security Guard as the 
force constituted thereunder. It provides for the conditions of service 
of the members of the force. In particular, pursuant to article 33 of 
the Constitution, provisions have been inserted in the Bill to restrict or 
abrogate the application of some of the "fundamental rights to the mem-
bers of the force in so far as this is necessary for the maintenance of 
discipline. The Bill sets out the offences for which the members of the 
force may be tried. It provides tor the constitution of Security Guard 
Courts for the trial of such offences. It specifies the procedure which 
would be follOWed by the Security Guard Courts and makes applIcable 
the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 to the proceedings of the 
said Courts. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above obJectl. 
BUTA SINGH. 
NEW Dam; 
The 4th July, 1986. 
41 

Notes on clat&8es 
Clause 2.-This clause defines the various expressions used in tl¥t Bill. 
Sub-clause (1) (a) of this clause defines 'active ,duty'. Broadly a~king 
ac:eordingto this definition a member of, the Security Gu~d will be on 
ac:tiv.eduty during the period he is attached to or fon'ns part ofa unit 
of ,the Security Guard which is engaged in operation, apinst, terrorist 
or any person in arms against the Union or which.is ~rating at a 
picket or engaged on patrol or any other duty in relation to CQmbating 
terrorist activity. 
, ~ offences such as under clauses 16, 20 and 21 are punishable 
more severely when committed on active duty. The, de~ition is model-
~ on the aeftnition of 'active service' in the Army Act, 1950. 
The definitions of "civil offence", "civil prison", "criminal 
code" and "offence", are based on the definitions of these expressions in 
tho Army, Act, 1950. 
Sub-clause (1) (y) defin('s the word 'terrorist'. Tht' definition i, 
similar to the one given in thp Terrorist and Disruptive Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1985. 
Clause a.-This clause specifies the persons subject to the propos('d 
legislation. 
Clause 4.-This clause provides for the constitution of the National 
Security Guard. It has to be read with clause 140 which deals with the 
existing National Security Guard. 
CLause 5.-This clause provides for the general superintendence. 
direction and control of the Security Guard and appointment of officers 
of the Security Guard. 
Clawe 6.-This clause provides for liability of members of thE' 
Security Guard for service in and outside India. 
ClcJuse 7.-This clause deals with the resignation and withdrawal 
from the post by any member of the Security Guard. 
Clauses 8. to n.-These clauses deal with the. tenure of service, etc .. 
of m.embers of the, Security Guard. 
Clause 12.-This clause. seeks to impose certain restrictions on the 
rights of the members of the Security' Guard to form associations, free-
dom of speeCh, etc. '. 
Clauses 13 fmd If-These clauses. provide for l'eJ'Iledy or aggrieved 
persons including oftlcers. ' .' ' . . .",' ., .. 
ClaUBe$ 15 to 44.-Tbese clauses seek to constitute offences under 
the proposed legislation and penalise the members of the ~rity G~ard 
4ll 

43 
for the various acts prejudi'Cial to the maintenance of discip1inei good 
order and efficiency of the Security Guard. These clauses follow, 
subject to certain modifications, the provisions relating to offences con-
tained in sections 34 to 68 of the Army Act, 1950. The modifications 
relate, apart from the non-inclusion of provisions peculiar to the Army, 
to reduction in the punishment for certain offences. 
Claus~s 45 and 46.-These two clauses lay down that all civil 
offences committed by the members of the Security Guard within or 
beyond India shall be deemed to be the offences under the proposed 
legislation and shall be triable by Security Guard Court. Exception 
under section 46 has, however, been made in respect of the civil offences 
of murder, culpable homicide not amounting to murder and rape in 
relation to civilians where such offences are committed by the members 
or the Security Guard while not on active duty. 
Clause 47.-This clause sets out the various punishments which may 
be awarded by Security Guard Courts. 
Clause 48.-This clause enables a Security Guard Court to take into 
account the nature and degree of the offence committed and award to 
the person convicted of any offence under clauses 15 to 44 the punish-
ment 'prescribed by the relevant provision or punishment lower in the 
scale within the meaning of clause 47. . 
Clause 49.-This clause specifies the punishments which may be 
awarded in combination by a Security Guard Court. 
Clause 5O.-This clause permits infliction of minor punishments wIth-
out the intervention of. a Security Guard Court. . 
Clauses 51 to 54.-Clause 51 seeks to authorise a Commander of and 
above the rank of Group Commander to proceed in the preScribed 
manner against any person other than an officer or an Assistant Com-
mander and award one or more punishments specified. in the clause. 
Clause 52 imposes certain limitations in respect of award of these punish-
ments. Clause 53 authorises an officer not below the rank of Inspector-
General to proceed in the prescribed manner against an officer 1)£ or 
below the rank of Squadron Commander and award one or more 
punishments speci1l&d in the clause. Clause 54 proviaes for punisnment 
I)f persons of the rank: of an Assistant Commander by officers not below 
the rank of. Group Commander. 
Clauses 55 to GO.-These c~uses deal with arrest· and proceedings 
before trial. Clause 55 provides that ,any person charged with an offence 
under the proposed. legislation may be taken into Security Guard 
custody under the orders of any superior officer but an officer who is 
engaged, in a quarrel, affray or disorder may be ordered into Security 
Guard custody even by an oftlcer inferior in rank Clause 56 provides 
for the duty of Commander in regard to detention. The charge' against 
any. person taken. into Securi~ Guard custody must be investigated 
within forty-elght hours unless fllvestlgation within· that pi!rioa seems 
to be impracticable having regard to the public service. In case of delay 
the matter has to be reported to superior authorities.' 'Clause FJ1 provides 
that ill every cue where any person who 11 not on active duty remains 

'Of 
in Security Guard custody for a longer period than eight days without 
a Security Guard Court f.oJr ~s trial being comrened, sp~ report 
giving reasons for the delay shall be made by his Commander and a 
similar report shall be forwarded at intervals of fNery eight days until 
a Security Guard Court is convened or such person is released from 
custody. Clauses 58 and 59 provide for assistance by Magistrates, police 
officers and oiher civil authorities in the matter of apprehension and 
arrest of persons accused of offences under the legislation and deserters 
from the Security Guard. Clause 60 provides for enquiry into absence 
of a person subject, to the legislation without leave. 
Clause 61.-This clause provides for three kinds of Security Guard 
Courts, namely, General Security' Guard Courts. Petty Security Guard 
Courts, and Summary Security Guard Courts, for the trial of offences 
under the proposed legislation. The provisions in the Bill relating to 
these Courts are based, subject to some modifications, on the provisions 
of Army Act, 1950 relating to Courts Martial. The important modi-
fication is that while the Army Act provides for four kinds of Courts 
Martial, the Bill provides for only three kinds of Security Guard Courts. 
Clause,; 62 to 71.-These clauses deal with convening, composition 
and dissolution of Security Guard Courts and their powers. 
Clause 72.-This clause provides that a person subject to the pro-
posed legislation who has been acquitted or convicted of an offence by 
a Security Guard Court or a criminal court or has been dealt with under 
clause 51 or clause 53 (relating to imposition of minor punishment by 
certain officers) shall not be liable to be tried again by a Security Guard 
Court and dealt with under the said clauses. It thus prohibits sec.ond 
trial in respect of the same offence under this legislation. 
CZa~e 73.-This clause prescribes three yean period of limitation 
for trial of offences under the Act except the offence of desertion and 
any of the offences mentioned in clause 17. 
CZa~ 74.-This clause deals with the liability of a person who has 
ceased to be subject to the legislation after the commission of an offence 
thereunder. 
Clause 75.-This clause provides for the continued application of the 
proposed legislation during the term of sentence. 
Clause 76.-This clause deals with ·the place of trial. 
Clauses 77 and 78.-These clauses deal with choice of forum for ,the 
trial of an offence in respect. of which both.a Security Guard Court and 
an ordinary criminal court has concurrent jurisdiction. 
Clauses 79 to l03.-These clauses deal with procedure of Security 
Guard Courts and are based upon section 128 to sectiQn 15Z of the 
Army Act, 1950 which deal with procedure ofCouns ·Ma#ia1. ,.In par;ti-
cular, clause 84 seeks ~ apply the "proV1;Bions of the.'rnd.la.n.J!M.dence Act, 
1872 to all proceedingsbef~ a'~Ul'ityGuard :~oUtt. '" . 
. , Clautes 104.to U4.-Theseclausesdealwith eol1ftrmation ana r~n 
of findings andS&~te~e of Security Guard Courts. TheSe muses follh\v 

45 
elosely the provision contained in sections 153 to 165 of the Army Act. 
1950 in regard: to confirmation and revision of sentences of Courts 
Martial. 
Clau.~s 115 to 134.-These clauses deal with execution of sentences 
of Security Guard Coutts, pardon of persons convicted by such courts, 
re~ions of such sentences, etc. These clauses follow corresponding 
proviSions contained in sections 166 to 190 of the Army Act, 19M. . 
Clause 135.-This clause provides for the rank classification of offtcers 
and other members of the Security Guard. 
Clause 136.-This clause provi4es for the deductions that may be 
made from the pay and allowances of officers and other persons subject 
to the Act. 
Clause 137.-Sub-clause (1) of this clause empowers the Central 
Government to direct exercise of. such powers and discharge of such 
duties by members of the Security Guard as are exercisable or discharge-
able by an officer of the corresponding or lower rank under any Central 
Act. Similarly sub-clause (2) of this clause empowers the Central 
Government to confer or impose, with the concurrence of the State 
Government, any powers or duties under any State Act upon the mem-
bers of the Security Guard of corresponding rank. 
Clause 138.-This clause provides for protection of acts of the mem-
bers of Security Guard and it follows the provisions of section 17 of the 
Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949. 
Clause 139.-This clause deals with the powers of the Central Gov-
ernment to make rules, 
Clause 140.-This clause provides that the existing National Security 
Guard shall be deemed to be the National Security Guard constituted 
under the proposed legislation and makes the necessary and saving 
provisions in regard to persons appointed: to the existing National 
Se('Urity Guard and as to actions taken and things done in relation to 
the constitution of the existing National Security Guard. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the coiistitution of the National 
Security Gu&rd. Clause 5 provides for appointment of certain olftcers 
of the Security Guard while clause 80 read with clause 2 (1) (m) deals 
with appointment of Judge Attorney-General and other officers of his 
set-up. . 
2. The National. Security Guard, which was raised for combating 
terrorist activities with a view to protect the States against internal 
disturbances will be deemed to have been constituted under the pro-
posed legislation (vide clause 140). 
3. AU expenses incurred in connection with the administration of 
the Security Guard would be met from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
As the Security Guard has already been constituted, no additional 
expenditure of a non-recurring nature is likely to be involved when the 
Bill is enacted and brought into force. The recurring expenditure on 
the administration of the Security Guard during 1985-86 was of the 
order of Rs. 3,86,08,972.00. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING D!.LEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 139 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legfstation. The 
matters in respect of which rules may be made, inter alia., relate to the 
constitution, superintendence, command and discipline of the Security 
Guard; conditions of service of the members of the Security Guard 
(including deductions from pay'am!'lI11owances); 'the rank, powers of 
command and authority of the officers and other members of the Security 
Guard; the matters required to be prescribed under clause 12 of Uie 
Bill; the manner of filling in of vacancies on the retirement of members 
of the Security Guard Courts; the procedure to be followed by such 
courts and other matters relating thereto. 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under clause 
139 are essentially matters of detail or procedure and are merely 
ancilliary to the proper implementation of the legislation. The dele-
~fltion of legislative power is thus of a normal character. 
U~. ~H;ld n i\ ,:~ j 
';"'\ihl~~,:.JH P ,'"Brl',)M 47 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force of the 
Union for combating terrorist activities with a view to protecting 
States against internal disturbances and for matters connected 
therewith. 
", (Shri Buta Sitlgh,. 
.IIi,"*" t1/ Home AlGi"'). 