As ivTropucep in Lox SatHa on

18 MAY ३90

\

Bill No-93 of 1990 _
———
THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTY-SEVENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of
India as follows: —

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Sixty-Seventh Am- Short

title
endment) Act, 1990. a

5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government mence-

may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, कक
2. In article 124 of the Constitution, in clause (2) Amend-
ment of

(१) for the portion beginning with the words “after consulta. article
tion with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court” and ending with 124,
10 the words “Provided further”, the following shall be substituted,
namely:— =
“on the recommendation of the National Judicial Commission and
shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years:

Provided that where the recommendation of the National
15 Judicial Commission is not accepted, the reasons therefor shall be
recorded in writing: : |

Provided further that the Chict Justice of India shall be ap-
pointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal after
consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and


Amend-
ment of
article
217.

Amend-
ment of
article
222,

Amend-
ment of
article
231,

2

of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem neces-
sary for the purpose:

Provided also”;

(b) the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end,
namely:— | | क्‍

“Explanation.—Nothing in the first proviso to this clause shall
be construed as empowering the President to appoint any person
as a Judge of the Supreme Court unless he is recommended by
the National Judicial Commission for gach appointment.”.

3. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1),--

(a) for the portion beginning with the words. “after consultation +
with the Chief Justice of India” and ending with the words “Provided
that”, the following shall be substituted, namely: —

“on the recommendation of the National Judicial Commission and
shall hold office, in the case of an additional or acting Judge, as 15
provided in article 224, and in any other case, until he attains
the age of sixty-two years:

Provided that where the recommendation of the National
Judicial Commission is not accepted, the reasons therefor shall

‘be recorded in writing: 20

Provided further that”;

(6) the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end,
namely: —

“Explanation—Nothing in the first proviso to this clause shall
‘be construed as empowering the President to appoint any person 25
as a Judge of any High Court unless he is recommended by the
National Judicial Commission for such appointment.”.

4. In article 222 of the Constitution, in clause (1),—

(6) for the words “after consultation with the Chief Justice of
India”, the words “on the recommendation of the National Judicial
Commission” shall be substituted;

(०) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:—

“Provided that where the recommendation of the National
Judicial Commission is not accepted, the reasons therefor shall
be recorded in writing.” 35

5. In article 281 of the Constitution, in clause (2), for sub-clause (a),
the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely: —

+ (6) the reference in sub-clause (b) of clause (3) of article 307A
to the Chief Minister of the concerned State shall be construed as a
reference to the Chief Ministers of all the States in relation to which 40
the High Court exercises jurisdiction; ”.


3

6. After Part XIII of the Constitution, the following Part shall be
inserted, namely:—

“PART XIIA
NATIONAL JUDICIAL. COMMISSION

307, (1) The President shall by order constitute a Commisjson,
referred to in this Constitution as the National Judicial Commission,

(2) The National Judicial Commission shall make recommenda-
tions to the President as to the appointment of a Judge of the Sup-
reme Court (other than the Chief Justice of India), a Judge of a
High Court and as to the transfer of a Judge from one High Court
to any other High Coutt.

(3) The National Judicial Commission shall,—

(७) for making recommendation as fo the appointment of

a Judge of the Supreme Court (other than the Chief Justice of

India, a Chief Justice of a High Court and as to the transfer

of a Judge from one High Court to any other High Court, consist
of— |}

(i) the Chief Justice of India, who shall be the Chair-
person of the Commission; and

(ii) two other Judges of the Supreme Court next to the
Chief Justice of India in seniority;

(b) for making recommendation as to the appointment of a
Judge of any High Court, consist of—

(i) the Chief Justice of India, who shall be the Chair-
A, person of the Commissions

(ii) the Chief Minister of the concerned State or, if a
Proclamation under article 356 is in operation in that State
the Governor of that State;

(ii) one other Judge of the Supreme Court next to the
Chief Justice of India in ‘seniority;

(iv) the Chief Justice of the High Court, and

(x) one other Judge of the High Court next to the Chief
Justice of that High Court in seniority.

(4) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament,

the procedure to be followed by the National Judicial Commission in the
transaction of ifs business shall be suth as the President may, in consul-
fation with he Chief Justice of India, by rule determine,

(6) The National Judicial Commission shall have a separate
secretarial staff and their conditions of service shall be such as the
_ President may, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, by
rule determine.”

Insertion
of new
Part
XIIA,

Consti-
tution of
National
Judicial
Commis-
sion and
its func-
tions.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Government of India have in the recent past announced their
intention to set up a high level judicial commission, to be called the
National Judicial Commission for the appointment of Judges of the
Supreme Court and of the High Courts and the transfer of Judges of
the High Courts so as to obviate the criticisms of arbitrariness on the
part of the Executive in such appointments and transfers and also to make
such appointments without any delay. ‘The Law Commission of India
in their One Hundred and Twenty-first Report also emphasised the need:
for a change in the system.

2. The National Judicial Commission to make recommendations with
respect to the appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court will consist
of the Chief Justice of India and two other J udges of the Supreme Court
next in seniority to the Chief Justice of India. The Commission to make
recommendations with respect to the appointment of the Judges of the
High Courts will consist of the Chief Justice of India, one senior-most
Judge of the Supreme Court, the Chief Minister of the State concerned,
Chief Justice of the concerned High Court and one senior-most Judge
of that High Court.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

DINESH GOSWAMI.
New DEuut;
The 11th May, 1990;


' FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert article 307A in the Constitution
to empower the President to constitute the National Judicial Commission.
The National Judicial Commission will have as its Chairman the Chief
Justice of India, and as its Members, the Chief Ministers of the con-
cerned States, the Chief Justices of the concerned High Courts, and other

2. The Commission, will have a separate office of its own. The strength
and level of the officers and staff to be employed in this office will be
determined from time to time by the Chairman of the Commission with
the approval of the President. Expenditure will have to be incurred on
their salaries and on contingencies for running the office. It is not possi-
ble to estimate at this stage the likely expenditure to be involved on
this account, However, the expenditure, whether recurring or non-
Tecurring, will be met out of the budgetary grants of the Department of
Justice.

3. The Bill, when enacted, will not involve any other recurring or
non-recurring expenditure.


Estab-
lish-
ment and
constitu-
tion of
Supreme
Court,

Appoint.
ment and
condi-
tions of
the office
ofa
Judge
ofa
High
Court,

ANNEXURE

Extracts FROM THE ConsrrruTIon of INDIA
* * * * *

Cuaprer IV—Tue Unton Juprcrary
124. (1) * * La *

(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the
President by warrant under his hand and seal after consultation with such
of the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States
as the President may deem necessary for the purpose and shall hold office
until he attains the age of sixty-five years:

Provided that’ in the case-of appointment of a Judge other than:the
Chief. Justice; the Chief Justice gf India shall always be consulted:

Provided further that—

(०) 8 Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
President, resign his office;

(0) a Judge may be removed from his office in the manner pro-
vided in clause (4).

* * ve * *

217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the
President by warrant under his hand and seal after consultation with
the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State, and, in the case of
appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice
of the High Court, and shall hold office, in the case of an additional or
acting Judge, as provided in article 224, and in any other case, until he
attains the age of sixty-two years:

Provided that—

(@) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
President, resign his office;

(b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the President
in the manner provided in clause (4) of article 124 for the removal
of a Judge of the Supreme Court;

e

(०) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appointed
by the President to be a Judge of the Supreme Court or by his being
transferred by the President to any other High Court within the
territory of India.

& * * * *


आओ

200) The President may, atter consultation with the Chief Justice ‘Transfer
India, transfer a Judge from one High Court to any other High Court. sf ae है
* * * * * from one
High
Court to
another,

231. (1) * * * * *

Estabish-
(2) In relation to any such High Court,—

ment of

(०) the reference in article 217 to the Governor of the State shall High
be construed as a reference to the Governors of all the States in Court for

telation to which the High Court exercises Jurisdiction; BOs
z गे &; e States.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India,

(Shri Dinesh Goswami, Minister of Law and Justice.)