Bill No. ?3 of 1957 
THE PARLIAMENT (PREVENTION OF 
DISQUALIFICATION) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 

31 o( 1948. 
56 of 1948. 
630( 195 2 • 
5 
DiU No. ,~ of 1'57 
THE PARLIAMENT (pREVENTION OF DISQUALIFI-
CATION) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABKA) 
A 
BILL 
to dec14re that certcl,in offices of profit under the Government shall 
not duqUQ.Ufy the holder. thereof for blring cha.en cu, or for being, 
mem8ers of Parliament. 
BE it emcted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Parliament (Prevention of Qb- Short title 
qualification) Act, 1957. ~~~-
(2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of January, 1958. 
Z. It is hereby declared that none of the following offices, in so Certain 
far as it is an office of profit under the Govenunent of IndiiR or the omCClfi of 
• • PIO t not to Government of any State, shall disqualify the holder thereof for disqualify. 
being chosen as, or for being, a member of Parliament, namely:-
10 (a) any office held by a Minister for the Union or for any 
State whether ex officio or by name; 
(b) the office of the Chief Whip or a Deputy Chief Whip 
in Parliament or of a Parliamentary Secretary; 
(c) the office of a member of any force railed or maintained 
IS. under the N ationa! Cadet Corps Act, 1948, the Territorial Army 
Act, 1948, or the Reservee.nd Auxiliary Air Forces Act, 1952; 
(d) the ofBce of a member of a Home Guard constituted 
Wlder any law for the time being in force in any State; 
(e) the office of sherif! in the city of Bombay, Calcutta 01' 
~ Madras; 
(f> the office of Vice-Chancellor of a University or of chair-
man or member of the syndicate, seDate, executive committee, 
council, court or any other body connected with a University; 
(g) the oftlce of member of any delegation or miasion sent 
2S outside India by the Government for any special purpose; 

Repeal •. 
2 
(h) the office of-
(i) chairman, director or member of a statutory body 
other than a body connected with a University, unless the 
Jaw by or under which the statutory body is established other-
wise expressly provides, ,or 5 
(ii) chairman or member of a non-statutory body other 
than eny such body as is referred to in clause (g), or 
(iii) an adviser created temporarily for the purpose of 
advising the Government or any other authority on any mat-
ter of public impor1Jance, 10 
where the holder of such office is not entitled to any remunera-
tion other than compensatory allowance; 
(i) the office of village revenue officer, such as lambardar, 
malguzar, patel, deshmukh and the like, who is remunerated by 
a share of, or commission on, the amount of land revenue ~ollect- IS 
ed by him; 
(j) any part-time' office which does not disqualify the hol-
der thereof for being chosen as, or for being, a member of the 
Legislature of the State which, or a 'territorial constituency in 
which, he represents in Parliament; 
Explanation.-For the purposes of clause (h),-
• , (i) "statutory body" means any corporation, committee, 
commission, council, board or other body of persons, whe-
ther incorporated or not, established by or under any law 
20 
for th~ time being in force; 2S 
(ii) "non-statutory body" means any body of persons 
Qther than Qstatutory body; and 
(iii) "compensatory allowance" means any sum' of 
'money payable to the holder of an office by way of daily 
allowance (such allowance not exceeding the amount of daily 30 
Q]lowance to which a member 'Of Parliament is entitled un-
der the Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliament 
Act, 1954), conveyance allowance, house-rent allowance or 30 of 1954, 
travelling allowance for' the purpose of enabling him to re-
coup any expenditure, incurred by him in perfonning the 35 
functions of that office. 
3. The l'erliament (PreVention 6f Disqualification) Act, 1950, the 
Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, .1951, and the Pre-
vention of Disqualification (Parliament and ,Pert C .States Legisla-
tures)Act, 1953, are hereby repealed. 4° 
19 of 1950' 
68 of 1951. 
1 of 1954· 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 102 (1) (a) of the Constitution provides that a person shall 
b~ disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either 
House of Parliament if he holds any office of profit under the Gov-
ernment of India or the Government of any Stat-e other than an office 
declared by Parliament by law not to disqualify its. holder. In pur-
suance of this article, Parliament has passed-. three Acts, 
namely, the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, . 19501 
the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, 1951, and the 
Prevention of Disqualification (Parliament and Part C States Legis-
latures) Act ,1953. 
The Act of 1951 exempted certain offices for specified periods 
which have expired and the Act is thus spent. The Act of 1950 and 
section 3 of the Act of 1953 exempted perman~nt1y tp.~ _ offices of-
(i) Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers, 
(ii) Parliamentary Secretaries and Parliamentary Under 
Secretaries, 
(iii) Deputy Chief Whips in Parliament, 
(iv) Vice-Chancellors of Universities, 
(v) Officers in the National Cadet Corps and the Territorial 
Army, and 
(vi) the Chairmen and members of Advisory Committees set 
up by the Government when they are not entitled to any fee or 
remuneration other than compensatory allowance. 
Section 4 of the Act of 1953 further exempted for a temporary 
period-
(i) the offices of Chairman and member of any other Com-
mittee ~et up by the Government, whether under a statute or by 
executive order; and 
(ii) the offices of Chairman, director, member and officer of 
any statutory body, where the power to make th~ appointment 
or the power to remove the person. from the office is vested in 
the Government. 

4 
It was even then recognised that the last mentioned exemptions were 
very wide in scope, and consequently their operation was limited to 
a short period which is due to expire on the 31st December, 1957. 
This Bill seeks to repeal the three existing Acts and to replace 
them by a consolidated and permanent measure. It takes into 
account the recommendations made by the Joint Committee of 
Parliament under the chairmanship of Pandit Thakurdas Bhargava 
which submitted its report in October, 1955. While'most of the 
recommendations of this Committee have been given effect to in the 
BUl, it has not been found practicable Uto have schedules enumerat-
in~ in detail the clliferent offices which do not incur disqualification, 
offices for which exemption has to be granted and offices which 
would disqualify members". Clause 2 of the Bill lists ten different 
categories of offices the holding of which would not disqualify for 
membership of Parliament. 
NEW DE.RIj A. K. SEN, 
The 28th Nooember. 1957. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to declare that certain offices of profit under the Govern-
ment shall not disqualify the holders thereof for being 
chosen as, or for being, members of Parliament. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, 
Minister of LtmJ.) 