5

10

As inrropucen IN Lox SaBHA

Bill No. 93 of 2001
—a!
THE SLUMS AND JHUGGI-JHOPRI AREAS (BASIC AMENITIES AND: CLEARANCE)
BILL,2001
By
Suri RaMDAS ATHAWALE, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the basic minimum amenities of water, electricity, sanitation and health
Sacilities in slums and Jhuggi-Jhopri clusters and for the clearance of such areas in
larger public interest and. | for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:-—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Slums and Jhuggi-Jhopri Areas (Basic Amenities and
Clearance) Act, 2001.

(2) It extends to the Union territories and Metropolitan cities only.

(3) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different Union
territories and Metropolitan cities,

2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a Metropolitan city falling
within the jurisdiction of a State, the Government of that State and in other cases the
Central Government;

Short title,
extent and
Commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Competent

authority to
declare slum
areas.

Competent
authority to
carry out
works of
improvement
in slums and
Thuggi Shopri
clusters.
Health
facilities in
slums and
Thuggi Jhopri
clusters.

Removal of
Shuggi Jhopri
clusters frout
Government
land.

Power to
declare any
area to be 8
clearance
area.

Slum
clearanve
order.

2

(0) "building" includes any structure or erection or any part of a building but
does not include a plant or machinery comprised in 8 building;

(c) "competent authority" means such officer or authority as the appropriate
Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as the competent
authority for the purposes of this Act;

(d) "Jhuggi-Jhopri" means small roughly built house or shelter usually made of
mud, wood or metal having thatch or thin sheet roof covering;

(७) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(0 "slum" means an area consisting of ‘badly built, overcrowded houses, buildings
or Jhuggi-Jhopri clusier;

(g) "slum clearance" means the clearance of any slum area by demolition and
removal of buildings therefrom;

(0) "works of improvement" includes in relation to a slum area the execution of
following works, namely:—

(i) necessary repairs of lanes, roads, etc.;
ii) provision of light point, water taps and bathing places;
(iii) construction of drains, open or covered;

(iv) provisions of latrines, including conversion of dry latrines into water
borne latrines; and

(v) removal of rubbish.

3. The competent authority may, from time to time, by notification in the official Gazette,
declare any area to be a slum area within the meaning of this Act.

4, The appropriate Government through the competent authority shall carry out
works of improvement in slums and Shuggi-Jhopri clusters from time to time in such
manner as may be prescribed.

5. The appropriate Government shall provide minimum basic health facilities through
primary health centres in slum areas. and Jhuggi-Jhopri clusters in such manner as may
be prescribed.

6. The competent authority shall not allow a Shuggi-Jhopri cluster to come upon a
Government land and if any slum exists in such a land before the commencement of this Act,
the competent authority shall remove it in such manner as may be prescribed.

7. Where the competent authority is satisfied that the most satisfactory method of
dealing with the conditions in a slum area is the demolition of ail the buildings in the area, the
authority shall by an order notified in the Official Gazette declare the area to beaclearance
area, that is to say an area to be cleared of all buildings in accordance with the provision of
this Act and the rules made thereunder.

8. As soon as may be, after the competent authority has declared any slum area to be
clearance area it shall make a slum clearance order in such manner as may be prescribed and

submit the order for the clearance by the appropriate Government and if the appropriate

10

15

20

25

30

ne


2:

Government confirms the order, the order shall become operative from the date of such
confirmation,

9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for Power to
the purposes of this Act. make rules.


Crore of people in our country are living in slums and .
inhuman conditions. There are no basic facilities of potable water,

health services in these areas. However, people have no other option but

slums and Jhuggi-Jhopri clusters. The Problem is more appaling

Delhi, Bombay, and Calcutta and such other big cities where peop!

numbers in search of employment. Poverty forces them to find shelter in:

Jhopri clusters. It is the duty of the concemed State Governments to pro

in such areas. However, sometimes Jhuggi-Jhopri clusters come upon G

which is meant for other important purposes. Their clearance is necessary in larger
interest.

‘Hence this Bill.

New Dew;
November 22, 2000.



7
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that competent authority shall carry out works of
improvement in slums and. Jhuggi-Jhopri clusters. Clause 5 provides for health care facilities
in slums. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, It
is estimated that a sum of five hundred crore Tupees will involve as recurring expenditure per
annum.

A sum of rupees one hundred crore will also involve as non-recurring expenditure,


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purposes
of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.

The delegation of legislative power is ofanormal character.


LOK SABHA

A

BILL
ies of water, electricity, sanitation and health
for the clearance ‘of such areas in larger

to provide for the basic minimum amenitit
therewith or incidental thereto.

facilities in slums and. Shuggi-Jhopri clusters and
public interest and for matters connected

(Shri Ramdas ‘Athawale, M.P.)

igip PLUIMAND—2970LS—12-10-200" 3