1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 93 of  2016
Definitions.
THE INDIGENOUS COW PROTECTION BOARD BILL, 2016
By
SHRI  DEVJI M. PATEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the protection of indigenous cow and
its progeny and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indigenous Cow Protection Board Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on  such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise provides,—
(a) "Board" means the Indigenous Cow Protection Board constituted under
section 3;
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "gaushala" means a shelter home or building with facilities of fodder, water
shed and medical aid for indigenous cows;
(c) "indigenous cow" means cow of indigenous breeds and its progeny but
does not include cows of foreign breeds; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Indigenous Cow Protection Board for protection of indigenous
cow and its progeny.
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and such other members to be appointed
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The headquarter of the Board shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The Board shall have its offices in the capital of each State and Union territory.
(5) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as may be
deemed necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board.
 (6) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, members and officers and staff of the Board shall be such as may be
prescribed.
4. The Board shall —
(a) construct gaushalas in every village, tehsil and district for protection of
indigenous cows;
(b) promote the therapeutic use of medicines based on cow milk, gobar and
gomutra;
(c) promote the manufacturing of fertilizers and insecticides with the use of
gobar and gomutra, aak, neem and tulsi;
(d) link gaushalas in the villages to the mid day meal scheme for supply of milk
and milk-made products to school students in order to overcome the problem of
malnutrition;
(e) promote the use of gobar gas in generation of electricity;
(f) link the setting up of gaushalas with Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act 2005, to ensure employment in the villages;
(g) promote bullock driven agro processing industry; and
(h) undertake such other steps as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to carry out the purposes of this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act;
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of Indigenous
Cow
Protection
Board.
Function of
the Board.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
42 of 2005.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Inspite of being most favourite animal and having importance in our religio-cultural
economy, the population of cows is decreasing day by day. Our country currently holding
the distinction of being the largest producer of milk, may run the fear of importing milk in near
future. The quantum of havoc and tragic effect it will wreak for the millions of people is
beyond anticipation. Traditionally, India houses varied species of cows. These different
species of cows like sahilwal breed, which gives milk even in dry days, have been the
backbone of nation's rural economy. Milk of the indigenous cow has been found to be a
complete diet by the scientists. Cow's milk and milk products are full of nutrients that are
required for human body to have a disease free life. It has huge potential to fight chronic and
incurable diseases. One pound cow's milk a day can keep one healthy and potentially sound
to resist various diseases.
Cow's milk contain Vitamin A that have therapeutic value to deal with the disease of
cancer. In the Ayurveda, there have been umpteen number of experiments done with gomutra.
It has twenty-four elements that have antitoxic and preventive values to treat various diseases
and it has been found that gomutra is therapeutic for as many as one hundred and eight
diseases. Pesticides manufactured with the gomutra, aak, neem and tulsi adds to the fertility
of the land. Apart from this, gobar is also used to manufacture bio-fertilizers. Given this, the
role of indigenous cows cannot be ignored in the economy and day to day life.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to constitute a Board for the setting up of gaushalas and
protection of indigenous cow and its progeny in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DEVJI M. PATEL
March 10, 2016.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for  constitution of a Board for the protection of indigenous
cow and its progeny. Clause 4 provides that the Board shall set up gaushalas in every
village, tehsil and district. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall provide
requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore per annum would be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the protection of indigenous cow and
its progeny and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Devji M. Patel, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—65L(S3)—25.04.2016.