Bill No. 93-F of  2010
ORIGINAL
THE JHARKHAND PANCHAYAT RAJ
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 17TH AUGUST, 2010
RAJYA SABHA ON 25TH  AUGUST, 2010)

THE JHARKHAND PANCHAYAT RAJ (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
(AS PASSED BY THE H OUSES OF P ARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Jharkhand Panchayat Raj Act, 2001.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic  of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Jharkhand Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Jharkhand.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 15th day of April, 2010.
2. In the Jharkhand Panchayat Raj Act, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act),—
(a) in section 17,—
(i)  in Part (A), in sub-sections (3) and (4),  for the words, figures and letters
"at least 1/3rd", the words "not less than fifty per cent." shall be substituted;
  (ii) in Part (B), —
(A) in sub-section (3), for the word, figures and letters  "the 1/3rd",
the words "not less than fifty per cent." shall be substituted;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Amendment of
sections 17, 36
and 51.
Jharkhand Act
6 of 2001.
Bill No.  93-F  of  2010

2
(B) in sub-section  (4), for the figures and letters "1/3rd", the words
"not less than fifty per cent." shall be substituted;
(b) in section 36,—
(i)  in Part ( A), in sub-sections (3) and (4), for the word "one-third", the
words "fifty per cent." shall be substituted;
(ii)  in Part (B), in sub-sections (3) and (4), for the word "one-third", the
words "not less than fifty per cent." shall be substituted;
(c) in section 51,—
(i)  in  Part (A), in sub-sections (3) and (4), for the word "one-third", the
words "fifty per cent." shall be substituted;
(ii) in Part (B), in sub-sections (3) and (4), for the word "one-third", the
words "not less than fifty per cent." shall be substituted.
3. In section 21 of the principal Act,—
(a) in Part (A),—
(i) in the heading, the words “and Up-Mukhia” shall be omitted;
(ii) for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘(1) The following procedure shall be followed in respect of
reservation for the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, namely:—
“(i) In General Areas (Non-Scheduled Areas), the posts of
Mukhia shall be reserved for the candidates belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in proportion of their
population and such posts shall be allotted by rotation in the
prescribed manner to different constituencies by the State Election
Commission.
(ii) In case of less than fifty per cent. reservation of posts for
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes candidates, rest of
the posts shall be reserved for the Other Backward Classes in
proportion of their population but in any case the total number of
posts reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
the Other Backward Classes shall not exceed more than fifty
per cent. of the total posts.
(iii) Out of the total posts reserved under clauses ( i) and (ii)
of this sub-section, not less than fifty per cent. of the posts shall be
reserved for the women belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes.
(iv) Not less than fifty per cent. of the total posts of Mukhia
(including the posts reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes) shall
be reserved for women candidates and such posts shall be duly
allotted by rotation by the State Election Commission in different
Gram Panchayats of the Panchayat Samiti.” ’;
(b
) in Part (B),—
(i) in  the heading, the words "and Up-Mukhia" shall be omitted;
(ii) in  sub-section (ii), for the word "one-third", the words "fifty per cent."
shall be substituted.
4. In section 22 of the principal Act, for clause ( d), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(d) the posts of Up-Mukhia in General Areas as well as in the Scheduled Areas
Amendment
of section 21.
Amendment of
section 22.

3
shall be kept unreserved or shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions made
by the State Government.”.
5.  In section 40 of the principal Act,—
(a) in Part (A), for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘(1) Reservation for the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes for the posts of Pramukh shall be in the following
manner:—
“(i) In General Areas (Non-Scheduled Areas), the total number of
posts of Pramukh of the district shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes candidates in proportion of their population
and such posts shall be allotted by rotation to different constituencies by
the State Election Commission.
(ii) In case of less than fifty per cent. reservation of posts for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes candidates, the rest of the
posts shall be reserved for the Other Backward Classes in proportion of
their population in the area, but in any case, the posts of Pramukh reserved
for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward
Classes candidates shall not exceed fifty per cent. of the total posts.
(iii) Out of the total posts reserved under clauses ( i) and ( ii), not
less than fifty per cent. shall be reserved for women candidates belonging
to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward
Classes.
(iv) Not less than fifty per cent. of the total posts of Pramukh in the
district (including posts reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other  Backward Classes) shall
be reserved for women candidates and such posts shall be allotted by
rotation by the State  Election Commission in the prescribed manner in the
light of total posts of Pramukh of the district.
(v) The posts of Up-Pramukh shall be kept unreserved or shall be
dealt with in accordance with the provisions made by the State
Government.” ’;
(b) in Part ( B), for the word “one-third”, the words “fifty per cent.” shall be
substituted.
6.  In section 55 of the principal Act,—
(a) in Part (A), for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘(1) The following procedure shall be followed in respect of reservation
for the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes,
namely:—
“(i) In General Areas (Non-Scheduled Areas), the total number of
posts of Adhyaksha of Zila Parishad shall be reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes candidates in proportion of their
population in the State and such posts shall be allotted by rotation by the
State Election Commission in the prescribed manner in different constituencies:
Provided that if the total number of Adhyaksha belonging to the
Scheduled Tribes in the Scheduled Areas is beyond the proportion of
their population in the State, further reservation shall not be provided.
Amendment of
section 55.
Amendment of
section 40.

4
(ii) In case of less than fifty per cent. reservation of posts of
Adhyaksha of Zila Parishad for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes candidates, rest of the vacant posts shall be reserved for the
Other Backward Classes in proportion of their population in the State, but
in any case the posts of Adhyaksha of Zila Parishad reserved for the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes
candidates shall not exceed fifty per cent. of total posts of Adhyaksha of
Zila Parishad.
(iii) Out of the total posts reserved under clauses (i) and (ii) of this
sub-section, not less than fifty per cent. shall be reserved for women
candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
the Other Backward Classes.
(iv) Not less than fifty per cent. of the total posts of Adhyaksha of
Zila Parishad (including posts reserved for women belonging to the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes)
shall be reserved for women candidates and such posts shall be allotted
by rotation by the State Election Commission in the prescribed manner in
the light of the total number of posts of Adhyaksha of Zila Parishad in the
State.
(v) Posts of Upadhyaksha of Zila Parishad shall be kept unreserved
or shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions made by the State
Government.” ’ ;
(b) in Part ( B), for the word “one-third”, the words “fifty per cent.” shall be
substituted.
7. In section 66 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 4), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5) The State Election Commission shall have discretion to initiate suitable
action on examination of report submitted by Observer or on receipt of allegations of
irregularities in Panchayat elections and such action may include countermanding of
election, stay on election and stay on counting of votes.”.
8. In section 67 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after clause (ii), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(iia) For free and fair conduct of Panchayat elections, the State Election
Commission, in consultation with the State Government, shall appoint General and
Expenditure Observer, who shall supervise the entire election process and shall submit
their report to the State Election Commission.”.
9.  After section 68 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“68A. In case any doubt arises or inadequacy is felt in giving effect to any
provision of this Act in respect of preparation of electoral rolls or conduct of elections,
the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 or the Representation of
the People Act, 1951 and the rules made thereunder, as the case may be, shall mutatis
mutandis apply.”.
10. (1) The Jharkhand Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010, is hereby repealed.
Amendment of
section 66.
Amendment
of section 67.
Insertion of
new section
68A.
Repeal and
saving.
Jharkhand Ord.
1 of 2010.
Special
provision
relating to
interpretations. 43 of 1950.
43 of 1951.

5
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Jharkhand Panchayat Raj (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2010, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by
the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as
amended by this Act.
————
The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament.
Dated the Speaker.
————
I assent to this Bill.
Dated the President.
Jharkhand Ord.
1 of 2010.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Jharkhand Panchayat Raj Act, 2001.
————
GMGIPMRND—4288RS(S3)—26-08-2010.
(As passed by the Houses of  Parliament)