AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

पा |
“Aue 2006

Bill No. 93 of 2005

THE PAYMENT OF WAGES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By
SHRI GINGEE N. RAMACHANDRAN, M.P.
५ ;
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Wages Act, 1936
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Wages (Amendment) Act, 2005
(jit shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the Ist May, 2005
4. Insection 1 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, sub-section (6) shall be omitted

Short title and
commencement.

Amendment of
section 1.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 regulates the payment of wages to | classes of
persons employed in various types of establishments and industries. It was enacted to
ensure that the wages payable to the employees covered by the Act are disbursed by the -
employers within the prescribed time limit. The existing wage limit for the applicability of the
Act is rupees one thousand six hundred per mensem. A large number of employed persons
have gone out of the purview of the Act due to successive rise in wages resulting from rise
in cost of living. Hence, in order to make the Act practicable and more effective, it has been |
proposed to remove the ceiling. In the year 2002, the Ministry of Labour had informed the
Standing Committee on Labour and Welfare that initially the Ministry had proposed for
deletion of the ceiling but the Group of Ministers in its meeting held on 6 September, 2000 did
not accept it. Instead, Group of Ministers directed to replace the same with the enhancement -
of existing ceiling and to arrive at corresponding figure.

If the existing ceiling is removed, all the workers across the country will be able to get
their wages without delay. The proposed amendment will go a long way to help the lakhs of

workers across the country and to provide them proper working conditions in industries.
The fundamental right to life will become a reality only if the hard-earned wages are paid on -

time to the workers.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New DELHI; GINGEE N. RAMACHANDRAN

July 11,2005.



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936
(Act No. 4 oF 1936)

* * * ax

1, Short title, extent, commencement and application.

* * * *

(6) Nothing in this Act shall apply to wages payable in respect of a wage-period which,
| such wage-period, average [one thousand six hundred rupees] a month or more.

* * * *


LOK SABHA

A
further to amend the Payment of Wages Act, 1936.

(Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1614LS(S1)—28-07-2005.