BWNo • 
.:." , 
r. , 
~"'P 
',' 
..... 
,.,; .. , 
.~. . 
, ' 
THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORA-
TION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
~As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA 
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 1960) 

LOK SABRA 
CORRI~DA 
to 
THE INDU STRI AL FIN dN CE CORPOR ATI ON 
(AMBNDHENT) BILL, 1960 
(IQ re/As introduced in. Lok Babha) 
1. Page 2, line 36,-
I.Qr "under-wri ting" read "under14'14;!n&"o 
2. Page 5, line 5,-
W_ ''Unle ss" read 'Under" 
3. Page 5, line 11 fr:t bot tom, -
a f te r "s hare s II .9J:L1.1; "," 
4. Page 5, line 1 from bottom,-
.!Qr... "paYment" ~ "repaYlIlent" 
5. Page 6, line 2,-
for "receipt" read ''recipient'' 
6. PSi":'J 10, line 3J," 
.~ 

~-'-~ 
6. PSi? 10, 11ne m,'" 
7. 
.~ 
· !.9.L "rapayable" rtt-ad "repayable" -~ 
Corre ct line nUlll be rs ::m page s 2 and 3. 
NEW DELHI, 
De cember 17 196Q.a- _ 
Agr ahayana 26, 1882 ( Sal:3) 
• 

31 of I9~~· 
8111 Nll b" of 1960 
THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Fimance Corporation Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Industrial Finance Corpomtion Short title. 
(Amendment) Act, 1960. 
S 2. In section 2 of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 ~=:~~ 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause (c), for the 
words "in the manufacture or processing of goods", the words uin 
. the manufacture, preservation or processing of goods" shall be substi-
tuted. 
10 3. In section 4 of the principal Act, after sub-section (7), the Amendment 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- ofaection 4· 
IS 
"(8) In this section the expression "insurance companies" or 
uinsurance company" includes the Life Insurance Corporation of 
India established under s~tion 3 of the Life Insurance Corpora-
tion Act, 1956.". 
.. 4. In, section 11 of . the .principal Act, for sub-section (4), the Aren~ment 
fQllowi,Ag. sub-section shall be substituted, namely: _ ~I.aectJon 
"(4) Direetors shall be paid such fees as may be prescribed 
for attending the meetings of the Board and, if they are members 
1802 (B) LS-2. 

Amendment 
of 8ection 
23· 
2 
of the Central Committee or any other Committee appointed by 
the Corporation, for attending meetings of such Committee: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to the 
Chairman or to any other Director who is a servant of the Gov-
ernment.". 5 
5. In section 23 of the principal Act,-
(1) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) The Corporation shall, subject to the provisions of 
this Act, be authorised to carry on and transact the follow- 10 
ing kinds of business, namely:-
(a) guaranteeing, on such terms end conditions as 
may be agreed upon,-
(i) loans raised by industrial concerns which 
are repayable within a period not exceeding twenty- IS 
five years, and are floated in the public market; 
(it) loans mised by industrial concerns from 
scheduled banks or State Co-operative Banks; 
(b) guaranteeing, on such terms and conditions as 
may be agreed upon, deferred payments due from any 20 
industrial concern-
(i) in connection with its import of capital goods 
from outside India; or 
(ii) in connection with its purchase of capital 2S 
goods within India: 
Provided that no guarantee under sub-clause (i) 
shall be given without the prior approval of the Central 
Government; 
(c) guaranteeing, on such terms and conditions as 30 
may be agreed upon, loans raised from, or credit arrange-
ments made with, any bank or financial institution in 
any country outside India by industrial concerns in 
foreign currency: 
Provided that no such guarantee shall be given 
without the prior approval of the Central Government; 35 
(d) under-writing the issue of stock, ~hares, bonds 
or debentur .. by industrial concertllj 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
30 
3S 
(e) acting as agent for the Central Government or, 
with its approval, for the International Bank for Recons-
truction and Developmen.t in the transaction of any 
business with an industrial concern in respect of loans 
or advances granted, or debentures subscribed, by either 
of them; 
(f) subscribing to the stock er shares of any indus-
trial concern; 
(g) receiving in consideration of the services men-
tioned in clauses (a) to (f), such commission as may be 
egreed upon; 
(h) retaining as part of its assets any stock, shares, 
bonds or debentures which it may have to take up in 
fulfilment of its underwriting liabilities, so however 
that it disposes of the stock, shares, bonds or debentures 
so acquired as early as practicable but in no mse, the 
stocks, shares, bonds or debentures so acquired shall be 
retained beyond a period of seven years from the date of 
such acquisition, except with the permission of the Cen-
tral Government; 
(i) granting loans or adwnces to, or subscribing to 
debentures of, industrial concerns, repayable within a 
period not exceeding twenty-five years from the date 
on which they are granted or subscribedLo, as the case 
may be: 
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall 
be deemed to preclude the Corporation from granting 
loans or advances to, or subscribing to debentures of, an 
industrial concern, which Tllay at the option of the Cor-
poration be convertible into stock or shares of that con-
cern within the period the loan, advance or debenture 
is repayable; and 
(j) generally, the doing of all such matters and 
things a·s may be incidental to or consequential upon the 
exercise of its powers or the discharge of its duties under 
this Act."; 
(2) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets, letters and 
figure "clauses (a) and (e) of sub-section (1)", the words, brack-
ets, letters and figure "clauses (a), (b), (c) and (i) of sub-section 
(1)" shall be substituted. 

Amendment 
oflection 
24· 
Amendment 
of section 
26. 
Amendment 
of section 
42. 
4 
6. In section 24 of the principal Act,-
(1) for the words, brackets, letters and figure "clauses (a) 
and (e) of sub-section (1)" the words, brackets, letters and figure 
"clauses (a) and (i) of sub-section (1)" shall be substituted; 
(2) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substi-S 
tuted, namely:-
"Provided that the aforesaid limit of one crore of rupees may 
be exceeded with the prior opproval of the Central Govern-
ment.". 
7. In section 26 of the principal Act, clause (b) and the proviso to 
shall be omitted. 
8. Section 42 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
section (1) of that section and after sub-section (1) as so re-number-
ed, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon IS 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and, 
if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 
session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any .20 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without preju-
dice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 25 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It has been found from experience gained by the Industrial 
Finance Corporation in its working since 1957 when the Act was 
amended last, that it is necessary to amend the Act in certain res-
pects. Unless clauses (a) and (aa) of sub-section (1) of section 23 
of the Act, the Corporation can guarantee loans floated by indus-
trial concerns in the market and also guarantee, with the approval 
of the Central Government, deferred payments due for import of 
capital goods from abroad. The Corporation, however, cannot 
guarantee loans raised by an industrial concern from scheduled 
banks or State Cooperative Banks; the result, sometimes, is that the 
concerns which have already mortgaged their assets to the Corpora-
tion are unable to offer suitable security to banks for accommoda-
tion. The Corporation has also now no power to guarantee deferred 
payments for acquisition of capital goods made in India. This has 
an inhibiting effect on development of indigenous manufacture of 
capital goods. Then again, as the Corporation is not authorised 
now to guarantee foreign exchange loans sought by Indian concerns 
from institutions abroad, the concerns sometimes find it difficult 
to obtain credit owing to their inability to find suitable guarantors. 
It is, therefore, proposed to amend section 23 suitably, so as to enable 
the Corporation to guarantee the loans raised by industrial concerns 
frorp scheduled banks or State Cooperative Banks, the deferred pay-
ments for acquisition of capital goods manufactured in India and 
the credit arrangements made by industrial concerns from foreign 
financial institutions. 
2. The Corporation is not authorised to subscribe directly to the 
share capital of an industrial concern. although it can underwrite 
the issue of stock, shares, etc., and retain, up to seven years, without 
Government permission and longer with Government permission, 
such stock, shares etc., as it may have to take up in discharge of its 
underwriting obligations. Cases arise where concerns apply to the 
Corporation for substantial loans although they would need smaller 
loan or none at all if they approach the public for capital with an 
assurance that the Corporation would subscribe to a portion of the 
issue. It is, therefore, proposed to enable the Corporation to make 
direct subscription to the stock/share capital of industrial concerns· 
3. Under the existing provisions of the Act, the Corporation is 
entitled only to the payment of loans/debentures with stipulated 
5 

interest and cannot share the profits of an industrial concern, which 
has been the receipt of substantial financial assistance in the shape 
of loans or debentures. The new provision referred to in paragraph 
2 above will pave the way for the Corporation to subscribe to the 
shares of an industrial c~ncern where the terms of the loan granted 
to it or the terms of debentures issued by it enable the Corporation 
to convert such loans or debentures into shares. 
4. Under the provisions of section 24, the Corporation cannot 
grant loans or advances to or subscribe to debentures of industrial 
concerns where the total amount exceeds one crore of rupees unless 
the Central Government, on the recommendation of the Corporation, 
guarantee the repayment of such loans, advances or debentures and 
the payment of interest thereon. Government owns 20% of the 
share capital of the Corporation and has guaranteed the balance of 
the share capital and all the bonds issued by the Corporation; it is 
therefore felt that there is no particular advantage gained by the 
Government guaranteeing over again, loans/debentures exceeding 
one crore of rupees advanced or subscribed by the Corporation to 
a single industrial concern. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the 
provisions suitably dispensing with the provision regarding the 
Central Government guarantee and substituting in its place the 
prior approval of the Central Government being obtained before the 
Corporation grants loans or subscribes to debentures exceeding the 
aforesaid limit. 
5. The existing clause (c) of section 2 of the Act defines an 
industrial concern as one which is engaged or to be engaged in the 
manufacture or processing of goods, etc. This leaves out the cold 
storage industry. It is proposed to enlarge the above definition to 
include concerns engaged or to be engaged in preservation of goods 
also. 
6. The Bill seeks to achieve these objects. Opportunity has also 
been taken to incorporate some other amendments which are found 
necessary for the smooth working of the Corporation or are of a 
consequential or procedural nature. The notes on clauses appended 
to the Bill explain the provisions thereof. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 14th December, 1960. 

Notes on Clauses 
Clause 2.-This clause seeks to include industrial concerns 
engaged or to be engaged in the preservation of goods within the 
definition of "industrial concern". 
Clause 3.-It seeks to clarify that insurance companies include 
the Life Insurance Corporation of India. 
Clause 4.-As ther& is a doubt as to whether a director of the 
Corporation other than the Chairman and officials of the Govern-
ment is entitled to fees for attending meetings of any committee 
appointed by the Corporation, it has become necessary to make 
specific provision for payment of fees to such directors for attending 
meetings of such committee. 
Clause 5 (1) .-Under section 23 (1) (a) and (aa) the Carporation 
can guarantee loans floated by industrial concerns in the market and 
guarantee, with the approval of the Central Government, deferred 
payments due for import of capital goods from abroad; the Cl)r-
poration, however, cannot guarantee loans raised by industrial con-
cerns from scheduled banks or State Co-operative Banks with the 
result that, sometimes the concerns which have already mortgaped 
their assets to the Corporation are unable to offer suitable securities 
to banks etc., for accommodation. It has also no power to guarantee 
deferred payments for acquisition of capital goods made in India. 
Further the Corporation is not authorised at present to guarantee 
loans/credits in foreign currency sought by an industrial concern 
from foreign financial institutions. The concerns which may need 
foreign exchange loans or credits are handicapped owing to their 
inability to find suitable guarantors. The sub-clause therefore seeks 
to authorise the Corporation to guarantee (a) loans raised by indus-
trial concerns from scheduled banks or State Co-operative Banks, 
(b) deferred payments for purchase of capital goods manufactured 
in India and (c) credit arrangements made by industrial concerns 
with foreign financial institutions. 
The Corporation can under section 23(1) (b) and (d) under-
w:rite issue of stock, shares etc. of industrial concerns and retain up 
to seven years without Government's permission and longer with 
Government's permission, such stock, shares as it may have to take 
up in fulfilment of its underwriting obligations. But the Corporation 
7 

cannot directly subscribe to the share capital of any concern. It is 
felt that, if an industrial concern approaches the public for capital 
with an assurance that the Corporation would subscribe to a portion 
of it, the industrial concern can reduce its requirement for loans from 
the Corporation substantially if not avoid it altogether. It is thus 
proposed to authorise the Corporation to make subscription to the 
capital of an industrial concern directly. 
With a view to enabling the Corporation to snare in the prosperi-
ty of an industrial concern which 'has been the recipien.t of substan-
tial assistance from the Corporation, the clause will pave the way 
for the Corporation to grant such loans or subscribe to such deben-
tures which are at the option of the Corporation also convertible 
into shares of industrial concerns. 
The clause further provides for the Corporation receiving com-
mission for all types of business including those now proposed. 
Clause 5 (2) .-The sub-clause seeks to bring within its ambit 
further types of business referred to in clause 5 (1). 
Clause 6.-The Central Government owns 20% of the share capi-
tal of the Corporation and has guaranteed the balance and has also 
guaranteed all the bonds issued by the Corporation; it is therefore 
felt that there is no particular advantage gained in guaranteeing 
over again the loans or advances granted, or debentures subscribed 
to, by the Corporation to anyone industrial concern when such 
amount exceeds Rs. one crore either singly or in the aggregate. The 
clause therefore seeks to substitute the existing guarantee provision 
in the proviso to section 24 by providing for prior approval of the 
Central Government. The clause further makes consequential 
change in that section as a result of amendments proposed in clause 
5. 
Clause 7.-It is consequential to the amendments proposed in 
clause 5 (1). 
Clause 8.-The amendment made to section 42 by this clause 11 
in accordance with the present practice. 

ANNEXUItE 
Zx'l'llAe'I'S PROM 'l'HB INDUSTRIAL !'mANcI C01U'ORATION ACT, 1948 
(15 OF 1948) 
• • • • • • • • • • • • 
2· • • • • • 
• • • • • • 
(c) "industrial concern" means any public limited company 
or cq..ope~.tiv, society incorporated by a Central Act or an Act 
of the 1At,islature of a State or under any law for the time being 
m toroe "Dd. reliatered in India whieh il engaged or is to be 
engaged in. tne manufacture or processing of goods or in shipping 
Q1' iJl mi.n.in.i or in hatel industry or in the «eneration or distribu-
tion of electricity or any other form of power: 
Expum(ltWtt..--The expresaiOft "proceuin. of ,GOds" includes 
any art or prooess for producinl, preparing or making an 
article by lI\lbjocting any material to a manual, mechanical, 
chemical, electrical or any other liko operation; 
• • • • • • 
• • • • • • 
11. 
• • • • • • 
(4) Directors shall be paid such fees for attending the meetings 
ot the Boarcl, and, if they are members thereof, of the Central Com-
Inittee, as may be preloribecl: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to the 
Chairman Of to JAy oth" Dir~tor who itl tl aervant of the Govern-
ment. 
• • • • • • 
Interpreua-
tion. 
Term of 
office and re-
tirementof 
Directors. 
83, (l) The Corporation shall, subject to the provisions of this Business 
Act, be authorised to carry on and transact the following kinds of c!~~~fon 
bUllinsSl, namely:- may tranaact. 
(a) guaraIlteeini, on /!Iucll tef1ft6 and conditions as may be 
agreed upon, loans raised by industrial I!oncerns which-
(0 are repayable within a period not exceeding twenty-
five years, and 
9 
1602 (B) LS-l. 

IJmit ofac-
tommoda-
tion. 
(ii) are floated in the public market; 
(00) guaranteeing on such terms and conditions as may be 
agreed upon, deferred payments due from any industrial concern 
in connection with its import of capital goods from outside India: 
Provided that no such guarantee shall be given without the 
prior approval of the Central Government; 
(b) underwriting the issue of stock, shares, bonds or deben-
tures by industrial concerns; . 
(c) receiving in consideration of the services mentioned in 
clauses (a) and (b) such commission as may be agreed upon; 
(d) retaining as part of its assets any stock, shares, bonds 
or debentures which it may have to take up in fulfilment of its 
underwriting liabilities, so however that it disposes of the stock, 
shares, b6nds or debentures so acquired as early as practicable 
but in no case, the stocks, shares, bonds or debentures so acquired 
shall be retained beyond a period of seven years from the date 
of such acquisition, except with the permission of the Central 
Government; 
(e) granting loans or advances to, or subscribing to deben-' 
tures of, industrial concerns, rapayable within a period not 
exceeding twenty-five years from the date on which they are 
granted or subscribed to, as the case may be; 
(ee) acting as agent for the Central Government or, with 
its approval, for the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development in the transaction of any business with an industrial 
concern in respect of loans or advances granted, or debentures 
subscribed, by either of them; and 
(f) generally, the doing of all such matters and things as 
may be incidental to or consequential upon the exercise of its 
powers or the discharge of its duties under this Act. 
(2) No accommodation shall be given under clauses (a) and (e) 
of sub-section (1), unless it is secured by a sufficient pledge,. mortgage, 
hypothecation or assignment of Government or other securities, 
stocks, shares or secured debentures, bullion, movable or immovable 
property or other tangible assets in the manner prescribed by regula-
tions or unless it is guaranteed as to the repayment of principal and 
the payment of interest by the Central Government, State Govern-
ment, a scheduled bank or a State Co-operative Bank. 
24. The Corporation shall not enter into any arrangement under 
clauses (a) and (e) of sub-section (1) of section 23 with a single 

II 
industrial concern for an amount exceeding one crore of rupees in 
the aggregate: 
Provided that the aforesaid limit of one crore of rupees shall not 
apply to any such arrangement when any loans, advances or deben-
tures are, on the recommendation of the Corporation, guaranteed by 
the Central Government as to the repayment of the principal and 
the payment of the interest. 
• • • • • • 
26. The Corporation shall not-
(a) • • • • • • 
(b) subscribe directly to the shares or stock of any company 
having limited liability; 
• • • • • • 
Provided that nothing in clause (b) shall affect the right oi,the 
Corporation to acquire any stock, shares, bonds or debentures of " 
company having limited liability in fulfilment of any underwriting 
agreement entered into by the Corporation. 
• • • • • • 
• 
Prohibited 
business. 

l.OK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
b~I1her LO amend the Jnd1lltI'ia1 Finance Corporation Act, 
The President has, in pUJSUance of clause (I) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the introduction of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, Minister of Finance.) 