As INTRODUCED IN' Lox SABHA. Olf 
\
' < 
..:': ".'" ' . . ~~. \..: .. , 
Bill No. M of 1988 
THE HIGH COURT AND SUPREME COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS 
OF SERVICE) AMENDMENT BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
further to am.end. the High Court Judges (Conditions of Se1"'Jice) Act, 1954 
and the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the RepubUc 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be call~d the High Court and Supreme Court 
Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1986. 
(2) It shalt come into force on such date as the . Centrnl Govemment 
may,' by notification in the Offieial Gazette, appoint 
CHAPTER II 
10 AMENDMENT OF 1lIE HIGH COURT JUDGES (CONDmONS OF SERVICE) 
ACT, 1954 
2. In section "'4 of the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 
28 of 1954. 1954 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the High Court Judges 
Act), W sub-section (2) , in clause (0),-
120 
(a) in sub-clause (i), the word uand" occurring at the end shall 
be omitted; 
(b) after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
II (iii) where the Judge had, prior to his appointment as such, 
held any pensionable post UDder the Union or a State, the period 
of leave earned by him in the said po,t, 80, hoW'evet', that such 
Short 
title 
and. 
com.. 
meuce-
ment. 
Amend.. 
ment of 
aectlon .. 

Amend. 
ment of 
section 
17A. 
In.ertion 
of new 
section 
20A. 
Deposit 
Linked 
Insurance 
Scheme. 
2 
peTi~ shall not exceed one hundred a!ld eighty days in term8 
of leave on full allowances; and". 
3. In section 17A of the High Court Judges Act,-
(a) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub-sections shall 
be substituted, namely:- 5 
"(1) Where a Judge who, heiDI' in service on or after the 
commencement of the High Court and Supreme Court Jud,. 
(Conitions of Serv~ee) Amendment Act, 1986, dies, whether be-
fore or after retirement in circumstances to which seetion 11 
does not apply, family pension calculated at the rate of ftfty per 1 L 
cent. of the pension admissible to him on the late of h:s doath 
shall he payable "to the person or persons entitled thereto and the 
amount so payable shall he paid from the day following the date 
of death of the Judge for a period of seven y~ or for a 
period up to the date on which the Judge would have attained the J 5 
age of sixtr-five years, had he survived, wh:chever is earlier, and 
thereafter at the rate! of· half of the family pension so admissible. 
Expilanation.-For the purposes of determining the person 
or persons entitled to family pension under this sub-section,-
(i) in relation to a Judge who elects 01' i$ eligible to :.10 
receive pension under Part I of the First Schedule, the rules, 
notitications and orders for the time being in force with 
regard to the person or persons entitled to family pension in 
relation to an officer of the Central Civil Services, Group 
'A', shall apply; 25 
(ii) in relation to a Judge who elects to receive pension 
under Part II or Part III of the First Schedule, the ordinary 
rules of his service if he had not been apPointed a Judge 
with respect to the person or persons entitled to family 
pension shall apply and his service as a Judge bejng treated 30 
as service therein. 
(2) Where any Jud~, 'who has el£l~ed to nee've the pension 
pavable to him under Part D or Part ID of the First Schedule, 
retires. or dies in circumstances to which section 11 does not apply, 
~atuity, if any, shall be payable to ithe person or peIrsons entitled 35 
thereto under the ordinary rules of his service if he had not been 
8npo!nteld a Judee, his service as 8 Jud~ being treated as service 
therein fol' the ,,1U'1tGSe of calculating that gratuity.": 
(Ib) in sub-section (3), in clautlle (iii), for the words· "thirty 
thouqnd rupees", the worc1s "fifty thousand rupees"· shall be substi- 40 
tuted; 
(c) in the EXJ)lanation, for the words. brackets and figures "sub-
sectiom (2) and (3)". the word, brackets and tigllt'P. "sub-section 
(3)" rhall be substituted. 
.4. IVtp.,. Clectinn 20 of the Hi~h Court JudS{es Act, the fol1owin~ section 45 
sh~ll he ;nc:e,.ted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect 
from the 5th day of September, 1977, namely:-
"20A. The Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme for the time being 
in f'lr"e under the General Provident Fund (Central Services) Rules, ... 
1960, shall aoply to every Judge whether he subscribes to the General 50 
.P'rovident Fund (Central Services) or any other Provident Fund 
': ~erred to in section 20.", .. 

5 
10 
15 
35 
3 
I.. In the. High Court Judses Act, for sections 2m .. aDd 22C, the follow· Substitu-
ing sections shall be substituted, namely:- tion of 
new sec. 
tions tor 
tor 
sections 
22Band 
22C. 
"22B. avery Juqe shall be eatitled.te.a.taft ear and one hundred 
.... fiftJ' litres of pehoI every month 01' tbe actual CODlIIIIRption of 
petrel per month,whiehewer is less. 
22C. The Chief Justice and each of the ·other Judges of every 
Rich Court shall be entitled. to a sumptuary. aIlowaDCt\ of five hundred 
rupees per month and three hWldred rupees permaoth, respeciively.". 
.. In the First Schedule to the High Court Judges Act,-
(a) in Part I, after paragraph 10, the following paragraph shall 
be inserted, Jlamely:-
'U. In the CB'Se of a Judge to whom this Part applies and 
who has retired on or after the commencement of the High 
Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
Amendment Act, 1986 the foregoing provisions of this Part shan 
have effect subject to the modifications that-
CO for pa.ragraph 2, the following paragraph shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"2. Subjelet to the other provisioll8 of this Part, the 
pension payable to a Judge to whom this Part applies 
and who has completed not less than seven yean of 
service for pension, shall b&-
(4) for service as Ch:ef Justice in any High Court, 
Rs. 4,DOO per annum for each completed year of 
service; 
,; (b) for service as any other Judge in any High 
Court, rupees 3,430 per annum for _ch completed year of 
serivee: 
Provided that the pension shall in no case exceed 
RI. 54,000 per annUm in the case of a Ch' ei J Ilstiee 
and RI. ",009 per anllum ill the case of any other 
Judge."; 
(ii) paragraphs !l to 5 shall be omitted; 
(ii.i) in paragraph 6, for the word and figure "paragraph 
5", the word and figure "paragraph 2" shall be substituted; 
(iv) for paragraph 8, the following paragraph shall be 
SUbstituted. namely:-
"S. Notwithstlllldin, aaythin,.r eoetained ill the fore-
go" previsiou of this Part, the pe .... payable! to It 
J'udp who baa completed fourteen 1eus of service for 
peDBiOll indudm, not leIS than s~x yean of service as 
Chief Just:cel of one or more of the Biab Courts, shall be 
.. 54,100 per 8IUlUID.": 
Convey. 
ance 
facilities. 
Sump-
tuary 
allowance. 
Amend. 
ment ot 
the First 
Schedule. 

Amend. 
mentof 
section'" 
Amend. 
ment Of 
eectlon 
18A. 
(v) in paragraph 9, for the .&pres "6,000", the fipres 
"15,750" shall be substituted; 
(vi) paragraph 10 shall be omitted,'; 
(b) in Part Ill, after p&ragraph 3, the following paragraph shall 
be inserted, namely:-
'4. In the case of a Judg~ to whom this Part applies and who 
has retired on or after the commencement of the High Court and 
Supreme Court Judges (Conditlons of Service) Amendment 
Act, 1986, the foregoing provisions of this Part shall have effect 
subject to the modifications that-
(i) in paragraph 2,-
(A) in clause (b), for the fitrw'es "500" and "2,500", 
the fiIrures "1,600" and "8,000" shall respeetively be su .... 
stituted; 
5 
10 
(B) after claUSe (b), the following proviso shall be 15 
inserted, namely:-
"Provided that the pension UDder clause (po) and the 
additional pension , Wider ~lause (b) tOllMher shall in 
no case enceeed Rs. 54,000 per annum in the case of a 
Chief Justice and Rs. 48,000 per aanUDl in the case of lZO 
any other Judge."; 
(ii) paragraph 3 shall be omitted.'. 
CHAPTER III 
AM.rJmMUIT OF THE SUPREME CoURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) 
Ac:rl 1958 ~5 
7. In section 4 of the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1958 (hereafter in this ,Chapter referred· to as the Supreme Court 
Judges Act), in sub-se::tion (2), in clause (a), in sub-clause (i~i), for the 
words "four months in terms of leave on half allowances", the wordb "one 
hundred and eighty days in terms Of leave on full allowances" shall be 30 
substituted. 
8. I'll section 16A of the Supreme Court Judges Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(1) WhtU'e a Judge who, being in service on or after the 35 
commencement of the High Court and Supreme Court Judges 
(Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1986,-
(a) dies before r~\tjrement, family pension calculated at 
the rate of fifty per cent. of the pension admisaible to him on 
the date of' his death shall be payable to the penon or peIIo 40 
SODS entitled thereto aad the amount 80 payable shall be 
paid from the day followiD&' the date· of d$th of the Judge 
for a period of seven yean or for a period up to the date OIl 
which the Judge would have attained t~' age of lixty-ftve 
years, had be survived, whichever is earlier, and thereafter 45 
at the rate of half of tbe famBy pension 110 admksible; and 
41 of 1968. 

5 
10 
15 
• 
(b) dies after retirement, family pensioa calculated at 
tbe rate of half of the pension so admissible to him shall IKI 
payable to the person or persons entitled thereto. 
Explanation.-For the pUrpOSE.5 of determining the person or 
penons entitled to family pension under this sub-section,-
(i) in relation to a Judge who elects or is eliPble to 
receive pension under Part I of the Schedule, the rules, noti-
ficatioDS and orders for the time being in force with r."ard 
to the person or persons entitled to family pension in rela-
tion to an officer of the Central Civil Services, Group 'A', shall 
apply,; 
(ii) in relation to a Judge who elects to receive pension 
under Part n or Part III of the Schedule, the ordinary rules 
of his _vice if he had not been appointed a Judge with 
respect to the person or persons entitled to family pension 
shall apply and IUs service as a Judge being treated as setr-
vice therein.". 
('b) in sub-section (2), in clause (iii), for the words "thirty 
thousand rupeeI!J", the words "fifty thousand rupees" shall be sub-
stituted; 
(c) in the Explanation, for the words "In this section", the words, 
brackets and figure "In sub-section (2)" shall be substituted. 
9. After section 20 of the Supreme Court Judges Act, the following 
section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with 
effect from the 5th day of September, 1977, namely:-
"20A. The Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme for the time being 
in force under the General Provident Fund (Central Services) 
Rules, 1960, shall apply to every Judge whether he subscribes to the 
General Provident Fund (Central Services) or any other Provident 
Fund referred to in section 20.". 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
2OA. 
Deposit 
Linked 
Insurance 
Scheme. 
10. In the Supreme Court Judges Act, for section 23A, the following 
30 section shall be substituted, namely:-
Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 
23A. 
''23A. Every Judge shall be entitled to a staff car and one hund.red Convey-
and fifty litres of petrol every month or the actual consumption of ance facili tiel. petrol per month, whichever is less.". 
35 11. In section 23B of the Supreme Court Judges Act, for the words 
"five hundred rupees per month and three hundred rupeteS", the words 
"one thousand two hundred and fifty rupees per month and sevekl 
hundred and ftffy rupees" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
ment Of 
section 
23B. 
40 
12. In the Schedule to the Supreme Court Judges Act,-
(a) in Part I, after paragraph 6, the following paragraph shall 
~e inserted, namely:-
'7. In the case of a Judge to whom this Part applies and 
who has retired on or after the commencement of the High 
Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
Amend-
ment of 
the 
Sche-
dule. 

Amendment Act, 1986, the foregoing provisions of this Part shall 
have effect subject to the modifications that-
(i) in paragraph 2,-
(A) in c~use (b), for the ftpes "470" and "2,000" and 
"1,200", thel ~res "1,235", '(37,500" and "3,150" shall 5 
respectively be substituted; 
('B) in the proviso, for the ~es "26,000", the\ 
figures "60,000" shall be substituted; 
(ii) to paragraph 3, the following proviso shall be 
added, namely:-
"Provided that the pension UDder this paragraph 
shall in no case exceed rupees 54,000 per annum.". 
(iii) in paragraph 5, for the figures "7,500". the figures 
"19,700" shall be SUM."titut~; 
(iv) paragraph 6 shall be omitted.'; 
10 
15 
(b)' in Part III, after paragraph 3, the following paragraph shall 
be inserted, namely:-
'4. In the case of a Judge to whom this Part applies and who 
has retired on or after the commencement of the High Court and 
Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment 20 
Act. 1986, the foregoing provisions of this Part shall have effect 
'iubject to the modifications that-
(i) in paragraph 2,-
(A) in clause (~), for the figure\s "500" and "2,SOI}". 
the\ figures ('1,600" and "8,000" shall respectively be su .... 2' 
stituted; . ) 
(B) after clause (b), the following proviso shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that the pension under clause (a) 
and the additional pension under ,clause (b) together 
shall in no case exc£!ed Rs. 60,000 per annum in the 
case of the Chief Justice andRs. M,OOO per annum 
in the case of any other Judge."; 
(ii) paragraph 3 shall be omitted.'. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Since the passing of the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
Amendment Act, 1976, and the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of 
Servite) Amendment Act, 1976, there has been no material modification of 
the conditions of service of High Court and Supreme Court Judges. There 
has been a persistent demand for the improvement of the conditions of 
service of the Judges of thp. High Courts and Supreme Court. Having 
considered all aspects of the matter, it is proposed to allow them certain 
benefits apart from the increase in their salarie~. 
2. When a High Court Judge is elevated as a Supreme Court Judge, 
he is entitled to carry forward leave on half allowances up to four months. 
However, when Ii person, who is holding a pensionable post under the 
Union or State Government is elevated as a High Court Judge, he is not 
entitled to carry forward the leave standing to his credit ai the time of 
his elevation. The Judges of High Courts and Supreme Court have been 
extended the bem'fit of encashment of unutilised leave on full allowances 
standing to their credit at the time of their retirement. In the absence 
of any pr.ovision for carry forward of leave on full allowances to the 
Judges, they are not in a position to avail of the benefit of encashment 
of leave on full allowances up to the maximum pennissible limit of 180 
days. It is, therefore, proposed to give the benefit of carry forward of leave 
on full allowances up to a maximum of 180 days to a person holding a 
pensionable post under the Union or a State Government elevated as a 
High Courf Judge, and also to a Judge of a High Court elevated to the 
Supreme Court. 
3. The benefit of conveyance allowance was extended t.o the Judges 
with effect from 1-10-1974 and the amount of conveyance allowance was 
then fixed at Rs. 300 per month. Presently, Judges of High Courts and 
Supreme Court are entitled to· a conveyance allowance of Rs. &00 subject 
to the maintenance of a motor car by them. Since then, the price of 
petrol :lnd also the maintenance cost of the car have increased consider-
ably. It is, therefore, proposed to provide every Jud((e of a High Court 
and Supreme Court with a staff car and also 150 litres nf petrol per 
month. 
4. At pres('nt, the Chief Justices of High Courts are entitled to a 
f,Umph1Rrv allowance of Rs. 300 per month. The Chief Justice of India 
and the Judges of Supreme Court are entitled to a sumptuary allowance 
of Rs. 500 per month and· Rs. 300 per month respectively. It is now 
proposed to increase the sumptuary allowance payable· to the Chief 
.Tustice of India to Rs. 1,250 per month and of' the Judge:; of Supreme 
Coart to Rs. 750 per month. It is also proposed to enhance the :mmpfuary 
"ltowAnce payable to the Chief Justices of High Courts to Rs. 500 and 
to gi',e a sumptuary allowance of Rs. 300 to the Judges of High Courts. 
'1 

8 
5. In the case of Central Government employees, the ceiling on pension 
was removed and the dearness allowance up to 568 points was allowed to 
be included in the basic pay for calculation of pension, resulting in 
considerable increase in their pension. There has, however, been no 
increase in the pension of Judges of High Courts/Supreme Court, especially 
;n the case of Judges elevated from the Bar. The rate of pension in the 
case of Judges of the High CourtslSupreme Court was last increased in 
1974. Aiong with the proposed increase in the salary of the Judges of the 
High CourtslSuprcme Court, their pensionary benefits are also required. 
to be improved. 
6. The rates 'Of pension have been calculated at the rate of 50% of the 
enhanced salary and the minimum pension that is payable has been 
worked out proportionately. The ceiling on maximum pension per 
annum payable to a Judge 1S restricted to 50% of the salary drawn by 
him at the time of his retirement. 
7. With the proposed increase in ,the pension of a Judge commensurate 
with the increase in his salary. it is proposed to increase the family 
pension, payable to his family after his death, at the rate of 50% of his 
pension admissible to him on the date of death, up to 7 years from the date 
of his death or till he would have attained the age of 65 years had he 
survived, whichever is earlier, and thereafter, at the rate of 50% of the 
above amount. 
8. The Dea'th-cum-Retiremcnt Gratuity in the case of Central 
Government employees was increased from Rs. 36,000 to Rs. 50,000 with 
effect from 31-3-1985. In the case of Judges also, it is propos~ to in-
crea~e the Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity from Rs. 30,000 to Rs. 50,000. 
9. The Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme was notified by the Govern-
ment 'Of Jndh in 1975, with a view to providing extra social security to 
the families of the subscribers of Provident Funds. The Judges of High 
Courts and Supreme Court bec(Jme entitled to the benefit of this Scheme 
by virtue of the residuary provisions contained in the High Court Judges 
Rules and Supreme Court Judgps Rules. However. 'the Deposit Linked 
Insurance Scheme was incorporated in the General Provident Fund (Cen-
tral S~rvic'es) Rules. 1960 in 1977. Thus, those Judges, who are entitled 
to subscribe on Iv to General Provident Fund (Central Services) are 
entitled to the Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme and not those Judges. 
who subscribe to the State Provident Funds. It is proposed to give the 
benefit of Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme even to those Judges, who 
subscribe to the State Provident Funds. 
It is, thcrcforP, propose<\ to ffi.store the position obtaininJ!' before 
5-9-1977 by r:1Ilkint! all the Jud'!cs entitled to the benefit of the Deposit 
Linked Insurance Scheme, irrespective of whether they subscribe to the 
General Provident Fund or to the State Provident Funds. Hence this 
amenilment is proposed to be given retrospective eft'ect. i.e. with effect 
from 5-9-1977, the date on which this S~heme was inserted in the General 
Provident Fund (Central Services) Rules, 1960. 

9 
10. The Bill seeks to amend the High Court Judges (Conditions of Ser-
vice) Act, 1954 and the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1958 to achieve the above mentioned objectives. 
NEW DELHI; A. K. SEN. 
The 4th August, 1986. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 24\100I8l)..Jus, dated the 6th August, 1986 from 
Shri Asoke Kumar Sen, Minister of Law and Justice to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amend-
ment Bill, 1986, recommends the introduction and consideration of the 
Bill in Lok Sabha under article 117(1) and (3) of the Constitution of 
India. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 4 of the High Court Judges 
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 to enable the High Court Judges elevated 
from service to carry forward leave on fun allowance standing to their 
credit at the time of their elevation, subject to a maximum of 180 days. 
At present, these Judges are not entitled to carry forward the leave stand-
ing to their credit at the time of their elevation to the High Court. How-
ever, the High Court Judges are entitled to encashment of unutilised 
leave standing to their credit at the time of their reiirement, subject to 
n maximum of ] 80 days. In view of this eneashment benefit, which is 
nlready extended to the Jud~es, there will not be any additional financial 
liability in extending the present benefit of carry forward of leave. 
Similarly, clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend section 4 of the Supreme 
Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958 so as to enhance the limit 
of carry forward of leave in the case of Supreme Court Judges elevated 
from the High Courts. At present 'they are entitled to carry forward 
leave on half-allowance subject to a maximum of 4 months. They will 
now be entitled to carry forward the leave on full-allowance standin'g to 
their credit at the time of their t:levation from the High Court subject to 
a maximum of 180 days. The enhancement of the limit of carry forward 
of leave will not involve any additional financial implications, as they are 
already entitled to encashment of unutilised leave standing to their credit 
at the time of their retirement, subject to a maximum of 180 days. 
2. Clauses 3 (a) and 8 (a) of the Bill seek to amend section 17A of 
the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 and section 16A 
of the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958, so as to 
enhance the Family Pension payable to the family of a Judge, who dies 
while in service or after his retirement at the rate of 50% of the pension 
admissihle to him on 1he c1nv of his death up to 7 years from the date of 
death or up to the date (In which the Judge would have attained the 
age of 65 years had he survived, whichever is earlier and thereafter at 
the rate of 50% of the above amount. At present, the family ofa 
Jur1~e elevated from the Bar is entitled to a Family Pension of 
Rs. 500 per month for a period of 7 years or up to the age of 65 years, 
as the CAse may be and thereafter at the rate of R.c;. 250 per month. In 
the case of other Judges, family pension is granted as per the rules of 
the service to which they belong. The expenditure on this account in 
respect of .lud~es of the Runreme Court and Delhi High Court, will be 
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. The expenditure 'On this 
account in respect of. Jud[1es of other High Courts will be first charged 
on the COn>lo1idllted Fund of Indir and subsequently recovered from ·the 
States. In the case of Judges to whom Family Pension would be pay-
able, it is to be paid whether they die while in service Or after retire-
ment. In the very nat-ure of things, it is not possible to work out the 
precise expenditure on this account. At present the sanctioned strength 
of the Rllpreme Court is 26. Assuming that all the 26 Judges retire in 
10 

11 
the near future after attainjng the age of 65 years and the Family Pen-
sion has been paid after their retirement, the total amount of annual re-
curring expenditure will be of the order of Rs. 2,73,600 per year. Simi-
larly, in the case of Judges of the Delhi High Court, the sanctioned 
strength is 27. Assuming that all the 27 Judges retire in the near future 
after attaining the age of 62 years and the Family Pension has been paid 
after their retirement, the total amount of annual recuning expenditure 
will be of the order of Rs. 1,05,000 per year for the first three years and 
thereafter the annual recurrin'g expenditure will be of the order of 
Rs. 2,02,500 per annum. 
3, Clauses 3 (b) and 8 (b) of the Bill seek to amend section 17 A of 
the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 and section 16A 
of the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958, to entitle 
the Judges to the grant of enhanced rate of Death-cum-Retirement Gra-
tuity of Rs. 50,000. The present limit is Rs. 30,000. The expenditure 
on 'this account in respect of the Judges of the Supreme Court and the I 
Delhi High Court is charged. on the Consolidated Fund of India. In res-
pect of Judges of other High Courts, the additional expenditure will be 
first charged on the Consolidate·, Fund of India and subsequently recover-
ed from the States. During the next 4 years, 10 Judges of Supreme 
Court and 10 .Judges of Delhi High Court will be retiring. The additional 
expenditure in this regard io the Central Government will be of the order 
,.,f Rs. LOO,Ono per annum (r('curring) on an average for the: next 4 years. 
4. Clauses 4 and !J of the Bill seck to make new provision in the High 
Court Judges (Conditlons of Service) Act, 1954 and the Supreme Court 
Judges (Conditions of Sen'icc) Act, 1958 to entitle the Judges, who sub-
scribe to the State Provident Fund to get the benefit of Deposit Linked 
Insurance Scheme [as provided under the General Provident Fund 
(Central Services) Rules, 1960] with effect from 5-9-1977 [the date on 
which the Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme was incorporafed In the 
General Provident Fund (Central S(~rvice~;) Rules, 1960]. The benefit 
of Deposit Linked Insurance SC'heme was extended in Hl75 to all 'the 
Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts under the l'esiduary provi-
sions of the High Court Judges Rules, 1956 and the Supreme Court Judges 
Rules, 1959. However, the benefit ceased to be applicable to the Judges 
of the Supreme Court and the High Courts who subscribed to the State 
Provident Funds from 5-9-1977, i.e., from the date on wbich the Deposit 
Linked Insurance Scheme was included in the General Provident Fund 
(Ce'1tral Services) Rules, 1960. These clauses seek to regulatise the 
matter. In view of this, no additional financial liability is involved in 
extending the Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme with effect from 5-9-1917. 
5. Clauses 5 and 10 of the Bill seek to amend section 22B of the High 
Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 19f14 and section 23A of the 
Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958 to entitle every 
Judge t)f the Supreme Court and the High .Courts to a staff car with 150 
litres of petrol per month for official purposes. The expenditure on this 
account in respect of the Judges of the Supreme Court and the Delhi 
High Court will be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. In res-
pect of Judges of other High Courts, the expenditure will be charged on 
the Consolidated Funds of the States. The sanctioned strength of the 
Judges ,.,f the Supreme Court and the Delhi High Court is 26 and 27 and 

12 
the existing nwn~r of staff cars is 7 and 6 respectively. The expenditure 
in respect of additional stafl cars works out to Its. 40 lakhs (non-recurring) 
and the recuning expenditure towards petrol charges works out to 
Rs. 6,99,300 per annum. Since the Judges of the· Supreme Court and 
the High Courts will not now be entitled to the conveyance alloW&llCe of 
Rs. 500 per month, the actual additional expenditure will be Rs. 3,81,300 
per annum (recurring). . 
6. Clause 5 of the Bill also seeks to amend section 23C of the High 
C'Ourt Judgto.S (Conditions of Scrvice) Act, 1954 to enhance the swnptuary 
allowance in the case of Chief Justices of High Courts from Rs. 300 per 
month to Rs. 500 per month and to allow the sumptuary allowance of Rs. 
30U to the Judges of the High Courts. High Court Judges are not entitled 
to any sumptuary allowance at present. Similarly. clause 11 of the Bill 
seeks to amend section 23B of the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1958 to enhance the sumptuary allowance in the case of the 
Chief Justice of India from Rs. 500 per month to Rs. 1250 per month 
and in the case of other Judges from Rs. 300 per month to Rs. 750 per 
month. The additional expenditure in the case of Judges of the Supreme 
Court and the Delhi High Court will be charged on the Consolidated 
Fund of India. In respect of Judges of 'the other High Courts, the ex-
penditure:: will be charged on the Consolidated Funds of the States. The 
additional recurring expenditure in the case of Supreme Court Judges will 
be Rs. 1,44,000 per annum nnd in the case of Delhi High Court Judges it 
will he Rs. 96,000 per annum. 
7. Clauses 6 and 12 of the hill seck to amend the First Schedule to the 
High Court Judges (Conditions of' Service) Act, 1954 and the Schedule to 
the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958, respectively 
to give enhanced pension tQ the Judges. The maximum pension that 
will be admissible to a Judge 01 the. Supreme Court and High Courts is 
Hs. 54,000 per annum and Rs. 43,000 per annum. respectively. The 
prcsenf limit is !ls. 2B,OOO ~md Rs. :.!'2,400 respectively. The maximum 
pension that will be admissible to the Chief Justice of India and a Chief 
Justice of a State is Rs. 60,000 per annum and Rs. 54,000 per annum, 
respectively. The additional expenditure in respect of the Judges of the 
Supreme Court and the D~lhi High Court will be charged on the 
Consolidated Fund of India. In respect of Judges of other High Courts, 
the additional expenditul'c will be first charged on the Consolidated 
Fund of India and subsequentlv recovered fronl the States. During the 
next 2 years, 4 Judges of the Delhi High Court will be retiring and hence 
the average increased liabilities :Cor the next 2 years will be of Rs. 47,200 
per annum. Similarly. during the next 2 years, 5 Judges of the Supreme 
Court will be retiring and hence the average increased ~iabi1ity for the 
next 2 years will be Rs. 52,000 per annum. 
8. There will be ~o other recurring or non-recurring expenditure on 
account of proposa1.s contained in the Bm. 

ANNEXURE 
l£xTRACTS FROM THE HIGH COURT JUDQEB (CONDITJlONS 01' SD.VICE) ACT, 19M 
(28 OF 1954) 
• • • • 
4. (1) * • • • 
(2) In the leave account of a Judge-
(a) there shall be credited to him-
(i) one-fourth of the time spent by him 
and 
• • • 
' . 
• 
on actual service; 
• 
Leave 
acClb1b1t 
showin, 
the 
amount of 
leave_ 
17A. (1) Where any Judge who has elected to receive the pension Famil,. 
payable to him under Part II or Part III of the First Schedule retires, pensions 
Or dies, whether before or after retirement, in circumstances to which ::le··-
section 17 does not apply, a family pension or gratuity, if 'any, shall be s. 
payable to the persall or persons entitled thereto under the ordinary 
rules of his service if he had not been appointed a Judge.. his service as 
a Judge being treated as service therein for the pUrpose of calculating 
that family pension or gratuity. 
(2) The rules, notifications and orders for the time being in force 
with respect to the grant of family pension in relation to an officer of 
the Central Civil Services, Class I, shall apply to the grant of family 
pension in relation to a Judge who, being in service on or after the 1st 
day of October, 1974, dies, whether before or after retirement, in cir-
cumstances to which section 17 does not apply. 
(3) The rules, notifications and orders for the time being in force 
with respect to the grant of death-r.um-retirement gratuity benefit to 
or in I'elation to an officer of the Central Civil Services, Class I (includ-
ing the provisions relati'rig to deductions from pension for the purpose) 
shall apply to 00' in relation to the grant of death-cum-retirement gratuity 
benefit to or in relation to a Judge who, being in service on or after the 
1st day of October, 1974, retires, or dies in cil'Cumstances to which aection 
17 does not apply, subject to the modifications that-
• • • • • 
(iii) the maximum amount of gratuity payable shall be thirty 
thousand rupees. 
Explanaaion.-In sub-sections (2) and (3) I the expreSSion "Judge" 
has the same meaning as in section 14. 
• • • • • 
228. Every Judge shall be entitled to a conveyance' allowance of five CODvey-
hundred rupees per month subject to the maintenance of a motor'car ance 
~~ ~ aace. 
22C. The Chief Justice of every High Court shall be entitled to a Sumptu-
sumptuary allowance of three hundred rupees per mensem. ary 
• • • • • aUow· 
aact. 
. ': 
": ... :. ... ~ ~. ;',. 13 

Leave 
account 
showing 
the· 
amount 
of leave 
due. 
FamUy 
pension 
and 
gratuity. 
Convey. 
ance 
allowance. 
Sumptu.-
ary 
allowance. 
14 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SUPREME COURT JUDGE (CONDITIONS 01' SERVICE) 
Ac:r, 195'8 
(41 OF 1958) 
• • • • • 
4. (1) • • * • • 
(2) In the leave account of a Judge-
(a) there shall be credited to him-
• • • • * 
(iii) where the Judge was, prior to his appointment as such, 
a Judge of a High Court, the period of leave earned by him as 
a Judge of the High Court, so, however, that such period shall 
not exceed four months in terms of leave on half allowances; and 
• • • • * 
16A. (1) The rules, notifications and orders for the time being in 
force with respect to the grant of family pension in relation to an officer 
of the Central Civil Services, Class I, shall apply to the grant of ~amily 
pension in relation to a Judge who, being in service on or after the .1st 
day of October, 1974, dies, whether before or after retirement, in circum-
stancl:s to which section 16 does not apply. 
(2) The rules, notifications and orders for the time being in force 
with respect to the grant of death-cum-retirement gratuity benefit to 
or in relation to an officer of the Central Civil Services, Class I (including . 
the provisions relating to deductions from pension for the purpose) shall 
apply to or in relation to the grant of death-cum-retirement gratuity 
benefIt to or in relation to a Judge who, being in service on or after the 
1st tiay of October, 1974, retires, or dies in circumstances to which 
section 16 does not apply, subject to the modifications that-
• • * • • 
(iii) the maximum amount of gratuity payable shall be thirty 
. thousand rupees. 
Explanation.-In this section, the expression "Judge" has the same 
meaning as in section 13. 
• * • • 
23A. Every Judge shall be entitled to a conveyance allowance of 
five hundred rupees per month, subject to the maintenance of ~ motor 
car by him. 
238. The Chief Justice and each of the other Judges shall be entitled 
to a sumptuary allowance of five hundred rupees per month and three 
hWldred rupees per month respectively. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the High Cow,t Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 
and the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958. 
(Shri ABoke Kumar Sen, Minister of Law and Justice) 