Bm No. H of Ie 
THE MULTI-UNIT CO-OPERATIVE 
SOCIETIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
ON Ism NOVEMBER, 1962) 

8U! No. 94 of 19fa 
TIm MUL TI-UNlT Cq-OPERA TIVE SOCIETIES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED ~ LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Multi-unit Co-operative Societiea Act, 1_ 
B!! it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Re-
public of India A$ follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Multi-uNt Co-oper ltive SocleUet SIIort ,. 
(Amendment) Act, 1962. 
, Z. In section 5A of the Multi-unit Co-operative Societiea-Act, 1M2 ~ 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- . ~MCdoa 
10 
(i) in sub-section (2) for the words, "including proposall 
regarding the formation of new co-operative societies and the 
transfer thereto of the assets and liabilities of that society" the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"including proposals regarding,-
(a) the formation of new co-operative locieties aDd 
the transfer thereto, in whole or in part, of the usetI 
and liabilities of "that society; or 
(b) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the aaets 
and liabilities of that society to any other co-operative 
societies in existence immediately before the date of that 
meeting of the general body."; 

(ii) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall b4 
inserted, namely:-
"(4A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
aection, where a scheme under sub-section (2) includes any 
proposal regarding the transfer of the assets and liabilities 5 
of any co-operative society to any other existing co-operative 
society referred to in clause (b) thereof, the scheme, shall 
not be binding on that existing society or the shareholders 
and creditors thereof, unless the proposal regarding such 
transfer is accepted by t1!e existing society by a resolution 10 
passed by a majority of the members present at a meeting 
of its general body.". 
Amendment 3. Section 6 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
oflCioD section (1) of that section and after sub-section (1) as so re-number-,- ad, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: - I ~ 
." (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be 'comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 20 
session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so 
however that any such modification or annulment shall be with- 25 
out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that aale.". 

AB a result of the re-organisation of States, certain-eo-operativ, 
societies which had their objects confined to one State only became 
multi-unit co-operative societies. Section 5A of the Multi-unit Co:' 
operative Societies Act, 1942, provides for the re-constitution and re-
organisation of such multi-unit co-operative societies as intra-State 
co-operative societies and for ·the formation of new co-operative 
locieties and the transfer thereto of the assets and liabilities of such 
multi-unit co-operative societies. In some cases it has been found that 
it is not necessary to form new societies and it would be more con-
venient if the llsets and liabilities of a multi-unit co-operative 
SOCiety are transferred to an existing co-operative society. The pre-
sent Bill seeks to make the transfer of such assets arid lialSilities to 
any existing co-operative SOciety also possible. The transfer to an 
existing co-operative society would be subject to a resolution of the 
general body of such society accepting the same. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 23rd September, 1962. S. K. DEY. 

Ez1'IAC'I' I'ROK ftD 14tJL'l'I-UNl'I' C~PERA'l'IVB Sotl&i1i8 Ac:t, 1HZ 
. (8 or 1942) 
• • • • 
TnDlltioael 
== CIIItabl eo- . 
SA. (1) • • • 
• • • • 
operatlft 
:=." (2) If it appears to the Central Registrar of Co-operatJve Soefe-
noqaail- ties necessary or expedient that any such society should be reconsti-
:::taIao tuted or reorganised in any manner or that it should be dissolved, the. 
Central Registrar may, with the approval of the Central Govern-
ment, place before a meeting of the general body of the society held 
in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act, 
• scheme for the reconstitution, reorganisation or dissolution of the 
society, including proposals regarding the formation of new co-
operative societies and the transfer thereto of the assets and llabW-
ties of that society. 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BnL 
further to amend the Multi-unit Co-opcrative Societies 
Act, 1942. 
(Sh,i S. K. Dey, 
Minister of Community /JeroeJOj1fIIImt, 
Panchllyati Raj and Co-operation.) 