BIU. .0. M of 1961. 
THE·INDIAN COCONUT COMMITTEE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1952. 
lAs INTRODUOED IN TRill HOUBB OF TIlE PEOPLB] 
A 
BILL , 0# 
I further to anumd the Indicm COCOllut Committee Act, 1944. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title and nommencement.--(l) This Act may be ca.lled the 
Indian Coconut Committee (Amendment) Aot, 1952 . 
. 
(2) It shall oome into force on such date as the Central Government 
may. bv notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 5 . ~ 
I. A,mencimel1t of aect.ion I, Act X of 1M6.-For olause (I) of section 2 
of the Indian Coconut Committee Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), the following clause shall be substituted. namely:-
,'11) •. mill " mea.ns I~n;\' premises in which or in any part of which 
cop~:;:;-tis crushed or is ordinarily crushed with the aid of power for th.e 10 
ext,lllctiOIJ ~~ ~i1; 
lixpla11ation.~"power" meRns electrical energy or any other 
form of energy which is mechanically transmitted and is not gene-
rated by human or .animal agency;'. 
8. Amendment of I8Ction ',Act X of 194.4.-In section 4 of the 
principal Act,- 15 
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely:-
.. (a) t1:i.e Vice-President, Indian Council of AgricultuieJ 
~~; ro 
(Ga) the Agricultural Marketing Adviser with the Govern-
ment. of India; .. ; 
-(ii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
. "(d) four persons representing, respectively, the Governments 25 
. of Assam, Madras. Mysore Rno Travancore-Cochin. appointed in 
eacL case by the S.tate Government concerned·'·· _ 
(iii) for olause (g), the following olause shali be substituted, 
namdy:-
.. (g) six other persops. of whom two shall be elected from 
among themselves by the members of the House of the People 30 
one shall be elected from among themselves bv the members of 
the Council of States. one shall be nominated by the GOYernment 
of the State of Mysore and two shall be nominated by the Govenl-
ment of the State of TravaDcore.Coohin." 
35 

Bill Bo. M 01 1911. 
TRE INDIAN COCONUT COMMITTEE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL,1952. 
[As INTRODUCBD IN THB HOUSB OF THE PBOPLB] 
.. 
BILL .... 
further to ·amend the Inltian Coconut Committee Act, 1944. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title and Ilommencement.--(l) This Act may be called the 
Indian UO(lonut Committee (Amendment) Aot, 1952. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, "bv notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. I> . ~ 
2. A,mendment of aect.1on 2, Act X of 1944.-For olause (J) of section 2 
of the Indian Coconut Committee Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to 80S the 
principal Act), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
~) "mill" means any premise!:! in which or in Bny part of which 
copra is crushed or is urdinarily crushed with the aiel of power for th,e 10 
extl·llctioll ~ 2il; 
Hx!'lanatioll.~"powf'r" means electrical energy or any other 
form of energy which is mechanically transmitted and is not gene-
rated by human or .&nimal agency;'. 
3. Amendment of section ',A,ct X Of 1944.-111 section 4 of the 
principal Act,- 15 
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
na.mely:-
.. (a) the Vice-President, Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research; 20 
(u) iIle Agrioultura.l Marketing Adviser with the Govern-ment. of India; .. ; 
(ii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, 
Damely:-
"(d) four persons representing. respectively, the Governments 25 
of Assam, Madra.s. Mysore nnd Travanoore-C~chin, appointed in 
each case by the 8,tate Government concerned'''· 
(iii) for clause (g), the following clause shali be substituted. 
D8mel~-:-
.. (g) six other persops, of whom two shall be elected from 
among themselves by the members of the House of the People 30 
one shall ~e elected from among themselves by the members of 
the CouncIl of Sta.tes, one shall be nomina.ted by the Gl)vernment 
of the Sta.te of Mysore a.nd two shall be nomina.ted by the Govern-
ment of the State of Travancore-Cochin." 
35 

:4 
•• .Am8JldmeDt of l8Otior& 'I, Act Z of INt.-For Bub-section (1) of 
section 7 of the principal Act, the following sub-section shall be substituted. 
na.mel.y::-
•• (1) The Central Government may appoillt any of the persons 
referred to in section 4 or any oth.er person to be the President of the 
Committee, and if any other person is so appointed that other person 
shall be deemed to be a. member of the Committe,e for all the purp~es 
of this Act." 
is. Amendment of aectioD. 9, Act X of 1",.-ln section 9 of the 
10 principal Act,-
15 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "and coconut poon8c." j,be 
words and brackets "coconut poonac and such ot-her COCOllut products 
(excepting coir and its products) as the Committee may determine. OJ 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) for clause (b) of sub-section (2), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:-
•• (b) the supply of technical advice to growers of coconut, and 
to persons engaged in any coconut industry; ". 
6. In.ertlon of Dew .ect!oD 9A. In Act X of 19".-After section \} of 
20 the principal Act, tbe following section sball be inserted, namely:-
25 
30 
"9A. OwnerB of millB to Bupply certain particularB to Oollector.-
(1) The owner of every mill shalL-
(a) if the mill was established before the commenoement of 
the Indian Coconut Committee (Amendment) Act. 1952, within 
fourteen days of such oommencement; and 
(b) if the mill is established after .he commencement of the 
Indian COCOIlut Committee (Amendment) Act, 1952, within 
fourteen days of such establishment; 
furnish to the Colleotor .. ltatement containing the following parti-
culars, n8.ID,el.y:-
(i) the name and situation of the mill; 
(ii) the name and address of the owner; 
(iii) the address to which oommunications relating to the mill 
may be sent; and 
(iv) the total capacity of the mill to orush copra. 
(2) Whoever fails to comply with the provisionl of'sub-section (1) 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or 
with both." 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS ANI> REASONS 
Under the Indian Cooonut Committee Act, 19U, the word "mill" is 
defined to be a place in which oopra is crushed for the extraction of oil, 
which is a factory as defined in section 2 of the Factories Aot, 1934, and, 
having regard to the definition of "factory", no cess is leviable on the ex-
traction of oil by a mill if the number of hands employed is less than ten. 
This enables oentain employers to evade the cess by employing one or two 
hands less than the statutory limit. In order to obviate the possibility of 
los8 of cess on this account, the d,efinition of "mill." is being amended 80 as 
to include all mills where extractiolJ of oil is done with the aid of power 
irrespective of the number of hands employed. Clause 2 contains the 
necessary amendment in this behalf. 
2. Clause 8 soeks to give effect to certain changes in the representation 
of persom on the Committee based on insistent demand in this behalf from 
certain Hta~e UU\'L'rnments. Opportunity is also taken to amend clause (g) 
of the section providing separately for the representation on the Committee 
of members of the two Houses of Parliament on the lines of clause (g) of 
this section as it was originally enacted. At present, this clause provides 
that three persons shall be elected from among themselves by the 
members of Parliament oollectively. 
3. Under section 7(1) of th,e Act, the Vice-President of the Indian 
Council of Agrioultural Research shall be the President of the Committee 
and this prevents the Central Government from nominating any other 
person to be th,e President of the Committee. Section 7(1) is thElrefore 
bein~ amended to empower the Central Government to Dominate any 
person whether a member of the Committee or oth,erwise to be the Presi-
dent of the Committee. 
4. Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to enlarge th" scope of section 9 of the 
Act in order to include within the objects for which the Fund may be 
applied 11 few other matters. 
5. Lastly, for the purpose of ,ensuring that full information exists with 
respect to all mills employed in the extraction of oil, a new section is 
being added ma.kiJ~g it obligatory upon the owner of mills to furnish to the 
Collector the prescribed information. 
R. A. KIDW AI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 11th Jvly, 1952. 

~.' ..... '. 
ANNEXURE 
J!;XTRAOT8 ,aOlt 'lHE lNDiAN COCONUT COMMITTEB ACT, 1944 (X OF 1944} 
BectiQR .9(0) 
2. Depnitioraa.-J.n this Act, unless there is a.nything repugnlWt in the 
subject or eontext,-
• • • • • 
(c) "mill" means any place in which copra is crushed for .he 
extraction of oil, which is a fao~ry as defined in section 2 of the 
}<'actories Act~ 1984. 
• • • • • 
Section 4 (a), (d) and (g) 
4. UonBtitution of the India.n 'Coconut Committee.-As soon as may be 
after the commencement of this Act, the Central Government shull cause 
to be constituted a Committee consisting of the following members, to 
receiv.e for credit to the Fund the prooeeds of the dut.y and any other 
monies received by it and to administer the Fund, namely:-
• • • • • 
(a) the Yice-Chairm!lll, Indian Council of Agricultural Research; 
• • • • • 
(d) three persons representing, respectively, the State Gover~ent 
of Madras, the Government of the State of Mysore and the Govern-
ment of the Sta.te of 'l'mvancore-Cochin, appointed in each case by 
the Government concerned; 
• • • • • 
(g) six other persons, of whom three shall be perSOllS elected 
from among themselves by the memb,ers of Parliament and three shall 
be persons, of ,whom one shall be nominated by the Government of 
the State of Mysore and two by the Government of the State of 
1.'ravallcore-Coohin. 
• • • • • 
Section 7(1) 
7. Pre8ident of Committee, Secretary, 8ub-committees and 8tall.-Cl) 
The Vice-Chairman, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, shall b. the 
President of the Committee. 
• • • • • 
Seotion 9(1) a.nd (S) (b) 
9. Applica.tion of Fund.-(l) The Committee shall apply the Fund to 
meeting the expenses of the Committee and the cost of such measures 8& 
. ,it may consider necessary or expedient to take for the improvement and 
development of the cultivation and marketing of coconuts and of the pro-
duction, utilisation and marketing of copra, coconut oil and coconut poonac. 
(2) Without. p~iudice to the generality of the foregoing power, t·h& 
Committee may utilise the Fund to defray expenditure. involved in-
• • • • • 
(b) the supply of technical advice to growers; 
• • • • • 

1I0USE Ofi' THE PEOPLE 
.A 
BILL 
further to a.mend the Indian Coconut Committee Act, 1964. 
The President has, ill pursuance of clause (1) of Article 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to the House of the 
People the introduction of the Bill. 
(SAri R. A. Kidwai, 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
,Minister for Food ant/, Agrioult'fl,re.) 