'22 MAY1990 
.,"" 
BII No, 94 01 1990 
---. 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN BILL, 1990 
A 
BILL 
to constitute a National Commission. for Women and to provide fM matters 
connected thert!with or i7tcide7ital ther'eto. 
Seitenacted by Parliament in the Forty-flrst Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
5 I, (1) This Act may be caIled the National Commission for Women 
Act, 1990. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State ~f Jammll and 
Kashmir. 
(3) It· shall come iJ1toforce on ,ucb date as tM CenU'~ Government 
10 JD4.Y.t. Of ~~ in tbeOtlcial ~ •• appQiat. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise require&.,-
. (4) "Commission~' ~ans the Natiopal CommJiaion fo.r Women 
constituted under section 3; 
ShOl't 
title, 
extent 
and ('om-
mence-
lT~nt. 
Defini-
tions . 

Consti-
tution 
of the 
National 
Commis-
sion for 
Women. 
2 
(b) "Member" means a Member of the Commission and includes 
:.the Member-Secretaryand a Member co-opted. under sub-section (3) 
of section 3; . 
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed. by rules made under this Act. 
CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN 
3. (1) The Central Government shaD constitute. body to be Imown 
as tbe NatiODal Commiss.ion for Women to exercise the powers conferred 
on, and to perform tbe functions assigned to, it under this Act. 
5 
(2) The Commission shall consist of- 10 
(a) a Chairperson to be nominated by the Central Govel'Dment 
from a panel of eminent persons committed to the cause of women 
prepared in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) five Members to be nominated by tile Central Govemment 
from amongst the persons of ability, integrity and standing who have IS 
had professional experience in-
(i) law or legislation (including in lepl bodies); 
(ii) trade unionism, management of an industry or orga'llisa-
tion committed to increasing the employment potential of women; 
(iiI) women's voluntary Grgauisatioas (Iacludng womeu adi- 20 
\'Ists); 
(iv) administration or economic development; 
(v) health, education or social welfare; 
(c) one Member-Secretary who sbaU be-
(i) III expert in die field of lD8IIagemeat, orgadsational 2S 
structure or sociological movement, Or 
(ii) an officer who is a member of a civil service of tbe 
Union or of an all-India service or holds a civU post under the 
{Jolon with appropriate experience. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2).-
(a) one pel'SOD belonging to a Scheduled Caste shall be co-opted 
lIS a Member, H no pet'SOft belonging to 8i Scheduled Caste has 
been llominated under that sub-section; 
(b).GIIe perIOD IJeIoa&iaa to a Scheduled Tribe ...... be Co-opted 
30 
as a Medler, • DO peI'IOII be ..... to 8 SdaedaIed 'I'IIIIie ....... ",aW 3S 
under that sub-section, 
and every person so co-opted shall have the right to attend the meet-
lop of the Commissi. and take part in its proceedings , and shaU all!O 
have the right to ,·ote. 

3 
4. (1) The Chairperson and eVf!!ry Member shall hold office for such 
period, not exceeding three years. as may be specified by the Central 
Government in this behalf. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Cen-
S tral Government may terminate the 'term of office of the Chairpt>rson or 
a Member at any time before the expiry of the tenn specified under sub-
section (1) by giving to the Chairperson or the Member, notice of not 
less than three months in writing or three months' salary and allowances 
in lieu of such notice; and the Chairperson or the Member may relinquish 
lO the office at any time before the expiry of the tenn specified under sub-
section (1) by giving, to the Central Government, notice of not less than 
three months in writing. 
(3) A vacancy caused under sub-section (2) or otherwise shall be filled 
by fresh nomination. 
1 S (4) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 
5. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with 
such officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient pertorm-
20 ance of the functions of the Commission under this Act. 
(2) The salaries and allowances. payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of, the officers and other employees of the Commis-
sion shall be such as may be prescribed. 
6. The saIIIItes • .- ~ paylable to die OIakpea ..... Mem-
2S hers and the ... hUative espeares, 1neIudiDg ..... ~ 'an' 
peasion payable., or in ra9pKt 01, 8ae. oatefS ........ .....yees 
of the COIIIIIIIi!aioo, shall be defrayed out of the Consolllllfed FaIId' of 
India. 
7. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or 
30 shall be invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or 
defect in the constitution of the Commission. 
8. (1) The Commission may appoint such committees as may be 
necessary for dealing with such special issues as may be taken up by 
the Commission from time to time. 
35 (2) The Commission shall have the power to co-opt as members of 
oy committee appointed under sub-section (1) such number of persons, 
who are not Members of the Commission. as it may think fit and the 
persons so co-opted shall have the right to . attend the meetings of the 
t'OMiJrlttee and take Part in its proceedings but shall no~ have the right 
40 to vote. I . 
Term ot 
office 
and 
condi-
tions of 
service of 
Chair-
person 
and Mem· 
bers. 
Officers 
and other 
employees 
of the 
Commis-
sion. 
Salaries 
and allow-
&nces 
to be 
defrayed 
out of the 
Consoli· 
dated 
Fund of 
India. 
Vacan-
cies, etc .. 
not to in-
validate 
proceed· 
ings of 
the Com-
mission. 
Commit-
tees of 
the Com· 
mission. 

Pr~­
dure to 
be rep-
lated by 
the COAl.-
mission. 
Functions 
of the 
Commis" 
sion. 
4 
.(3) The ,per,solll eo ~ted. ..wI be entitled to receive ,uoh _ allow-
anns torattencijng the mee1inis of Ule committee a.s may be preaeribtd. 
t. (1) The Commission or a committee thereof shall meet as and 
when necessary and shall meet at such time and place 81 the Chair-
person may think fit. I 50 
(2) The Commission .hall regulate its own procedure and the pr0-
cedure of the committee. thereof. 
{3) All orders and deeisions of the Commi88ion shall be 'authenticat· 
ed by the Member-Secretary or 'ahy other oftlcer of the Commtnion duly 
authorised by the Member-Secretary in this behalf. 10 
CHAPTER lIT 
FuNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
10. The Commission. shall perform all or any of the following fune-
tiollB, namely:-
(1Cro) study, investigate and rev1iew all matters mlating Ito'~ 15 
safeguards provided for women under the Constitution and other 
laws and make recommendations as to the steps that should be 
talten by the Government for the effective implementation of the 
safeguards so provided 10 8S to improve the conditions of women; 
(b)- review, from time to time, the existing provisions ot the 20 
Conatitution and othet' laws affecting women IIld recommend amend-
ments thereto so as to suggest .remedial legialative measures to 
meet any lacunae, inadequacies or shortcomings in such leglslat:ons; 
(c) take up the Q868I -o'f violation of the provisions of the 
Conatitution and of other laD reJ.ating to women with the appropriate 25-
authoriti.e8; 
(c:i) l'Ook into complaints and take suo moto notice of matters 
relati~ to-
(z) deprivation of womell's rights; 
(ii) non-implementation of laws enacted to provide protec- 30, 
tion to women and also to achieve the objective ot equality and 
development; 
(iii) non-compliance of policy decisions. guidelines or ins-
~ructions aimed at mitigating hardships and ensuring welfare 
and providing relief to women, 35-
and take up the issues arising OU";: at. such matters with appropriate 
~uthi')rities; 
, (e) call f~r sp~i~l stUdies or investigations into, specific pro-
w... orsituaUcn. lU'ISlng out of diSCrimination. aDd atrocities against 
womenmd identify the constraints so as to recommend strate.. 40 
"for their removal; 
(I), 1,Uldertake promotional _ educational reeearch so all to wg_ 
gest ways of enSuring due representation of women in all spberas 

10 
5 
and identify factors respollS~ble for impeding their advancement, 
such as, lack of access to housing and basic services. inadequate sup-
port services and technologies for reducing drudgery and occupa~ 
tional health hazards and far increasing their productivity: 
(g) inspect or cause to be inspected a jail, remand home. 
women's institution or other place of cu'stody where women are kept 
as prisoners or otherwise, and take up with the concerned authoriti5 
tor remedial action, jf found necessary; 
(h) fund litigation involving issues lIft'ecdng • hqe body of women; 
(i) make periodical reports to the Government on any matter 
pertaining to women and in particular various difficulties under 
which women toil; 
(j) any other matter which may be referred to it by the Central 
Government. 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
11. (1) The Central Governmeu& shall, alter due appropriadon made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to ., Coauh!ioa .., way of grants 
~lIch sum.o; 0( money ., die Central Govemment may thb* fit for being 
20 utilised for the piiipCNItS Gf tills Ad. 
(2) The Conn' f don BI8y ... such ,_ .. if! thiIIIuJl fit lui' pertonniQg 
the foDctiGns under dIU Ad, 1M -.cit _ ... be ......... expeDdituru 
payable out 0( die ... releITed to in suIHedioa (1) 
Gran .. 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
12. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other Accounts 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such ana 
2S form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation audit. 
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounfs of the Coamaission s.... be audited by die Comptroller 
aRd Auditor-ee...l .. IDdI intenals 118 .,. be spedW Illy ..... and any 
30 expenditure ilw::wied ID eoanecdon with such audit ... be payable by lite 
ColltJlliBsioR to die CoDIpa'oUer .,. Audifor.Geaeftlll. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed 
by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the CoII1Illi$sion 
under this Act shall have the same rights and "privileges and the 
authority in connection with su-ch audit as the Comptroller and 
35 Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Govern-
ment accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of books, accounts, connected. vouchers and other documents 
and papers and to inspeet· any of the offices of the Commission. 
(4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller 
40 and Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in 
this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shan be forwarded 
annuallY to the Central Government by the Commission. 

Annual 
report. 
Annual 
report 
and 
audit 
report 
to be 
laid 
before 
Parlia· 
ment. 
Chair-
person, 
Members 
and 
&taft of 
the Com-
miSllion 
to be 
public 
servants. 
Directions 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 
6 
13. The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time, 
for each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving 
a full account of its activities during the previous finanCial year and 
forward a copy 'thereof to the Central Government. 
14. The Central Government shan cause the annual report together 5 
with a memorandum of action taken. on the recommendations contained 
therein. in so far as they relate to the Central Government. and the rea-
sons for the non-acceptance. if any. of any of such recommendations and 
the audit report to be laid as soon as may be after the reports are received. 
before each House of Parliament. 10 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
15. The Chairperson, the Members, officers and other employees of 
the CommiSSion shall be deemed to be public servants within the' mean-
ing of ~tion 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 15 45 of 1860. 
16 .. The Commission shall carry out such direetions as may 
be issued to· it from time to time by the Central GoveI'I1ment for proper 
andeftlclent functioning of the Commission. 
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 20 
(2) In particnlar, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power. such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters. namely:-
(a) the manner of preparation of the panel of eminent persons 
under sub-section (2) of section 3; 25 
(b) ·salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions I)f service of, the Chairperson and Members under sub-
section (4) of section 4 and of officers and other employees under 
sub-section (2) of section 5; 
(c) allowances for attending the meetings of the committee by 30 
the co-opted persons under sub-section (3) of section 8; 
(d) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be 
maintained under sub-section (1) of section 12; 
(e) the fo.rm in and the time at, which the annual report shall 
be prepared under section 13; 35 
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. ; : 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid. as soon 8S may be 
after it is made. before each House of Parliament. while it is in session, 

7 
for a total period of thirty days which lnay be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not! be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect. as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Succes8ivttCommissions on Women have noted in their Reports the 
uneqUal status of women obtaining in f!Ner1 Iphare of life aDd ~ I\li-
gested the setting up of an agency to fulfil the surveillance functions as 
well as to facilitate redressal of grievan·ces of women. Several women 
activists and voluntary action groups have also been making persistent 
demands for setting up of a commission for women. The country can-
not progress as long as the inequality persists with reference to half of 
its population. Having realised the importance of the issue. the Gov-
ernment decided 10 set up a commission for women, to be called the 
National Commission for Women, consisting of a Chairperson and six 
Members. 
2. The main task of the Commission shall be to study and monitor 
all matters relating to the constitutional aDd legal safeguards provided 
for women, to review the existing legislations and auggest amendments, 
wherever necessary. It will also look into the complaints and take 
suo mota notice of the cases involving deprivation of the rights of 
women in order to provide support, legal or otherwise, to hapless women. 
The Commission shall monitor the proper implementation of an the legis-
lations made to protect the rights of women so as to enable them to 
achieve equality in all spheres of life aDd equal participation in the 
development of the nation. -
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives. 
NEW DELHI: RAM VILAS PASWAN. 
The 10th May, 1990. l\ 
8 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up a National Commission 
for Women. Clauses 6, 10(h), 11(2) and 12(2) provide for expenses to 
be met by the Commission on various items referred to in those clauses 
from out of the sums of grants paid to the Commission under clause 11 (1). 
2. Rupees two crores have been provided for in the budget 
estimates for 1990-91 of the Department of Women and Child Develop-
ment of the Ministry of Welfare for setting up of the Com. mission . The 
expenditure, recutring and non-recurring, which ,may be incurred dur-
ing the year 1990-91 on the Commission shall be met out of the payments 
to be made from the amount of rupees two crores out of the Consolidat-
ed Fund of India. 
9 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may provide for 
matters, such a&-
(a) the manner of preparation of the panel of eminent persons 
under sub-section (2) of section 3; 
(b) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members under sub-
section (4) of section 4 and officers and other employees under sub-
section (2) of section 5; 
(c) allowances for attending the meetings of the committee by 
the co-opted persons under sub-section (3) of section 8; 
(d) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be 
maintained under sub-section (1) of section 12; 
(e) the form in, and the time at, which the annual report shall 
be prepared under section 13; 
, (f) any other matter which is required to be, o.r may be, pres-
cribed. I 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of 
pr~edural and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide 
for them under the Bill itself. The delegation of the legislative powers 
is, therefore, of a nonnal character. 
10 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to constitute a National Commission for Women and to provide for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Ram Vilas Paswan, Minister of Labour and Welfare.) 