BIU No. " of 1257 
THE CRIMINAL LAW AMEND.MENT 
BILL, 1957 
. 
(As INTRODUCED IN LolC SABRA) 

I of 19,6. 
5 
10 
_III ,N", H of 1"7 
THE CRIMIN AT.. LAW AMENDMENT BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the India71. Penal ~f the Prevetl.tion. ()1 Corruptt<m 
Act, 1947, a7l.d the Crimi7l.al Law A17U!M17I.e7I.t Act, 1982. 
BE it enacted by Parliamel1t in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Crimmal Law Amendment Act, Sbort title. 
1957. 
2. In section 21 of the Indian Penal Code,- AmeDdment 
of lCICdon ax. 
(a) after clause Eleventh, taefol1owing clause shall be Act .5 of 1860. 
inserted, namely:-
"Twelfth.-Every officer in the service or pay of a local 
authority or of a trading corporation established by a Centr'al, 
Provincial or State Act or of a Governmellt C'Ompany as defin-
ed in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956."; 
(b) after Explanation 3, the following Ezpl4Mtton ,hall be 
inserted, namely:-
'Explanation 4.-The expression "trading corporation" in-
IS eludes a banking, insurance or ftnancial corporation, a river 
valley corporation and a corporation for supplying power. 
light or water to the public, 

Amendmmt 
of Act ~ of 
1947. 
Statement by 
bribe !river 
not to IUbject 
him to pro-
secution. 
3. In the Prevention of Corruption Act, ]947,-
(a) in section ~, for sub-section (2), the followiqg sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) Any public servant who commits cr iminal mIscon-
duct in the discharge of his duty shall be punishable with 5 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one 
year but which may extend to seven years and shall also be 
liable to fine: 
Provided that the court may, for any special reasons re-
corded i)l writing, refrain from imposing a sentence of impri- 10 
sonment or impose a sentence of imprisonment of less than 
one year. 
(2A) Where a sentence of fine is imposed under sub-sec-
tion (2). the court, in fixing the amount of fine, shall take iuto 
consideration the amount or value of the property which the 15 
accused person has obtained by committing the offence of 
criminal misconduct or where the conviction is based on the 
presumption under sub-section (3), the pecuniary resources .or 
property referred to in that sub-section for which the accused 
person is unable to account satisfactorily."; 20 
(b) after section 7. the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
,"8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any' law for 
the time being in force, a statement made by a person in any 
proceeding !l!gainst a public servant for an offence under sec- 25 
tion 161 or section 165 of the Indian Penal Code or under 4S of 1860. 
sub-section (2) of section 5 of this Act, that he offered or 
agreed to offer any gratification (other than legal !'emunera-
tion) or any valuable thing to the public servant, shall not 
subject such person to a prosecution under section 165A of 30 
the said Code.". 
Ameudment . 4. In the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, in section 8, after 
tC:~~f I, sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
19,2. 
"(JA) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality 
of the provisions contained in sub-section (3), the provisions of 35 
Section 350 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall, so far S of 1898 
as may be, apply to the proceedings before a Special Judge, 
and for the purposes of the said 'provisions a Special Judge 
shall be deemed to be .a maiistrate." 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Experience gained from the efforts made by Government to deal 
with the evil of corruption in the public services has revealed the 
need for some amendments in the Criminal Law. It is necessary to 
bring within the scope of the anti-corruption law the employees of 
statutory trading corporations and Government companies, and also 
to ensure that adequate punishment is a\Wlrded in cases of proved 
corruption and that the prosecution of such cases is not unneces-
sarily delayed. The present Bill is designed to achieve these objects. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 29th November, 1957. 

Notes on. elauses 
Clause 2.-Tbe scope and variety of Government's activities are 
rapidly expanding and a great deal of public money and pubUc 
property is now managed by statutory authorities and Government 
undertakings. Measures to prevent and combat corruption are no 
less necessary in this field than in the case of activities conducted 
directly through Government channels. The extension of the 
definition of upublic servant", as proposed in this clause, will bring 
the employees of such bodies under the. purview of the Indian Penal 
Code and the Prevention of Corruption Act. 
Clause 3(a).-Experience has shown that there is a tendency 
among the courts to deal too leniently with public servants convicted 
under the Prevention of Corruption Act. Even where imprisonment 
is awarded, the period is frequently too small to have adequate 
punitive or deterrent effect and the amounts of fine imposed are 
frequently grossly incommensurate with the corrupt gains. Sub-
clause (a) of clause 3 will result in ensuring that adeqUtBte punish-
ment is awarded in cases of proved corruption. 
Clause J (b) .-Since the introduction of section 165A of the Indian 
Penal Code, persons offering illegal gratification to public servants 
have become more 'reluctant to come forward to give evidence. This 
is because on his own admission in court such a person becomes 
liable for prosecution under that section. This clause will afford 
the necessary protection to the persons whose evidence has been 
utilised in court for the prosecution of corrupt public servants. 
Clause 'I.-Section 350 of the Code of Criminal Procedure permits 
a magistrate who has to deal with a case which bes already been 
partly heard by another magistrate to act on the evidence recorded 
by his predecessor. Under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, 
offences relating to corruption have to be tried by Special Judges 
who follow the procedure applicable to warrant cases. Conflicting 
views have been expressed by different High Courts on the question 
whether a Special Judge dealing with a case partly heard by another 
Special Judge can act on the evidence recorded by his predecessor. 
This clause is intended to place the matter beyond doubt. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THI: INDIAN PENAL CODE, l8ftO 
(AcT No. 45 OF 1860) 
* * .. * .. 
21. The . words "public servant" denote a person falling under"PubUc au-
'fIIIt.o' 
any of the descriptions hereinafter followin&, D8Dlely:-
* * .. .. .. 
Second.-Every Commissioned Officer in the Military, Naval or 
Air Forces of India; 
Third.-Every Judge; 
Fourth.-Every officer <)f a Court of JlLc;tice whose duty it is. as 
such officer, to investigate or report on any matter of law or fact, or 
to make, authenticate, or keep any document, or to take charge or dis-
pose of any property, or to execute any judiciel process, or to admi-
nister any oath, or to interpret, or to preserve order in the Court, and 
every person specially authorized by a Court of Justice to perform 
any of such duties; 
Fifth.-Every juryman, assessor, or member of a panchayat assist-
ing Ii Court of ,Justice or public servant; 
Si.xth.-Every arbitrator or other person to whom any caU8e or 
matter has been referred for decision or report by any Court of Ju. 
tice, or by any other comPetent public authority; 
Seventh.-Every person who holds any office by virtue of which 
he is empo~ered to place or keep any person in confinement; 
Eighth.-Every officer of the Government whose duty it is. as such 
officer, to prevent offences, to give information of offences, to bring 
offenders to justice, or to protect the public health, safety or con-
venience; 
Ninth.-Every Officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to tak'e, 
receive, keep or expend any property on behalf of the Government, 
or to make any survey, assessment or contract on behalf.of the Gov-
ernment, or to execute any revenue-process, or to investigate, or to 
report, on any matter affecting the pecuniary interests of the Gov-
ernment, or to make, authenticate or keep any document relating to 

8 
the pecuniary interests of the Government, or to prevent the in-
fraction of any law for the protection of the pecuniary interests of 
the Government and every officer in the service or pay of the Gov-
ernment or remunerated by feeS or commission for the performance 
of any public duty; 
Tenth.-Every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, 
receive, keep or expend any property, to make any surveyor assess-
ment or to levy any rate or tax for any secular common purpose 
of any village, town or district, or to make, authenticate or keep any 
document for the ascertaining of the rights of the people of any 
village, town or district; 
Eleventh.-Every person who holds any office in virtue of which 
he is empowered to prepare, publish, maintain or revise an electoral 
roll or to conduct an election or part of an election. 
llhutration 
A Municipal Commissioner is a public servant. 
Ezplanation I.-Persons falling under any of the above descriptions 
are public servants, whether appointed by the Government or not. 
Ezplanation 2.-Wherever the words "public servant" occur, they 
shall be understood of every person who is in actual possession of 
the situation of a public servant, whatever legal defect there may 
be in his right to hold that situation. 
Explanation 3.-The word "election" denotes an election for the 
purpose of selec~g members of any legislative, municipal or other 
public authority, of whatever character, the method of selection to 
which is by, or under, any law prescribed as by election . 
• • • • • 

EXTRACTS FROM THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT, 1947 (2 OF 1947) 
• • • • 
Cnminal 5. (1) A public servant is said to commit the offence of criminal 
~~:'~c misconduct in the discharge of his duty-
~~t)'~aJ (a) if he habitually accepts or obtains or agrees to accept 
5 of 18911. 
or attempts to obtain from any person for himself or for any 
other person, any gratification (other than legal remuneration) as 
a motive or reward such as is mentioned in section 161 of the 
Indian Penal Code, or 4S of J86o. 
(b) if he habitually accepts or obtains or agrees to accept 
or attempts to obtain for himself or for any other person, any 
valuable thing without consideration or for a consideration 
which he knows to be inadequate, from any person whom he 
knows to have been, or to be, or to be likely to be concerned 
in any proceeding or business transacted· or about to be trans-
~cted by him, or having any connection with the official func-
tions of himself or of. any public servant to whom he is 
subordinate, or from any person 'whom he knows to be interested 
in or related to the person so concerned, or 
(c) if he dishonestly or fraudulently misappropriates or 
otherwise converts for his own use any property entrusted to 
him or under his control as a public servant or allows any other 
person so to do, or 
(d) if he, by corrupt or illegal means or by otherwise abus-
ing his position as a public servant, obtains for himself or for 
any other person any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage. 
(2) Any public servant who cOnlmits criminal misconduct in the 
discharge of his duty shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both . 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT ACT, 1952 (46 OF 1952) 
• • • • 
8. (1) A Special Judge may take cognizance of offences without Procedure 
the accused being committed to him for trial, and in trying the ~?d ~ 
accused persons, shall follow the procedure prescribed by the Code Juciga. 
of. Criminal Procedure, 1898, for the trial: of warrant cases by 
magistrates. 
7 

8 
(2) A Special Judge may, with a view to obtaining the evidence 
of any person supposed to have been directly or indirectly ~on­
cerned in, or privy to, an offence, tender a pardon to such person 
on condition of his making a full and true disclosure of the whole 
circumstances within his knowledge relating to the offence and to 
every other person concerned, whether as principal or abettor, in 
the commission thereof: and any pardon so tendered shall, for the 
purposes of sections 339 and 339A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898, be deemed to have been tendered under section 338 of that 
Code. 
(3) Save as provided in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 shall, so far as 
they are not inconsistent with this Act, apply to the proceedings 
before a Special Judge; and for the purpoaes of the said provisions, 
the Court of the Special Judge shall be deemed to be a Court of 
Session trying cases without a jury or without the aid of assessors 
and the person conducting a prosecution before a Special Judge shall 
be deemed to be a public prosecutor. 
(4) A Special Judge may pass upon any person convicted by him 
any sentence authorised by law for the punishment of the offence 
of which such person is convicted . 
• • • • 
GIPRD-LS 1-1618 L8-3-I2-57-I60o. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1947, and the Criminal Law Amendment 
Act, 1952. 
(Shri GOfJind Ballabh Pant, 
,Minister of Home AjJairs) 