Bill No. 94 of  2023
THE HINDU SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023 
By
Dඋ. Gൺඎඍඁൺආ  Sං඀ൺආൺඇං Pඈඇ , M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
 Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date  as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), after clause ( c), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(cd) to the Members of any Scheduled Tribe within the meaning of 
clause (25) of article 366 of the Constitution"; and
(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
Short title and 
commencement.
AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Amendment of 
section 2.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 As per section 2(2) of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, the provisions of this 
Act do not apply to the Members of any Scheduled Tribe within the meaning of 
clause 25 of article 366 of the Constitution. This creates unjust situation wherein 
the members of the Scheduled Tribes, irrespective of gender, are not legally entitled 
to an equal share in their father’s/Hindu Undivided Family properties. Such 
discrimination is antithetical to article 14 of the Constitution which time and again 
have been clarified by the Hon’ble Supreme Court at the Madras High Court.
 The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 with a 
view to provide equal rights to members of Schedule Tribes irrespective of gender 
difference on the property of their father's/Hindu Undivided Family properties.
   Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං; GAUTHAM SIGAMANI PON 
July 04, 2023.   
2

3
ANNEXURE
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Hංඇൽඎ Sඎർർൾඌඌංඈඇ Aർඍ, 1956
[Act No. 30 of 1956]
 *                 *                *                *              *  
2. (1) This Act, applies―
  *                 *                *                *              *  
(a) to any person, who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or 
developments, including a Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the Brahmo, 
Prarthana or Arya Samaj,
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion, and
(c) to any other person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by 
religion, unless it is proved that any such person would not have been governed 
by the Hindu law or by any custom or usage as part of that law in respect of any 
of the matters dealt with herein if this Act had not been passed.
Explanation.―The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by 
religion, as the case may be:―
(a) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents are Hindus, 
Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by religion;
(b) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a Hindu, 
Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion and who is brought up as a member of the 
tribe, community, group or family to which such parent belongs or belonged;
(c) any person who is a convert or reconvert to the Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or 
Sikh religion.
 ( 2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), nothing contained 
in this Act shall apply to the members of any Scheduled Tribe within the meaning 
of clause (25) of article 366 of the Constitution unless the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, otherwise directs.
 ( 3) The expression “Hindu” in any portion of this Act shall be construed as if 
it included a person who, though not a Hindu by religion, is, nevertheless, a person 
to whom this Act applies by virtue of the provisions contained in this section.
  *                 *                *                *              *   
Application of 
Act.

LOK  SABHA
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
(Dr. Gautham Sigamani Pon, M.P .)