Short title and 
commencement. 
5
  As Introduced in Lok Sabha
 
Bill No. 94 of 2025
THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT   
BILL, 2025
By
Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary, M.P.
a
BILL
further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Environment (Protection) Amendment Act, 
2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act), for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely,–
“(a) “environment” includes the natural heritage including water, air, land, 
vegetation, bio-diversity and the inter-relationship which exists between the 
Amendment of 
section 2.
10
29 of 1986

5
10
15
20
25
2
Insertion of 
new section 
3A.
30
Declaration 
of National 
Carbon 
Budget.
State 
Government 
to submit State 
Environment 
Risk 
Assessment 
Report to 
the Central 
Government. 
35
40
water, air and land vegetation and humans, other living creatures, plants and 
micro-organisms and the natural heritage and property;”.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (xiii), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely,–
“(xiiia) compulsory installation  of real time emission monitoring system by 
all the “red” and “orange” category industries;
(xiiib) making data of real time emission by the industries under  
clause (xiiia) accessible to the general public or Environment Information 
System (ENVIS); and
(xiiic) recognition of drones, Artificial Intelligence (AI), Geographic 
Information System (GIS), Internet of Things (IoTs) based technologies as 
legal evidence in reporting of cause related to environmental pollution.”.
4. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely,–
“3A. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare its National Carbon Budget indicating the net amount of carbon 
dioxide (CO2) emitted by human activities per annum.”.
5. After Chapter II of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections 
thereunder shall be inserted, namely,–
“CHAPTER IIA
General Power of the State Government
6A. Every State Government shall submit State Environment Risk Assessment 
Report to the Central Government at the interval of every two years in such manner 
as may be prescribed.
6B. (1) The State Government shall establish Local Environment Monitoring 
Committee (LEMC) at every Gram Panchayat and Municipal Corporation under its 
jurisdiction.
(2) Every LEMC established under sub-section (1) shall monitor pollution, 
redress public grievance and conduct awareness programmes on risk of pollution in 
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Every LEMC established under sub-section ( 1) shall recommend the 
actions to be taken by the State Pollution Control Board established under the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 or the Air (Prevention and Control 
of Pollution) Act, 1981.”.
6. In section 15 of the principal Act,– 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words, “or with fine which may extend to one 
lakh rupees, or with both, and in case of the failure or contravention continues, with 
additional fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day”, the words, 
“or with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees, or with both and if failure or 
contravention continues, for a further fine which may extend to one lakh rupees for 
every day”, shall be substituted; and
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words, “shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to seven years”, the words, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or with fine which may 
extend upto rupees two crores or with both”, shall be substituted.
Establishment 
of Local 
Environment 
Monetary 
Committee 
(LEMC).
Amendment of 
section 3.
Amendment of 
section 15.
45
Insertion of 
new Chapter 
IIA.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 was enacted to provide for the 
protection and improvement of the environment. However, the said Act has not been 
able to achieve its goal due to the inadequate penal provisions prescribed under it. 
Currently, challenges such as increasing industrial pollution, climate change, and 
bio-diversity loss raise questions about the effectiveness of this Act.
 This Act has not been relatively successful in protecting the environment and 
preventing pollution for many decades. The penal provisions under this Act have 
not been amended since its enactment and at present the environment is not being 
protected.
 The major issues faced today are:–
(i) Outdated standards and regulations: Most environmental regulations are 
no longer relevant.
(ii) Weak system of implementation: The control boards of the States are 
suffering from lack of resources.
(iii) Lack of public participation: Participation of local communities is only 
formal.
(iv) Lack of strict punishment for polluters: Corporates or industries do not get 
serious punishment.
(v) Lack of new technology: Lack of tools like AI, GIS, IoT.
 Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 defines environment by referring only 
to water, air and land, whereas it is very important to include water, air, land, 
vegetation, biological diversity and natural heritage under the term ‘environment’ 
because environment has been defined by including water, air, land, vegetation, 
humans, other living creatures, plants and micro-organisms and natural heritage;
 The provision of a five year imprisonment for violation of the Act is fine but it 
has not been very successful due to the imposition of a fine of up to one lakh rupees. 
Anyone can continue violating the rules by paying the fine. Therefore, a fine of at 
least fifty lakh rupees is absolutely necessary.
 Hence this Bill.
   New  Delhi;                                                  DARSHAN SINGH CHOUDHARY 
July 08, 2025.
3

ANNEXURE
[The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986] 
(Act No. 29 of 1986)
*    *    *                *   *  * 
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,– 
 ( a) “environment” includes water, air and land and the inter- relationship which 
exists among and between water, air and land, and human beings, other living 
creatures, plants, micro-organism and property.
*    *    *                *   *  * 
 15. (1) Whoever fails to comply with or contravenes any of the provisions of 
this Act, or the rules made or orders or directions issued thereunder, shall, in respect 
of each such failure or contravention, be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, 
or with both, and in case the failure or contravention continues, with additional 
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such 
failure or contravention continues after the conviction for the first such failure or 
contravention.
 ( 2) If the failure or contravention referred to in sub-section (1) continues beyond 
a period of one year after the date of conviction, the offender shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years.
*    *    *                *   *  * 
*    *    *                *   *  * 
Definitions.
Penalty for 
Contravention 
of the 
Provisions of 
and the Act 
and the Rules, 
Orders and 
Directions.
4

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
(Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary, M.P.) 