THE EDUCATION BANK OF INDIA BILL,  2012
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of a Bank for the purpose of advancing loans to the
students for pursuing higher studies.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Education Bank of India Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘Bank’ means the Education Bank of India established under section 3;
(b) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) ‘student’ means a person who is pursuing any course of study,
including any professional, vocational or research study, in any college or
institution or University.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 94  of  2012
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
Setting up of
Education Bank
of India.
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Bank to be known as the
“Education Bank of India” with its headquarter at New Delhi and regional offices in
every State and Union territory.
(2) The Central Government shall set up a branch of the Bank in every district
of the country.
4. (1) The Bank shall be managed by a Board of Directors consisting of—
(a) Union Minister of Human Resource — Chair man;
Development
(b) Union Minister of Finance — Member;
(c) Education Minister of each State — Member;
(d) three eminent educationists to be nominated — Members;
by the Central Government
(e) Chairman-cum-Managing Director of a — Member; and
nationalized Bank to be nominated by
the Central Government
(f ) Secretary, Union Ministry of Human Resource — Member-
Development Secretary.
(2) The term of office of the members of the Board of Directors appointed under
clauses (d) and (e) of sub-section (1) shall be one year.
5. (1) The Board of Directors of the Bank shall meet at such place and at such
time as may be determined by the Chairman to frame out policies of the Bank.
(2) The Board of Directors shall meet at least once in a calendar year.
6. The Bank shall advance loans to the students to meet the cost of their
education.
7. (1) An application for grant of loan shall be made to the concerned branch of
the Bank by the student.
(2) An application made under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of within one
month from the date of its receipt.
8. (1) The loan shall be payable to every eligible student till he completes the
course for which the loan was applied for.
(2) The amount of loan shall be equal to the total cost of education which shall
include course fees, study materials, hostel fees, if any, and any other related expenditure
in connection with the education of the student.
(3) The Bank shall make the payment direct to the college or institution where
the student, whose loans has been sanctioned, is pursuing his studies.
9. (1) The following shall be eligible for seeking full amount of loan from the
Bank:—
(a) students, whose parents cannot afford the cost of higher education
and whose annual income from all sources is less than five lakh rupees; and
(b) meritorious students.
(
2)  A  student, whose parents cannot afford the full cost of his higher education,
shall also be eligible to secure a loan from the Bank to the extent of the amount he
falls short of.
Board of
Directors.
Meetings of
Board of
Directors.
Functions of the
Bank.
Application for
loan.
Loans to be paid
to colleges and
institutions
directly by the
Bank.
Eligibility for
loan.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
10. (1) The loan shall be given to every eligible student without any security  or
guarantee:
Provided that the Bank may demand from the student such details and such
documents before sanctioning the loan as may be deemed fit.
(2) The loan shall be recovered with simple interest at the rate of four per cent.
per annum.
(3) The terms and conditions of repayment of the loan shall be such as may be
prescribed:
Provided that a student shall start repaying the loan one year after he has
secured a job in such instalments as may be prescribed.
11. (1) Any student who wishes to take loan from the Bank for research purposes
shall apply to the Regional Office of the Bank concerned.
(2) The Regional Office of the Bank may, after necessary enquiry, sanction the
loan.
(3) The terms and conditions of sanction and repayment of such loan shall be
such as may be prescribed.
12. The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as
may be required for the efficient functioning of the bank.
13. All the branches of the bank shall be under the control and supervision of
the Regional Office concerned.
14. Any aggrieved student may represent to a Regional Office who shall, after
considering all aspects of the case, forward their recommendations to the headquarter
of the Bank and the decision of the headquarter shall be final.
15. Nothing in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, shall apply to the Bank
established under this Act.
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Loan for
research
purposes.
Officers and
staff.
Branches to
function under
the control of
Regional Office.
Representation
to Regional
Office by
aggrieved
students.
Saving.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Terms and
conditions of
sanction and
repayment of
loan.
35
10 of 1949.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Majority of the students in our country are not able to pursue higher education
due to poor financial condition of their parents. Although, students are brilliant in their
studies and want to pursue higher education, poverty comes in the way of their
pursuit.
Professional and technical colleges charge exorbitant fees for admission which
the students cannot afford.
With a view to encouraging poor students to continue their education, it is
proposed to provide loans on easy terms to them which can be repaid after they secure
jobs.
Although several banks offer loans for continuing education, such schemes are
not attractive and beyond the means of majority of the parents. Therefore, it is proposed
to set up a Bank exclusively for the purpose of assisting the students by providing
them loans for continuing higher education.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
July 30, 2012.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of Education Bank of India. Clause 4
provides for nomination of three prominent educationists to the Board of Directors of
the Bank by the Central Government. Clause 12 provides for appointment of necessary
number of officers and staff for the Bank.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five
hundred crore from Consolidated Fund of India will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of about one hundred crore is also likely
to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislation power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of a Bank for the purpose of advancing loans to the
students for pursuing higher studies.
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2528LS—29.08.2012.