1
THE PRE-EXAMINATION COACHING CENTRES REGULATORY
AUTHORITY  BILL, 2019
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Regulatory Authority for regulation of
Pre-Examination Coaching Centres and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Pre-Examination Coaching Centres Regulatory
Authority Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'Authority' means Pre-Examination Coaching Centres Regulatory Authority
constituted under section 3;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 94 of  2019
Definitions.
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) 'pre-examination coaching centre' means and includes any institute or
establishment where any coaching is imparted for admission into any professional
course including medical or engineering education or for appearing in any examination
conducted by any Government or private establishment for the purpose of securing
employment; and
(c) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government  shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Pre-Examination Coaching Centres Regulatory Authority for the purpose of regulating
and controlling pre-examination coaching centres, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority.
(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be situated at New Delhi.
(4) The Authority shall have its offices in every State/Union territory.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of services
of Officers and Staff of the Authority shall be such as may be precribed.
4. The Authority shall perform the following functions,—
(i) conferring recognition to  pre-examination coaching centres imparting coaching
for various competitive examinations;
(ii) prescribing fees to be charged from students for pre-examination coaching
being imparted at the coaching centres;
(iii) fixing minimum number of classroom lectures for various courses being
offered at the coaching centres;
(iv) laying down minimum qualifications for the teachers to be employed in the
coaching centres;
(v) prescribing penalties against such coaching centres which are not following
the provisions of this Act; and
(vi) any other work relating to regulation of coaching centres as may be assigned
to it by the Central Government from time to time.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Pre-
Examination
Coaching
Centres
Regulatory
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The number of private institutions conducting pre-examination coaching is increasing
at an alarming rate throughout the country. These coaching centres claim to be shaping the
future of the youth of this country. Some of these coaching centres make false claims in order
to attract maximum number of students and get huge amount from them as fees without
providing proper coaching to them, thereby endangering their future. Therefore, there is an
urgent need for legislation to regulate the functioning of such coaching centres in the
country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA PAL
June 6, 2019.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Pre-examination Coaching Centres
Regulatory Authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred
crore is likely to be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

MGIPMRND—451LS(S3)—20-06-2019.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Regulatory Authority for regulation of Pre-Examination
Coaching Centres and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P.)