THE FISHERMEN (WELFARE) BILL, 2011
By
SHRI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures for fishermen and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Fishermen (Welfare) Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) 'fishermen' means and includes  persons who are engaged in fishing and
fishing related works such as repairing, maintaining and manning boats, nets and other
equipments used in fishing and peeling, drying and selling of fish;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definition.
Bill No. 94 of  2011
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Constitution of
Fishermen
Welfare Fund.
Utilisation of
the Fund.
Power to make
rules.
 (ii) 'Fund' means the Fishermen Welfare Fund constituted under section 3 of
this Act; and
 (iii) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules framed under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as Fishermen
Welfare Fund for the welfare of fishermen in the country.
 (2) The Central Government and every littoral State Government/Union territory
administration shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Committee consisting of:—
 (i) a Chairman who shall be appointed by the Central Government;
 (ii) not more than one representative each from the littoral States/Union
territories to be nominated by the respective State Government/Union territory
Administration;
 ( iii) not more than one representative from the littoral States/Union
territories representing the fishermen who shall be nominated in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(4) The terms and conditions of the appointment of Chairman and other members
of the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
4. The Fund shall be used for the following purposes:—
(i) payment of unemployment/subsistence allowance to fishermen during off-
season period;
 (ii) providing free health facilities for the fishermen and their families;
 (iii) providing free educational facilities to the children of fishermen;
 (iv) payment of compensation to fishermen injured while fishing;
 (v) payment of compensation to families of fishermen dying in harness;
 (vi) payment of disability allowance to fishermen incapacitated due to accident
while fishing;
 (vii) payment of old age pension to fishermen who have attained the age of
sixty years; and
 (viii) payment of family pension to the next of kin including minor children of
the deceased fishermen.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Millions of men and women throughout the length and breadth of the coastal areas are
engaged in fishing and works related to it. Their living conditions are extremely poor, as
they have to depend on the nature to venture into the sea leading to a situation where there is
no work  during the greater part of the year. Due to their extreme poverty, their children are
not properly educated. No health care is available to them. By the time they reach the age  of
sixty they become physically unfit to work and are left on the mercy of others. Risk factor in
their profession is also very high. It is the responsibility of the Government to provide
minimum security and welfare for these people.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
November 8, 2011.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Fishermen Welfare Fund for the
benefit of fishermen. It further provides that the Central Government shall also contribute to
the Fund. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure  from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures for fishermen and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2434LS—21.11.2011.