 AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 94 of  2022
THE GOVERNMENT LEGISLA TIVE PROPOSALS AND SCHEMES
(IMPACT ANAL YSIS AND POST IMPLEMENTA TION
ASSESSMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI SRINIVAS KESINENI, M.P.
A
BILL
to bring about accountability and Parliamentary oversight to the legislative
and policy-making process in the country and to improve the quality of
expenditure made by the Union Government.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Government Legislative Proposals and
Schemes (Impact Analysis and Post Implementation Assessment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Bill’’ means a Government Bill but does not include Finance Bill,
Appropriation Bill and Bills of trivial or technical nature;
(b) “Government’’ means the Central Government;
(c) “major Scheme” means a Scheme that is likely to result in a recurring
expenditure of rupees one thousand crores or above from the Consolidated Fund of
India or a cumulative expenditure of rupees one thousand crores or above within
three years from the day of its  implementation;
(d) “major Bill” means a Bill which on enactment will—
(i) involve an expenditure of rupees one thousand crores or above from
the Consolidated Fund of India; or
(ii) result in major increase in costs for consumers, individual industries,
Union, State or local government, or geographic regions; or
(iii) have significant adverse effects on competition, employment,
investment, productivity, innovation or on the ability of India-based enterprises
to compete with foreign-based enterprises in domestic or export markets; or
(iv) regulate any item either under the Union or the Concurrent List of the
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution or any item in the State List that the
Union Government seeks to regulate,
and the expression “major Act’’ shall be construed accordingly;
(e) “market failure” means the following situations which result in markets not
allocating resources efficiently:–
(i) market power where one party in the negotiation or a contract has little
power and experiences a loss of choice including monopolies and oligopolies;
(ii) asymmetric information where the process of negotiation works
poorly as one party involved lacks information relative to the other;
(iii) externalities where the consequences of the action of two negotiating
parties are not negotiated which may lead to an effect on a third party;
 (iv) provision of public goods where goods that are being provided are
non-rivalrous in that consumption of that good or service by one person
doesn’t lead to lesser availability for another; and non-excludable in that
consumption of a good or service by one person doesn’t exclude another
person from consuming that good or service;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) “Scheme” means a Government or Government sponsored Scheme.
CHAPTER II
PRE-LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENTS
3.For every Bill proposed to be introduced in either House  of Parliament and
Scheme, that is to be implemented either by Central Government or by a
State Government or jointly, the Ministry of the Government responsible for initiating
the Bill or formulating the Scheme shall comply with the following conditions:
(a) the Bill or the Scheme shall disclose the need for and consequences of
the proposed Government action;
(b) the Bill or the scheme shall not be undertaken unless its potential
benefits outweigh its potential costs to the society;
2
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
Definitions.
Conditions to be
fulfilled for Bills
and Schemes. 40
45

3
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
(c) objectives of the Bill or the scheme shall be clearly delineated and
chosen so as to maximize the net benefits to society;
(d) among alternative approaches to any objective being sought by the Bill
or the scheme, the alternative involving the least net cost to society shall be
chosen; and
(e) Ministry responsible shall set regulatory priorities with the aim of
maximizing the aggregate net benefits to society, taking into account the condition
of the particular industries affected by regulations, the condition of the national
economy and other regulatory actions contemplated for the future.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the Ministry of the Government, responsible for
initiating a Bill or formulating or implementing a  major scheme, to prepare and
publish a document to be called the Legislation Impact Analysis or Scheme Impact
Analysis.
(2) Every Legislation Impact Analysis or Scheme Impact Analysis shall contain
the following information—
(a) the objectives and goals of the Bill or major Scheme to be achieved along
with clear measurable or quantifiable outcomes that may be monitored:
Provided that the  requirement to list  out clear  measurable or  quantifiable
outcomes that may be monitored shall be applicable only to major  Bills or to
such Bills only for which it is possible to list out clear measurable or quantifiable
outcomes;
(b) the potential market failure(s) to be addressed by the Bill or the scheme;
(c) studies that have examined the efficacy of the intervention of the Bill or
the scheme to be undertaken, including international experiences in the
implementation of a similar intervention;
(d) a description of the potential benefits of the Bill or the scheme, including
any beneficial effects that may not be quantified in  monetary terms,  and the
identification of those likely to receive the benefits;
(e) a description of the  potential costs of the  Bill or the scheme, including
any  adverse  effects  that cannot be  quantified in  monetary  terms,  and the
identification of those likely to bear the costs;
(f) a  comprehensive  analysis  of  all  the  stakeholders who are likely to be
affected by the proposed intervention;
(g) a   determination  of  the  potential  net  benefits of  the Bill or  the  scheme
including an evaluation of effects that may not be quantified in  monetary terms;
(h) a description of alternative  approaches that may  substantially achieve the
objectives and  goals as laid  down in clause (a)  at lower cost, together  with  an
analysis of potential benefit and costs and a brief explanation, wherever required,
of the legal reasons why such alternatives, if proposed, may not be adopted.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, within sixty days from the date of
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a National
Consultative Committee.
(2) The National Consultative Committee shall consist of—
(a) the Union Minister of Finance who shall be the Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) three members from the House of the People, to be nominated by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha—members ex-officio;
Impact analysis
of the proposed
Bill or scheme.
40
45
Constitution
of National
Consultative
Committee.

4
(c) two members from the Council of the State, to be nominated by the
Chairman, Rajya Sabha—members ex-officio;
(d) six experts, two from the field of economics, two from the field of law,
one from the field of public policy and one from the field of statistics, being an
expert in survey design,  to be nominated by the Government in such manner,
as may be prescribed—members; and
(e) the Chief Economic Adviser to the Government and one Officer from
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation not below the rank of
Joint Secretary to the Government or equivalent—ex-officio members.
(3)  The term of the National Consultative Committee shall be three years.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
services of members nominated under clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall be such, as
may be prescribed.
6. The National Consultative Committee shall–
(a) specify the procedure and methodology, especially drawing upon
international practices and emerging studies in the field of Cost-Benefit Analysis,
which may serve as a guide for the preparation of the Legislation Impact Analysis or
the Scheme Impact Analysis;
(b) within eight months of the commencement of this Act, in consultation with
experts, both national and international, publish a document, detailing the procedure
and methodology to serve as a guide in preparation of the Legislation Impact Analysis
or the Scheme Impact Analysis;
(c) develop the methodology, procedure and guidelines for Post-
Implementation Assessment Report referred to in section 11 and release a document
detailing the same within two years of the commencement of this Act;
(d) from time-to-time, publish relevant documents and research papers in
collaboration with higher educational institutions, highlighting the advances in the
field which may serve as a guide to the ministries;
(e) provide consultation to the ministry concerned for preparation of the
Legislation Impact Analysis or the Scheme Impact Analysis or Post-Implementation
Assessment Report, as the case may be; and
(f) review such Legislation Impact Analysis or the Scheme Impact Analysis or
the Post-Implementation Assessment Report, as it deems fit, and recommend
appropriate changes that may need to be brought about.
7.(1) The National Consultative Committee shall meet at least thrice in a year at
such time and place and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the
transaction of its business, as may be prescribed.
(2) The National Consultative Committee may invite such other experts as it
may consider appropriate for the discharge of its functions.
8. (1) The Legislation Impact Analysis shall be laid before both the Houses of
Parliament on the day the related Bill is proposed for introduction in the Parliament
and shall be examined by the concerned Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee to recommend such changes to the Legislation Impact Analysis, as it
deems appropriate.
(2) The Scheme Impact Analysis shall be laid before both Houses of the Parliament
in a session immediately following the date of release of the Scheme document.
9. (1) Every Bill and scheme shall provide for a sunset provision  declaring that
the Act or the scheme shall cease to be operative after completion of the period
specified in that sunset provision.
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
Functions of
the National
Consultative
Committee.
Meetings of
the National
Consultative
Committee.
Laying of the
legislation
Impact Analysis
and the Scheme
Impact Analysis.
Sunsetting
provision for
legislations
and schemes.
45

(2) where the period specified in sunset provision is more than twenty years  in
case of an Act, and ten years in case of a scheme, the Bill or scheme shall provide for
an explanation for exceeding the aforesaid time period:
Provided that if any Bill or scheme is to be exempted from the sunset clause,
the President shall after examining the explanation to that effect by the Government,
recommend the introduction of the Bill or implementation of the scheme without
sunset clause.
CHAPTER III
REVIEW COMMITTEE
10. (1) The Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Review Committee for every Ministry for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
   (2) The Review Committee shall consist of :—
(a) the Minister responsible for the legislation or scheme, Chairperson
ex-officio;
(b) the Secretary of the Ministry responsible for the legislation or
scheme, member ex-officio;
(c) a representative from the Union Finance Ministry not below the
rank of Joint Secretary, member ex-officio;
(d) a representative from the Home Ministry not below the rank of Joint
Secretary member ex-officio;
(e) the Chief Economic Advisor to the Government, member ex-officio;
and
(f) two legal experts, two environmentalists or sustainability experts,
two economists or statisticians or economy experts, two domain experts and
one member from the civil society, to be appointed by the Government in
such  manner as may be prescribed, members.
(3) The Review Committee may invite such other experts (including
international experts) as it may consider appropriate for the discharge of its functions.
(4) The members of the Review Committee, other than ex-officio members,
shall have a term of three years and be eligible for re-nomination only for two
consecutive terms.
CHAPTER IV
EX-POST REVIEW
11.  (1) The Review Committee shall undertake Post-Implementation Assessment
of every major Act and major scheme.
(2) The Post-Implementation Assessment shall be conducted every three
years after taking into consideration:—
(i) Legislation Impact Analysis and Scheme Impact Analysis;
(ii) Performance Measurement to assess the results against measurable
outcomes entailed in the Legislative Impact Analysis or Scheme Impact
Analysis;
(iii) Impact Assessment  Identify the ex-post impact of a major act or
scheme, including the social, economic, environmental, legal and
administrative impacts to evaluate the combined costs and benefits of a
major act or scheme including the whole range of social, economic,
environmental, legal and administrative considerations; and
10
15
20
5
25
30
35
40
5
Constitution
of Review
Committees.
Post
Implementation
Assessment.
45

(iv) Perception Surveys Involve stakeholder consultation of the
perceived impact, both benefits and costs, of the major acts and schemes
under review.
(3) The Review Committee shall complete the Post-Implementation Assessment
Report within one hundred and twenty days from the start of the review process.
(4) The Post-Implementation Assessment Report shall be laid before both the Houses
of the Parliament in a session immediately following the date of its completion.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
12. (1) For major schemes already in existence on the day this Act comes
into force: –
(a) the concerned ministry shall prepare a Scheme Impact Analysis within
eighteen months from the day this Act comes into force; and
(b) the  Review  Committee    shall  conduct  a   Post-Implementation
Assessment after a period of three years from the day this Act comes into
force.
13. (1) The Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2)   Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
10
15
20
5
25
6
Scheme Impact
Analysis and Post-
Implementation
Assessment of the
Major Schemes
already in
existence.
Power to make
rules.

7
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In a Presidential form of Government, the Legislature has ample freedom to
initiate a legislative proposal and the Executive has a very limited role in this
regard. Legislature therefore, in a Presidential System exercise a corresponding
amount of check on the Executive which delivers a large degree of stability to the
system. The Parliamentary form, on similar grounds, seeks more accountability from
the Executive which is an integral part of the Legislature. Laws are a primary means
by which the Executive runs about its agenda. However, many a time Bills are
passed without adequate deliberation in the Houses. The Bill, firstly, seeks to
devise a legislative check on the actions of the Government irrespective of whether
a party holds a majority.
Any expenditure incurred by the Government imposes a cost on the economy.
Also known as marginal cost of public funds, it is an opportunity cost that could
have been effectively utilized elsewhere by other agents in the economy. Empirical
estimates put this figure to be around 3, implying that for every rupee spent by the
Government, there is a cost of about three rupees to the economy. When multiplied
by the volume of government spending in the economy, the impact is gigantic.
Therefore, it is necessary to keep an accountability on such large expenditure – any
spending which is not meeting its stated objectives must be discontinued. The field
of cost-benefit analysis has been revolutionary in this regard. Such a system was
kept in place as early as the 1980s in the USA. Similarly, the OECD countries like
Australia have a robust mechanism in place to assess the impact of every legislation
once in place.
The pace of change in today’s world is blinding. This fast-moving world demands
an evolving and agile legislation landscape that caters to the everchanging needs of
our society and economy. The nation cannot have an overhang of outdated legislations
that do not improve governance outcomes, but instead contribute to increasing the
legal and social costs to society. In this context, we require our laws and schemes to
have expiry date (sunset clause). Such provision will ensure an opportunity re-make
laws and schemes that will help our nation stay up to date on evolving situations of
the world.
The present Bill, inter-alia, provides for—
(a) a pre-legislative mechanism to clearly set out objectives of the stated government
intervention, careful consideration of costs and benefits to the society from the proposed
legislation or scheme, all of which must be documented in an Impact Analysis report,
and the insertion of sunset clauses in every scheme and legislation;
(b) a post-implementation mechanism to check whether the government has met
its stated objectives and measurable targets, and the impact the intervention has had
on the society. Should the government fail to do so in the post-implementation
assessment, the act or scheme shall stand repealed or revoked, respectively;
(c) establishment of a National Consultative Committee which will guide the
government in the technical details pertaining to the studies to be conducted for every
legislation and scheme and the establishment of a Review Committee under every
ministry to carry out the post-implementation assessment of the legislation and scheme.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
    NEW DELHI;               SRINIV AS KESINENI
23 February , 2022

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Consultative
Committee to assist the Government in the pre-legislative process of any legislation
or scheme and in preparation of a guide for the Post-Implementation Assessment
Report. It also provides for appointment of experts to the Committee. Clause 10
provides for the constitution of a Review Committee under each ministry to
scrutinise the working of major legislations and schemes.  The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty-one crore per annum
would be involved from Consolidated Fund of India.
 A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two crore is likely to be involved.
8

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 13 empowers the Central Government to make rules
regarding the times and places of the meetings of the National Consultative Committee
and the procedure to be followed at such meetings under sub-section (1) of section 7
and the expenditure incurred on the meetings of the National Committee under
sub-section (3) of section 7.
The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the Central Government are
matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide
for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.
9

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to bring about accountability and Parliamentary oversight to the legislative and
policy-making process in the country and to improve the quality of
expenditure made by the Union Government.
————
(Shri Srinivas Kesineni, M.P.)