1
Bill No.  94 of  2018
Short title,
extent and
commencements.
THE  OCEAN THERMAL ENERGY CONVERSION  BI LL, 2018
By
DR. SHRIKANT E. SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of use of ocean thermal energy to reduce carbon emission,
protect environment and substitute traditional electricity generation methods of
fossil fuel burning and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Definitions.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "Authority" means the National Ocean Thermal Energy Authority of India
constituted under section 3;
(c) "Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion" or "OTEC" means a process used for
production of electricity by using the temperature difference between deep ocean
water and warm tropical surface water; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an Authority to be called the National Ocean Thermal Energy Authority
of India for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and the Authority may
establish offices at such other places in the country as it may deem necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an expert scientist having adequate knowledge
and professional experience in the field of OTEC technology;
(b) one Deputy Chairperson with such qualifications as may be prescribed;
(c) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be from the House of the
People and one from the Council of States to be nominated by the respective Presiding
Officers of the Houses concerned;
(d) five members to represent the Union Ministries of Environment, Forests and
Climate Change, Science and Technology, New and Renewable Energy, Planning and
Finance, respectively;
(e) four members to represent the non-Governmental Organisations working
for the protection of environment and promotion of ocean thermal energy in the
country; and
(f) four members to be nominated by the Governments of the States to be rotated
amongst the States in alphabetical order.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the Authority and the
procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority shall be such, as
may be prescribed.
(5) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such officers and members of staff and
with such terms and conditions of services as may be prescribed, from time to time.
4. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under the provisions
of this Act, the Authority shall perform and undertake such special steps in close co-ordination
with concerned Ministries, Departments and Public Sector Enterprises of the Central and
State Governments for rapid and accelerated promotion and development of ocean thermal
energy throughout the country as it may deem necessary and expedient to do so for the
promotion of ocean thermal energy conversion.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority
shall,—
(a) formulate ocean thermal energy conversion policy, its goals and execution
plan;
(b) develop indicative standards of ocean thermal energy conversion;
Establishment
of National
Ocean
Thermal
Energy
Authority of
India.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(c) support and encourage research and development through Government and
private sector participation involving all major Research laboratories;
(d) facilitate infrastructure development of ocean thermal energy conversion in
coastal areas;
(e) suggest educational and other policy initiatives for ocean thermal energy
conversion;
(f) facilitate quick technology transfer and adoption of ocean thermal energy
conversion; and
(g) such other steps as the appropriate Government may deem necessary.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall in consultation with the Authority make it compulsory
for every coastal city village including Government establishments to,—
(a) use the OTEC technology for electrification in all coastal buildings, homes
and villages;
(b) make it mandatory for electricity utilities to purchase electricity from
ocean thermal energy sources;
(c) reserve adequate resources for setting up of ocean thermal energy
conversion projects;
(d) take such other steps as the appropriate Government may deem necessary.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, as soon as may be, identify the exploitable
sources of ocean thermal energy in their respective territorial jurisdictions and send
project report thereon to the Authority which shall depute a team of experts to verify and
assess the possibility of exploiting ocean thermal energy sources.
(3) The Authority shall on the basis of the report submitted by the team of experts
work out the estimated expenditure on the project and recommend to the Central Government
regarding implementation of the projects.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, pay to the Authority in each financial year such sums as may be considered
necessary and adequate for the performance of the functions of the Authority under this
Act.
7. The Authority shall prepare once in every calendar year in such form and at such
time as may be prescribed an Annual Report giving a true and full account of its activities
during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the President of India who
shall cause the same to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made the expiry of the period of two years from
the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before both the Houses of Parliament.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament , while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
Miscellaneous
Provisions.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Annual
Report.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the
expiry of the sessions immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) is more than just a technology that produces
clean energy. With OTEC, the goal is to create a sustainable future using the world's most
abundant resource-our oceans.
Due to the unlimited availability of the ocean's thermal resource—the fuel that powers
OTEC—this technology is built to produce clean energy 24 hours a day, 7 days week. This
provides a great advantage over intermittent (albeit important) renewable technologies such
as solar and wind.
OTEC also can shrug off the storage problems that are often associated with clean
energy. Due to its ability to produce a range of secondary services, the surplus energy
generated by an OTEC plant can be diverted to power desalination plants (removing salt and
other minerals to produce drinking water). This flexibility ensures that OTEC produced
energy never goes to waste. Another major competitive benefit of OTEC is its range of
secondary services. Besides producing electricity and fresh drinking water, OTEC can support
agriculture and aquaculture industries, reducing local demand on water supplies. It can also
slash costs of air conditioning in tropical regions. By using the temperature differential
between warm ocean surface water and cold deep water as a renewable energy source, OTEC
can generate two humanity's most fundamental needs—clean drinking water and renewable
base load (24x7) energy. Each OTEC plant is capable of producing voluminous amounts of
drinkable water (a 10-MW OTEC plant can produce as much as 75 million litres of fresh
drinking water a day). Thus, the technology holds great potential for meeting global domestic
and agricultural freshwater demands both now and in the future. More than seventy per
cent. of the earth's surface is covered by water, and over eighty per cent. of the sun's energy
is stored within surface waters—the equivalent of 4,000 times the energy used in the world
per day. In just one 24-hours period, tropical ocean waters absorb solar radiation equal to the
energy produced by 250 billion of oil.
OTEC's ability to help reduce our dependence on fossil fuels—one of the largest
human-induce contributors to climate change—is enormous. Just one 10-MW OTEC plant
has been estimated to provide reliable clean energy for approximately 10,000 people and to
replace the burning of 50,000 barrels of oil and release of 80,000 tons of carbon dioxide (CO
2)
per year into the atmosphere. OTEC plants therefore may play a huge role in helping global
communities fight pollution-related climate change.
OTEC can also use deep water as a cooling agent for environmentally friendly air
conditioning, a system known as Seawater Air Conditioner (SWAC). To replace traditional
electric chillers and chemicals for cooling buildings, OTEC plants use cold water from deep
oceans and lakes. Their installation into airports, medical centers and holiday resorts can
reduce electricity usage by up to ninety per cent. compared to conventional systems, offering
enormous reductions in carbon emissions.
OTEC's unique symbiosis between clean baseload renewable energy and potable
water production is a natural fit. The combination addresses existing global factors that
could precipitate a humanitarian crisis: the growing global need for potable water, the lack of
available freshwater sources, the increased concentration of populations in coastal regions,
and rising energy prices. Keeping all the benefits in view, China has recently installed world's
largest floating OTEC plant. Many countries are already in ways to install OTEC plants. In
India's perspective, there is tremendous scope for the energy from the ocean as India has a
long coastline of about 7500 kilometer and about 1200 islands in Bay of Bengal and Arabian
Sea including Andaman and Nicobar Islands and the Lakshadweep Islands.
5

6
The Bill, therefore, seeks to constitute a National Ocean Thermal Energy Commission
for the rapid and accelerated promotion and development of Ocean Thermal Energy in the
country.
Hence this Bill
N
EW DELHI; SHRIKANT E. SHINDE
February  15,  2018.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Ocean Thermal
Authority of India. Clause 5 makes it compulsory for every Central Government establishment
to take measures for using ocean thermal energy by carrying out appropriate changes.
Clause 6 of the Bill makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide necessary
funds for the purpose of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted and brought into operation
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees  one hundred crore may be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one thousand crore may also involve
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of use of ocean thermal energy to reduce carbon emission,
protect environment and substitute traditional electricity generation methods of
fossil fuel burning and for matter connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Shrikant E. Shinde, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4277LS(S3)—16-03-2018.