13 of 19i5. 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
\ . 
Bill No. 85 of 1980 
THE HINDUSTAN TRACTORS LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) AMENDMENT BILL, 1980 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Hindustan Tractors Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1978. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republl~ 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Hindustan Tractors Limited (Acquisi- Short 
tion and . Tl'ansfer of. Undertakings) Amendment Act, 1980. title. 
Z. In section 5 of the Hindustan Tractors Limited (Acquisition and 
5 Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1978 (hereinafter referred to a. tae prin-
cipal Act), in sub-section (2), in clause (b), the following shall be, and 
shall be deemed always to have been, inserted at the end, namely:-
.. , but excluding loans advanced, on or after such date, by a bank 
10 to the Company to the extent such loans have J:.ecn utilised by the 
Company for the re-payment of, or the payment of interest on, 
secured loana advanced to the Company by a bank at any time 
before such date". 
3. In the Schedule to the principal Act, in Category III, after the 
IS words "Secured loans", the following shall be, and shall be deemed al-
ways to have been, inserted, namely:-
" including loans advanced, on or after the date of taking over, 
b~ a bank to the Company to the extent such loans have been utilised 
by the Company for the re-payment o'f, or the payment of interest 
on secured loans advanced to the Company by a bank at any time 
~ , " before the date of taking over . 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 5. 
Amend-
ment of 
the 
Schedule. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Government of India assumed the management of Hindustan Trac-
tors Limited, Vishwamitri, Baroda in March, 1973, under the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, and appointed Gujarat Agro 
Industries Corporation as its Authorised Controller for a period of five 
years. The undertakings of the Company were acquired by the Central 
Government with effect from the 1st April, 1978, on the enactment of 
the Hindustan Tractors Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertak-
ings) Act, 1978. The undertakings were vested on the same date in the 
State Governm~nt of Gujarat and a 'new company in the name of GUjarat 
Tractor Corporation Ltd. has also been formed to carryon the activity. 
2. Section 5 :If the Act specifies the manner in which the liabilities of 
the Hindustan Tractors Limited prior to the taking over of the manage-
ment of the '::ompany and after the taking over of the management of 
the Company should be taken care of. According to this section, liabili-
H~§~ris~, i~ te~t inter alia of secured loans advanced by a bank 
to the Company before the date of taking over shall be enforceable 
agatnst the Cornpeny. According' to Part B of the Schedule to the Act, 
secured loans relating to the pre-take over management periOQ :tall within 
Category III priority and the intention of the Act was that the secured 
loans advanced by banks to the Company be'fore the take over of the 
Company should be met from out of the amount payable to the Company 
for the tratlsier to, and vestipg in, the Central, Govern~ent of the under-
takings of the Company under sectioJ} 80f t.he Act. It was envisaged 
that the secured loans advanced by the State Bank of India to the Com-
panjr beiore the tait>e oYer of the CODlpmy WOlIld qualify for pay-
ment under Category III of Flirt B of the Schedule and this considera-
tion was taken into account in determining the amount which has been 
specified in section 8 a& the amount payable to the Company. On further 
examination, it has been discovered that in view of the accotintmg treat-
Melnt given. ~ the books of the State Bank of India by reason of the 
adjUstMent of the ,loans given by the Bal\kafter the take over against 
* iMeulle4! l~. giwn by ,the Bank to the Company before, the take 
over all the amounts due to the State Bank have to be treated as post-, , , 
take over loaps. The post-take over loans which were advanced by the 
State Bank of India to the extent they were utililltd 'Iiormeettng the 
pre-take over ~ecured loans advanced by the Bank totbe Company 
ihould be entitled to tl;1e same ~eatment to whioh tM p!&'take lOver 
secured loans which were so de 'frayed would:' ha'Ye been .ntitW The 
amendments proposed in the Bill are for the purpoae ofHC1lriItC this 
potitiOlL 
NEW DELHI; 
The3T~ 11l~, 1'980' 
2 
(!BARANJI'r CHANANA. 
'I , 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS i,QOM THE HINDUS~TltAC'l'OaS LIMrr!:D (ACQUISmON AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1978 
(13 OF 1978) 
* * * * * 
5. (1) • * * * • 
(2) Any liability arising in respect of-
• • • * • 
(b) Joans advanced by a bank to the Company (together with 
interest due thereon) on or after the date of taking over; 
* * * * • 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 5, 20, 21, 22, 24 and 26) 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY 
* * * • * 
•. PART B 
Pre-take-over mmragement period 
• • • • • 
Category III 
Secured loans 
• • • * • 
3 
Company 
to be 
liable for 
certain 
prior 
liabili-
ties. 

LOK SABHA 
to amend the Hindustan Tractors Limited (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Act, 1978. 
(Shri Charanjit Chanana, 
Minister of State in the 
Ministry of Industry.) 