As INTRODUcm IN LoK S.uHA OK 
Bill No. '$ of 1!J68 
THE DELHI HIGH COURT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1968 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Delhi High Ca...rt ACt, 1166 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as fo11oW8:-
". I 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi High Court (Amend- Short titl~ 
ment) Act, 1968. and com-
mence-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govem- ment. 
ment may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint. 
26 of 1966. 2. In the Delhi High Court Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as Insertion 
the principal Act), after section 3, the following section shall be in- of new 
serted, namely: - . . I section 3A. 
10 "3A. Expenditure in respect of the salaries anti allowances Salaries 
of Judges of the High Court of Delhi shall be expenditure and allow-
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.". ances Of 
Judges to 
be expen-
diture 
charged on 
Consolidated 
l'und of 
India. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 5. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 17. 
Amend-
memof 
certain 
laws. 
Power of 
Chief 
Justice to 
transfer 
pending 
suits and 
proceed-
ings to 
subordi-
nate 
courts. 
.. ". "" '·'2 
3. In sub-section (2) of section '5 of the principal Act, for the 
words "twenty-five thousand rupees", the wortls "fifty thousand 
rupees" shall be substituted. 
4. In sub-section (3) of section 17 of the principal Act, in clause 5 
(b), for the words "twenty-five thousand rupees", the words "fifty 
thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 
5. (1) In section 25 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918, as in for-:.-e 
in the Union territory of Delhi, for the words "twenty-five thousand 
rupees", the words "fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 
(2) In the Himachal Pradesh (Courts) Order, 1948, in paragraph 1) 
20, for the words "twenty-five thousand rupees'" the words "fifty 
thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 
6. The Chief Justice of the High Court of Delhi may transfer 
anl' suit Qr ot.her. proceedings which is or are pending in the High 
Cowi imIaec:liately before the commencement of this Act and in 15 
wl1.ich no "NUn .... have been examined~f,ore ~ch CO«lrMDC_~t 
to sUch subordinate court in the Union territory of Delhi or, as the 
case may be, Himachal Pradesh as:;would have jurisdiction to enter-
tain such suit or proceedings had such suit or proceedings been in- 20 
stituted or filed for the first time dter I\J.Ch CQ1:DJlWlCeDlent. . ' 
Punjab 
Act VI of 
1911. 

STATEMENT OF OBJacTS AND REASONS 
Under se6n 5{1) of ihe . Delhi. High CourtAet. iQ66,Ute High 
Court of Delhi has ordinary ~al C1i""il jurisdiction in every suit 
the value of which exceeds Ri. 25,000. It has been found that this 
limit in civil suits is too low for a metropolitan place like Delhi and 
leads to accumulation of arrears. In the intereat of speedy tiispolal 
of work in the High Court, it is proposed to raise the limit specified 
in.'aectlon 5(2) "frondts. 25,eoo toRs. 50,000. It is pro~ to make 
stmiiar . aIneftdm~ 'in seetion 1'1(3)' of the Aet UDder whieh, the' 
HIgh Court of Delhi has .~'origtDal jurisdicticm In respe<:tof the 
Union territorY at HbnaehaJ·Prade.h; , , 
2. Opportunity is being taken to include a provision in the Act 
that the salaries anti allowances of the Judges of the High Court of 
Delhi shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of 
India on the lines of the corresponding provision relating to the 
Judges of the State High Courts Ul 8rti~le 202(3) (d) of tl1e Con5ti-
tution. Clause (3) of article 112 of the. ConatUution does not ex-
pres. ly provide for the salaries and allowances of Judges of the High 
Court for a Union territory being charged on the Consolidated Fund 
of India and it "is therefore necessarY to make such a prO'Vision undt>r 
sub-clause (g) of that clause which empowers Parliament to declare 
any expenditure to be so chai-ged. 
3. The Bill iJ intended tQ give eftect to the above objects. 
NEW DELHI;, VIDYA CHARAN SHUKLA. 
The 17th October, 1968. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 16129/67-Judl. IIIII, dated the 4th November. 
1981 from Shri Vidya ~an Shukla. Kinister of State in the Min-
istry of HOJIle. Afra11'S to the Secretary. Lok SaDha.} 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Delhi High Court (Amendment) Bill, 1988, recommends t~ intro-
duction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under article 117(1) Of the 
Constitution of India. 
3 

,'ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DELHI HIGH COVRT AcT, 1966 
(26 OF 1986) 
'" '" • • • 
5. (1) • • • • • Jurisdic-
tion of 
High Court (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
of Delhi. being in f~cet 'the High Court of Delhi _hall also have iD. respect of 
the said. territories ordinary original civil jurisdi~D in .every suit 
the value of which exceeds twenty-five thousand rupees. 
Extension 
of the 
jurladic-
17. (1) 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• • • 
• • • 
• • • 
~:h ~o:~ (3) 'The High Court 0'£ Delhishall have, in respect of the temto-
of Delhi. ries, for the time being included in the Union territory of Himachal' 
Pradesh,-
• • • • • 
(b) ortiinary original civil jurisdiction in every suit the 
value o£ which exceeds twenty-five thousand rupees, notwith-
standing anything contained in any law for the time' being in 
force. 
• 
• • • • • 
EX'rI!ACT FROM THE PuNJAB COURTS ACT, 1918 
(VI OF 1918) 
• • '" • 
Original 25. Except as otherwise provided by any enactment for the time 
Jurlsdi~tiOI. being in force, the Court of the District Judge shall have jurisdic-
of Distr~ct tion in evf!!rj original civil suit the .value of which does not exceed 
Judges In ' 
suits. twenty-five thouaand rupees. 
• • • 
III 
4 

EXTRACT FROM. THE HIMACHAL PRADESH (COURTS) ORDER, 1948 
• • • • • 
CHAPI'ER III 
SUBORDINATE COURTS 
• • • • .-
20. Save as otherwise provided by any other law for the time being ?riginal. 
in force, the Court of the District Judge shall have original jurisdic- J~rgidJ:lon 
tion in every civil suit the value of which does not exceed twenty- ~ou;'<i. 
five thousand rupees. 
) : 
5 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Delhi High Court Act, 1966 
(Shri Vidya Chm-an Shukla, 
MinUter of r State in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs.) 