THE LIMITATION BILL, 1960 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

THE LIMITATION BILL, 1960 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
CI.AUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
PART II 
LIMITATIONS OF SUITS, APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS 
3. Bar of limitation. 
4. Expiry of prescribed period when court is closed. 
5. Extension of prescribed period in certain cases. 
6. Legal disability. 
7. Disability of one of several persons. 
8. Special exceptions. 
9. Continuous running of time. 
10. Suits against trustees and their representatives. 
11. Suits on foreign contracts. 
PART III 
COMPUTATION OF PERIOD OF LIMITATION 
12. Exclusion of time in legal proceedings. 
13. Exclusion of time of proceeding bona fide in court without 
jurisdiction. 
14. Exclusion of time. in certain other cases· 
15. Effect of death on or before the accrual cf the right to sue. 
16. Effect of fraud or mistake. 
17. Effect of acknowledgment in writing. 
18. Effect of payment on account of debt or of interest on 
legacy. 
19. Effect of acknowledgement or payment by another person 
1629 (B) LS-l. 

(li) 
CLAUSES 
20. Effect of substituting or adding new plaintiff or defendant. 
21. Continuing breaches and torts. 
22. Suits for compensation for acts not actionable without spe-
cial damage. 
23. Computation of time mentioned in instruments. 
PART IV 
ACQUISITION OF OWNERSHIP BY POSSJrBSION 
24. Acquisition of easements by prescription. 
25. Exclusion in favour of reversioner of servient tenement. 
26. Extinguishment of right to property. 
PART V 
MIscELLANEOUS 
27. Amendment of certain Acts. 
28. Savings. 
29. Provision for suits, etc., for which the prescribed period is 
shorter than the period prescribed by the Indian Limita-
tion Act, 1908. 
30. Provisions as to barred or pending suits, etc. 
31. Repeal 
THE SCHEDULE-PRESCRIBED PERIODS. 

Bill No. 9S of 1960. 
TIlE LIMITATION BILL, 1960 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law for the limitation of suits and 
. other proceedings and for purposes connected therewith. 
BE it enaeted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the, RepubUc 
of India as follows:-
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Limitation Act, 1960. Short title, 
[0 
extent Lid 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu commen.,;e-
d K hmir ment. an as . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "applicant" includes-
(i) a petitioner, 
(ii) any person from or through whom an applicant 
derives his right to apply; 
Deftnitiona. 
15 (iii) any person whose estate is represented by the 
applicant as executor, administrator or other representative; 
(b) "application" includes a petition; 

2 
(c) "bill of exchange" includes a hundi and a cheque; 
(d) ''bond'' includes any instrument whereby a person 
obliges himself to pay money to another, on condition that the 
obligation shall be void if a specified act is performed, or is not 
performed, as the case may be; 5 
(e) "defendant" includes-
(i) any person from or through whom a defendant 
derives his liability to 'be sued; 
(ii) any person whose estate is represented by the. 
defendant as executor, administrator or other representative; 10 
(1) "easement" includes a right not arising from contract, 
by which one person is entitled to remove and appropriate for 
his own profit any part of the soil belonging to another or any-
thing growing in, or attached to, or subsisting upon, the land 
of another; IS 
(g) "foreign country" means any country other than India; 
(h) "good faith" nothing shall be deemed to be done' in 
good faith which is not done with due care and attention; 
(i) "plaintiff" includes-
(i) any person from or through whom a plaintiff derives 20 
his right to sue; 
(ii) any person WhOSE estate is represented by the 
plaintiff as executar, administrator or other representative; 
(j) "prescribed period" means the period of limitation pres-
cribed for any suit, appeal or application by the Schedule 25 
and computed in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 
(k) "promissory note" means any instrument whereby the 
maker engages absolutely to pay a specified sum of money to 
another at a time therein limited, or on demand, or at sight; 
(1) "suit" d~ not include an appeal or an application; 30 
(m) "tort" means a civil wrong which is not exclusively the 
breach of a contract or the breach of a trust; 
(n) "trustee" does not include a benamidar, a mortgagee re-
maining in possession after the mortgage has been satisfied or a 
person in wrongful possession without title. 3S 

, of 1908. 
3 
?ART II 
Ln.nTATION OF SUITS, APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS 
3. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in sections 4 to 23 Bar of Uml-
(inclusive), every suit instituted, appeal preferred, and application ution. 
S made after the prescribed period ghall be dismissed, although limita-
tion has not been set up as a defence. 
10 
(2) For the purposes of this Act,-
(a) a suit is instituted,-
(i) in an ordinary case, when the plaint is presented to 
the prope·r ofRcer; 
(ii) in the case of a pauper, when his application for 
leave to sue as a pauper is made; and 
(iii) in the case of a claim against a company which is 
being wound up by the court, when the claimant first sends 
IS in his claim to the official liquidator; 
. (b) any claim by way of set off or counter claim, which 
shall be treated as a separate suit, shall be deemed to have been 
instituted-
(i) in the case of a set off, on the same date as the· suit 
in which the set off is pleaded; 
(ii) in the case of a counter claim, on the date on which 
the counter claim is made in court; 
(c) an application by notice of motion in a High Court is 
made when the application is presented to the proper ofRcer of 
2S that court . 
.I Wher~ the prescribed period for any suit, appeal or applica- Expil1:bed°f ... .' preSln 
tion expires on a day when the court IS closed, the SUIt, appeal or period whea 
application may be instituted, preferred or made on the day when ~o~~. is 
the court re-opens. 
5 Any appeal or any application, other than an application under Extenai~ 30 • f C '1 P d of prescnbed an of the provisions of Order XXI of the Code 0 iVl rcce ure, period in 
1958 may be admitted after the pre6cribed period if the appellant or certain casCi. 
th ~pplicant satisfies the court that he had sufficient cause for not 
pr:ferring the appeal or making the application within such period. 

Lepl dis-
ability. 
Explanation.-The fact that the appellant or the applicant was 
misled by any order, practice or judgment of the High Court in 
ascertaining or computing the prescribed period may be sufficient 
cause within the meaning of this section. 
6. (1) Where a person entitled to institute a suit or make an appli- 5 
cation for the execution of a decree is, at the time from which the 
prescribed period is to be reckoned, a minor or insane, or an 
idiot, he may institute the suit or make the application within the 
same period after the disability has ceased, as would otherwise have 
been allowed from the time specified therefor in the third column 10 
of the Schedule. 
(2) Where such person is, at the time from which the prescribed 
period is to be reckoned, affected by two such disabilities, or where, 
before his disability has ceased, he is affected by another disability, 
he may institute the suit or make the application within the same IS 
period after both disabilities have ceased, as would otherwise have 
been allowed from the time so specified. 
(3) Where the disability continues up to the death of that person, 
his legal representative may institute the suit Qr make the applica-
tion within the same period after the death as would otherwise have 20 
been allowed from the time so specified. 
(4) Where the legal representative referred to in sub-section (3) 
is, at the date of the death of the person whom he represents, affected 
by any such disability, the rules contained in sub-sections (1) and 
(2) shall apply. 2S 
(5) Where a person under disability dies after the disability 
ceases but within the period of limitation allowed to him under this 
section, his legal representative may institute the suit or make the 
application within the same period after the· death as would other-
wise have been available to that person had he not died. 30 
Dila"iUty of 7. Where one of several persons jointly entitled to institute' a 
one of suit or make an application for the execution of a decree is under 
~=. any such disability, and a discharge can be given without the con-
currence of such person, time will ron against them all; but, where 
no such discharge can be given, time will not run as against any of 3S 
them until one of them becomes capable of giving such discharge 
without the concurrence of the others or until the disability has 
ceased. 
Explanation I.-This section applies to a discharge from eve1'7 
kind of liability, including a liability in respect of any Immovable 40 
property. 

5 
. ~planation H.-For the purposes of this section, a discharge from 
lIabllity can be given by the manager of a Hindu undivided family 
governed by the Mitakshara law without the concurrence of the 
other members of the family only if he is both the de jure and de 
5 facto manager of the family. 
8. Nothing in section 6 or in section 7 applies to suits to enforce Speci~ 
rights of pre-emption, or shall be deemed to extend, for more than exceptiOna. 
three years from the cessation of the disability or the death of the 
person affected thereby, the prescribed period for any suit or appli-
10 cation. 
9. Where 'once time has begun to run, no subsequent disability ~~uouf 
or inability to institute a suit or make an application stops it: ~e. " 0 
Provided that, where letters of administration to the estate of a 
creditor have been granted to his debtor, the running of the pres-
IS cribed period for a suit to recover the debt shall be suspended while 
the administration continues. 
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provi- ~r~~:rt.: 
sions of this Act, no suit against a person in whom property has their rep-
become vested in trust for any specific purpose, or against his legal reBentativea. 
20 :representatives or assigns (not being assigns for valuable considera-
tion) , for the purpose of following in his or their hands such property, 
or the proceeds thereof, or for an account of such property or 
proceeds, shall be barred by any length of time. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section any property com-
25 p:rised in a Hindu, Muslim or Buddhist religious or charitable endow-
ment shall be deemed to be property vested in trust for a specific 
purpose and the. manager of the property shall be deemed to be the 
trustee thereof. 
11. (1) Suits instituted in the territories to which this Act ex- Suit, on 
d . t' f' t h II be b- foreign 30 tends on contracts entere mom a orelgn COWl ry S a su contra~ta. 
ject to the rules of limitation contained in this Act. 
(2) No foreign rule of limitation shall be a defence to a suit insti-
tuted in the said territories on a contract entered into in a foreign 
country unless the rule has extinguished the contract and the parties 
35 were domiciled in such country during the period prescribed by 
such rule. 
(3) This section applies to contracts entered into in the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir as it applies to contracts entered into in a 
foreign country. 

6 
PART III 
COMPUTATION OF PERIOD OF LIMITATION 
='1nio~ l.2. (1) In computing the prescribed period for any suit, appeal 
PIOCeedinp. or application, the day from which such period is to be reckoned, 
shall be excluded, 5 
(2) In computing the prescribed period for an appeal or an appli-
action for leave to appeal or for revision or for review of a judgment, 
the day on which the judgment complained of was pronounced and 
the time requisite for obtaining a copy of the decree, sentence or 
order appealed from or sought to be revised or reviewed shell be ex- 10 
eluded. 
(3) Where a decree or order is appealed from or sought to be 
revised or reviewed, or where an appiication is made for leave to 
appeal from a decree or order, the time requisite for obtaining a 
c:)py of the judgment on which the decree or order is founded shall IS 
a lso be excluded. ' 
(4) In computing the prescribed period for an application to set 
aside an award, the time requisite for obtaining a copy of the award 
shall be excluded. 
Explanation.-In computing under this section the time requisite 20 
for obtaining a copy of a decree or an order, any time taken by the 
court to prepare the decree or order before an application for a copy 
the reof is made shall not be excluded. 
=!~rn r:f 13. (1) In computing the prescribed pericd for any suit the time 
ceediDg ~ during which the plaintiff has been prosecuting with due diligence 25 
~~ U)urt another civil proceeding. whether in a court of first instance or in 
jurlacUction. a court of appeal or revision against the defendant, shall be excluded, 
where the proceeding relates to the same matter in issue and is 
prosecuted in good faith in a court which, from defect of jilrisdiction 
or other cause of a like nature, is unable to entertain it. 30 
'(2) In computing the prescribed period for any application, the 
time during which the applicant has been prosecuting with due diU-
gence another civil proceeding. whether in a court of first instance 
or of appeal or revision, against the same party for the same relief, 
shall be excluded, where such proceeding is prosecuted in good faith 35 
in a court which, from defect of jurisdiction or other c-8USP of a like 
nature, is unable to entertain it. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 2 of Order XXIII 
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the provisions of sub-section 5 of J9OB. 
(1) shall apply in relation to a f:resh suit instituted on permiSSion 40 
granted by the court under rule 1 of that Order, where such permis-
sion is granted on the ground that the first suit must fail by reason 

, 
of a defect in the jurisdiction of the court or other cause of a like 
nature. I ,_ i 
E:rplanation..-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) in excluding the time durjng which a former civil 
S Foceeding was pending, the day on which that proceeding was 
instituted and the day on which it ended shall both be counted; 
(b) a plaintiff or an applicant resisting an appeal shall be 
deemed to be prosecuting a proceeding; 
(c) misjoinder of parties or of causes of action shall be 
10 deemed to be a cause of a like nature with defect of jurisdiction. 
14. (1) In computing the, prescribed period for any suit or appli- ~u:a of 
cation for the execution of a decree, the institution or execution, of certain othel' 
which has been stayed by injunction or orde.r, the time of the con- C8aa. 
tinuance of the injunction or order, the day on which it was issued 
IS or made, and the day on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded. 
(2) In computing the prescribed period for any suit of which 
n'?tice has been given, or for which the previous conlient or sanc:tion 
of the Government or any other authority is required, in accordance 
with the requirements of any law for the time being in force, the 
20 period of such notice or, as the case may be, the time required for 
obtaining such consent or sanction shall be excluded. 
E:rplanation.-In excluding the time required for obtaining the 
consent or sanction of the Government or any other authority, the 
date on which the application was made for obtaining the consent or 
2S sanction and the date of receipt of the order of the Government or 
other authority shall both be counted. 
(3) In computing the prescribed period for any suit or applica. 
tion for execution of a decree by any receiver or interim receiver 
appointed in proceedings for the adjudication of a person as an insol-
3C vent or by any liqUidator or provisional liqUidator apPOinted in pro-
ceedings for the winding up of iii company, the period beginning with 
the date of institution of such proceeding and ending with the expiry 
of three months from the, date of appointment of such reCeiver or 
liquidator, as the case may be, shall be excluded. 
3S (4) In computing the prescribed period for a suit for possession 
by a purchaser at a sale in execution of a decree, the, time during 
which a proceeding to set aside the sale has been prosecuted shall be 
excluded. 

EtIe~ of 
death OD or 
before the 
accrual "f 
-be right 
.0 sue. 
Meet of 
fraud or 
mistake. 
i 
\ ' 
(5) In computing the prescribed period for any suit the tli'ne 
during which the defendant has been absent from India and from 
the territories outside India under the administration of the Central 
Government, shall be excluded . 
• 
15. (1) Where a person who would, if he were living, havf a right 5 
to institute a suit or make an application dies before the right 
accrues, or where a right to institute a suit or make an application 
accrues only on the death of a person, the period of limitation shall 
be computed from the time when there is a If'gal representative of 
the deceased capable of instituting such suit or making such applica- 10 
tion. 
(2) Where a person against whom, if he were living, a Il'ight to 
institute a suit or make an application would have accrued dies be-
fore the right accrues, or where a right to institute a suit or make 
an application against any person accrues on the death of such per- IS 
son, the period of limitation shall be computed from the time when 
there is a legal representative of the deceased against whom the 
plaintiff may institute such suit or make such application. 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) applies to suita. 
to enforce rights of pre-emption or to suits for the possession of 20 
immovable property or of a hereditary office. 
16. (1) Where, in the case of any suit or application for which a 
period of limitation is prescribed by this Act,-
(a) the suit or application is based upon the fraud of the 
defendant or respondent or his agent; or 2.5 
(b) the knowledge of the right or title on which a suit or 
application is founded is concealed by the fraud of any such 
person as aforesaid; or 
(c) the suit or application is for relief from the consequen-
ces of a mistake; or I 30 
(d) where any document necessary to establish the right of 
the plaintiff or applicant has been fraudulently concealed from 
him; 
the prescribed period shall not begin to run until the plaintiff or 
applicant has discovered the fraud or the mistake or could, with 3.5 
reasonable diligence, have discovered it; or in the case of a concealed 
document, until the plaintiff or the applicant first had the means of 
producing the concealed document or compelling its production: 

I 
Provided that nothing in this section shall enable any suit to be 
instituted or application to be made to recover or enfoxce any charge 
.,ainst, or set aside any transaction affecting, any property which-
(i) in the case of fraud, has been purchased for valuable 
S consideration by a person who was not a party to the fraud and 
did not at the time of the purchase know, or have reason to be-
Ueve, that any fraud had been committed, or 
(ii) in the case of mistake, has been purchased for valu-
able con~ideraticn subsequently to the transaction in which the 
10 mistake was made, by a person who did not know, or have 
reason to believe, that the mistake had been made, or 
(iii) in the case of a concealed document, has been purchll!l-
ed for valuable consideration by a person who was not a party 
to the concealment and, did not at the time of purchase know, 
IS or have reason to believe, that the document had been concealed. 
(2) Where a judgment-debtor has, by fraud or force, prevented 
the execution of a decree or order within the prescribed period, the 
court may, on the application of the judgment-creditox made after 
the expiry of the said period extend the prescribed period for exe-
20 cution of the decree or order: 
Provided that such application for extension of the prescribed 
period is made within one year from the discovery of the fraud or 
, the cessation of force, as the case may be. 
17. (1) Where, before the expiration of the prescribed period for Bft'ectofact-
2S a suit or application in respect of any property ox right, an acknow- =:~i=ent 
ledgment of liability in respect of such property or right has been 
made in writing signed by the party against whom such property 
Or right is claimed, or by any person through whom he derives his 
title arliability. a fresh period of limitation shall be computed from 
30 the time when the acknowledgment was so signed. 
(2) Where the writing containing the acknowledgment is un-
dated, oral evidence may be ~ven of the time when it was signed; 
I of '17" but subject to the provisions of the IndiAn Evidence Act, 1872, oral 
evidence of its contents shall not be received. 
3S Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) an acknowledgment may be sufficient though it omfts 
to specify the exact nature of the property or right, or avers 
. that the time for payment, delivery, performance or -enjoyment 
has not yet come ar is accompanied by a refusal to pay, deliver, 

Bfrect of 
paJlDent OQ 
ac.OUDt of 
c:let--l or of 
interest OD 
1ep....,. 
10 
perform or permit to enjoy, or Is coupled with a claim to 'let-
oft, or Is addressed to a person other than a person entitled to 
the property or right, 
(b) the word "signed" means signed either personally or by 
an agent duly authorised in this behalf, and S 
(c) an application for the execution of a decree or order 
shall not be deemed to be an application in respect of any pro-
perty or right. 
18. Where payment on account of a debt or of 'interest on a 
legacy is made before the expiration of the prescribed period by the 10 
person liable to pay the debt or legacy or by his agent duly authori-
sed in this behalf, a fresh period of limitation shall be computed 
from the time when the payment was made: 
Provided that, save in the case of payment of interest made 
before the 1st day of January, 1928, an acknowledgment of the pay- 15 
ment appears in the handwriting of, or in a writing signed by, the 
person making the payment. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) where mortgaged land is in the possession of the mort-
gagee, the receipt of the :rent or produce of such land shall be 20 
deemed to be a payment; 
(b) Udebt" does not ine~ude money payable under a decree 
or order of a court. 
Mer of'acJr:- 19. (1) The expression, Uagent duly authorised in this behalf" in 
:-~~t sections 17 and 18 shall, in the case of a person under disability, in- 2S 
b,1IDOther elude his lawful guardian, committee or manager or an agent duly 
penon. authorised by such guardian, committee .or manager to sign the 
acknowledgment or make the payment. 
(2) Nothing in the said sections renders one of se'O't!ral jOint 
contractors, partners,' @xecutors or mortgagees chargeable byreasoh30 
only of a written acknowledgment signed by, or of a payment made 
by, or by the agent of, any other or others of them. 
(3) For the purposes of the said section.,-
(a) an acknowledgment signed or a payment made In res-
pect of any liability by, or by the duly authorised agent of, 35 
any limited owner of property who is govemedby 'Hfndutaw, 
.hall be a valid acknowledgment or payment, as the ,case may 
be, against a reversioner succeeding to such Uab1lfty; and 
(b) where a liability has been incurred by, or on behalf 
of a Hindu undivided fartli1y as such, an acknowledgment or 40 

11 
,payment made by, or by the duly authorised agent of, the 
manager of the family for the time being shall be deemed to 
have been made on' behalf of the whole family. 
20. (1) Where after the institution of ,a suit, anew plaintrff or E~~ of lUbe 
s'defendant is substituted or added, the suit 'shall, as regards him, be :~~u:~ 
deemed to have been instituted when he was so made a party: plaintiff or defendant. 
Provided that where the eourt issatisfted that the omission to 
include a new plaintiff or defendant was due to a mistake made in 
good faith it may direct that the suit as regards such plaintiff or. 
10 defendant shall be deemed to have been 'instituted on any earlier 
date. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to a case where;a 
party is .added or substituted owing to assignment or devolution of 
any interest during the pendency of a suit or where a plaintfff is 
IS mad~ a defendant or a defendant is made a plaint1ft. 
21. In the case of a continuing breach of contract or in the case ContiDuing 
of 8 continuing tort, a fresh period of limitation begins to run at ~::,hea and 
every moment of the time during which the breach or the tort, as' the 
case may be, continues. 
20 22. In the case of a suit for compensation for an act which does Suit. for 
not give rise to a cause of action unless some 'Specific injury actually ro~=~~D 
results therefrom, the prescribed period shall be computed from the ac::t:--b1e 
time when the injury results. :ec::: 
damage. 
23. All instruments shall for the purposes of this Act be deemed Co~putation 
2S to be made with reference to the Gregorian calendar. ~en~ed in 
instruments. 
PART IV 
ACQt7ISmON OF OWHEllSHIP BY POSSESSION 
24. (1) Where the access and use of light or air to and for any A::quJsition • ot easement. building have been peaceably enJoyed therewith as an easement, by prescrip-
30 and as of right, without interruption, and for twenty years, and tiOD. 
where any way or watercourse or the use of any water or any other 
easement (whether affirmative or negative) has been peaceably ' and 
openly enjoyed by any person claiming title thereto as an easement 
and as of right without interruption and for twenty years,- the right 
'35 to such access and use of light or air, way, watercourse, use' of 
water, or otber easement shall be absolute and indefeasible. 

Excluaion in 
favour of 
rcversioner 
of acrvicDt 
tcnement. 
12 
(Z) Each of the said periods of twenty years shall be taken to be 
a period ending within two years next before the institution of the 
suit wherein the claim to which such period relates is cont~. 
(3) Where the property over which a right is claimed under sub-
section (1) belongs to the Government that sub-section shall be S 
read as :! for the words "twenty years" the words "thirty years" were 
substituted. 
Explanation.-Nothing °is an interruption within the meaning of 
this section, unless where there is an actual discontinuance of the 
possession or enjoyment by reason of an obstruction by the act of 10 
some person other than the claimant, and unless such obstruction is 
submitted to or acquiesced in for one year after the claimant has 
notice thereof and of the person making or authorising the same to 
°be made. 
25. Where any land or water upon, over or from. which' any ease- IS 
ment has been enjoyed or derived has been held under or by virtue 
of any interest for life or in terms of years exceeding three ·years 
from the granting thereof, the time of the enjoyment of such ease-
ment during the continuance of such interest or term shall be ex-
cluded in the computation of the period of twenty years in case the 20 
claim is, within three years next after the determination of such 
interest or term, resisted by the person entitled on such determi-
nation to the said land or water. 
Bxtingui.h- %6. At the determination of the period hereby limited to any 
tmeDt ~t person for instituting a suit for possession of any property, his right 2S o pro .......... 
AmcndlIlCDt 
ofccrtaiD 
Acts. 
Savinp· 
to such property shall be extinguished. 
PART V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
27. In the Indian Easements Act, 1882, in section 15, for the words 5 of ISb. 
"sixty years", the words "thirty years" shall be substituted; and in 30 s 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, section 48 shall be omitted. ° of 1908. 
ZL (1) Nothing in this Act shall affect section 25 of the Indian 
Contract Act, 1872. 
(2) Where any special or local law prescribes for any suit, 
appeal or application a period of limitation different from the pres- 35 
cribed period, the provisions of section 3 shall applya~ if. suc;:h 

period were the prescribed period, and for the purpose of deterl¢11-
ing any period of limitatIon prescribed for any suit, appeal or appli-
cation by any special or local law, the provisions contained in sections 
4 to 23 (inclusive) shall apply only in so far as, and to the extent 
5 to which, they are not expressly excluded by such special or local 
law. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in any law for the time being in 
force with respect to marriage and divorce, nothing in this Act shall 
apply to any suit or other proceeding under any such law. 
10 (4) Sections 24 and 25 and the definition of "easement" in sec-
tion 2 shall not apply to case~ arising in the territories to which the 
, of I8h. Indian Easements Act, 1882, may for the time being extend. 
9 of I9OB. 
IS 
20 
29. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,- I'romion for suits, etc., 
(a) any suit for which the prescribed period is shorter than for which. 
the period of limitation prescribed by the Indian Limitation Act, ~d';::k!J.-
1908, may be instituted within a period of two years next after is shoner 
the commencement of this Act or within the period prescribed = ~~:s.pe-
for such suit by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, whichever crib,ed t>L~ ~e 
'd' I' IndWl llm-peno explres ear ler: tation Act, 
Provided that a suit to redeem or recover possession of any 1908· 
munovable property which has been mortgaged may be insti-
tuted within a Period of twelve years next after such commence-
ment or within a period of thirty years from the date of accrual 
of the right to redeem or recover possession, whichever period 
expires later; 
(b) any appeal or application for which the prescr~bed 
period is shorter than the period of limitation prescribed by the 
Indian Limitation Act, 1908, may be preferred or made within 
a period of thirty days next after the commencement of this Act 
or within the period prescribed for such appeal or application 
by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, whichever period expires 
earlier. 
30. Nothing in this Act shall,- Provisions u 
(a) enable any suit, appeal or application to be instituted, :e~f~~ or 
35 preferred or made, for which the period of limitation prescribed auitl, etc, 
9 of 1908. by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, expired before the commen-
cement of this Act; or 
(b) affect any suit, appeal or application instituted, pre-
ferred or made before, and pending at, such commencement. 
9 of tpoB. 40 31. The Indian Limitation Act, 1908, is hereby repealed. RepeaL 

Deac:ziptionof .uit 
nmscHEDULB 
(PREscRmBD. Plaroos) 
[$Ie Sections 2 CJ) and 3] 
FIRST DIVISlON-SUlTS 
Period oflimitation I Time fro~ which peri cd , 
MPDll' terus 
PART I.-SuITS RELATING TO ACCOUl-lTS 
1 For the balance due on &/ Three yean. mutual, open and current 
I(:CO!'Dt. wlaere there baYe 
been redproc:al demand. 
between the parties. 
The close of the year in' 
wJHcll the ItIrt item admit-
ted or proved is entered 1.0 
in the account; 8uch year 
to be computed .. in the 
account. 
z Against a factorfor an ec:c:ouat. Three yeaa. 
3 By & prindpal against hi. Tbreeyean. 
agent for Iftcwable property 
rece.i ved by the Jan" and DOt 
accounted for. 
• 
Other IUita by priDcipala Tbreeyean. 
against asents for neglect or 
miaouaduc:r. 
.5 For an account and & share of 
the profits of • 'diuolftd 
Tbreeyean. 
pannc:nhip. 
When the lIQCOUIlt ii, dUrin, 
the continuance of the 15 
agency, demanded and re-
fused or, where no such 
demand is made, when the 
.,eacy lermi n8&es. 
'When the account is, during 20 
the CODtiJUJance of the 
agency, demuded and 
refused or, where no such 
demanct is 1Mde, when the 
agency terminates. 25 
When the neglect or mii-
conduct becomes blown to 
the plaintiff. 
The date of the dhlOlution. 
PART n.-SUITS aBLATING TO CONTRACTS 
6 For a ,eaman', wagel . Three l elQ. The CDd oft~ vOJIIp<durin, 
which the wa,e, are ear-
Ded. 35 
7 For WAles in the c:aae of IIDY 
other poraoo. 
Three ye&rl. When the ..... tlCCrUe due. 
8 For the price of food or drink Tbreeyean. When: the food or drink lold by the keeper of & hotel, is delivered. 
tavern or lodgin,-boute. 40 
9 For the price oflod,il1l. Three yean. When the price becomes pay-
able. 
14 

IIeriod of ii.i_ion Tiale frIa .aicb period 
begins to run 
5 
10 ApiDlt .ClltTierforoolll~"" T __ ,.... 
tion for losing or in,aring 
goods. 
It 1'\gahm a carrier for com- ThIft,..... 
penaation for non-deUvery 
of, or delay in delivering, 
goods. 
10 I2 For the hire of ani~ .ehi- Three yean. 
cles, boats or household 
furitirure. 
13 For the balance of money Three yean. 
advanced in payment of 
IS goods to be delivered. 
1-4 Por the price of woods laid Three yean. 
and delivered 'Where no 
fixed period of credit is 
agreed upon. 
20 IS For the price of coods laId 
and delivered to be paid for 
after the expiry of a fixed 
Three yca~. 
period ofcredit. 
16 For the price ofgoods sold and Three yeara. 
~S delivered to be paid far by a 
bi 11 of exchange, no such bill 
being given. 
30 
35 
17 For the price of trees or srow-
ing crops sold by the plain-
tiff to the defendant where 
no fixed period of credit is 
agreed upon. 
18 For the price of work dl)ne by 
the: plaintiff for the defen-
dant at his request, where no 
time has been fiS'ed for pay-
ment. 
Three yean. 
Three years. 
19 Por money payable fur money 'I1uft ,..... 
lent. 
lO Like suit when the lender has 
given a cheque for the 
money. 
Three years. 
II F or money lent under an asree- Three yean. 
ment that it shall be pay-
45 able on demand. 
II For money deposited under Three yean. 
an agreement that i t .hall be 
pay~ble on demand, in-
cluding money c1f a C1I8tomer 
in the hands of his banker 
lVllca "'e lou or iJljury 
0CDIn. 
When the hire becomes pay-
aWe. 
When the 1OQCi. ought to be 
IAdiWftd.. 
Tille c:ba at tb.e doll very of 
....... 
When the peciod of credit 
expires. 
When die .,.noel of the pro-
PQICd bill dapacs. 
The date of the sale. 
When the work is done. 
When the cheque is paid. 
..... die demaDd is made. 
SO 80 payable. 
------------~--------~------------
1829(B) LS-3. 

19l-
Description of suit Period of limitation- Time from which period 
begins to run 
il3 For money payable to the Three years. When the money is paid. 
plaintiff for money paid for 
S the defendant. 
24 For money· payable by the 
defendant to the plaintiff 
Three years. When the money is received. 
'for 'money received by the 
defendant, for the plaintiff's 
use. 10 
25 For money payable for in- Three years. When the interest becomc;s 
terest upon monet due from Liue. 
the defendant to t e plaintiff. 
26 For money, payable to the Three years. When the accounts arc: stated 
plaintift' for money found to in writing signed by the IS 
be due from the defendant defendant . or his agent 
to the ,plaintiff on accounts duly authorised in thia 
stated between them. behalf, unless where the 
debt is, by a simultaneous 
agreement in writins20 
signed as aforesaid, made 
payable at a fUlure time, 
and then when that time 
arrives. 
27 For compensation for breach Three years. When the time specified 2S 
of a promise to do anYthing arrives or the contingency 
at a specified time, or upon happens. 
the happening of a lpecified 
contingency . 
28 On It single bond, where a day Three years. The day so specified. 30 
'is specified for payment. 
29 On a single bond, where no Three years. The date of executing the 
such day is specified. bond. 
30 'On:a bond subject to a condi- Three years. When the condition i. 
tlon. broken. 3S 
31 On a bill of exchange or pro- Three years, When the bill or note faU. 
missory note payabk at a due. 
fixed time after date. 
J 
On a bill of exchange payable Three years. When the bill is presented. 32 
at sight, or after sight, but 40 not at a fixed ti me. 
33 On a bill of exchange accepted 
payable at a particular place. 
Three years, When the bill is 
at that place. 
presented 
34 On a bill of exchange or pro- Three years. When the fixed time 
milsory note payable at a expires. 45 
fixed time after sight or 
after demand. 

;17 
Description·of suit . Period of. limitation Time from which period 
begins to run 
S 
10 
35 On a bill of exchange or pro-
missory . ':l0te payable on 
demand and not accom-
panied by any writing res-
training or POitponing the 
right to usc. 
Three years. 
36 On a promissory note for bond Three years. 
payable oy instalments. 
IS 37 On a promissory note or Three years. 
bond payable byinstalments, 
lO 
which provides that, if de-
fault be made in payment 
of one or more instalments, 
the whole shall be due. 
38 On a promissory note given 
by the maker to a third 
person to he delivered to the 
payee after I cer'lin event 
should happen. 
Three years. 
39 On a dishonoured foreign biII Three years. 
where protest has been made 
and notice given. 
30 40 By the payee against the draw-
er of a bill of exchange, 
which has been dishonoured 
by non-acceptance. 
35 
. p By the acceptor of an aCcom-
modation-bill against the 
drawer. 
4Z By a surety against the princi-
pal debtor. 
40 43 By a surety against a co-surety. 
4S 
50 
44 (a) On a policy of insurance 
when the sum insured is 
payable after proof of the 
death has been given to or 
received by the insurers. 
(b) On a policy o~ insuran~e 
when the sum insured is 
payable after pr.oof of the 
los9 has been gwen to or 
received by the: insurers. 
Three years. 
Three years . 
Three yean. 
Three years. 
Three years. 
Tliree years. 
The date of the bill or note. 
The expiration of the first 
term of payment as to the 
part then payable; and for 
the other parts, the ex-
piration of the respective 
terms of payment. 
When the default is Diade. 
unless where the payee 
or obligee waives the 
benefit of the provision 
and then when fresh de-
fault is made In retpea of 
which there is no such 
waiver. 
The date of the deli very to 
the payee. 
When the notice is given. 
The date of the 
to accept. 
refusal 
When the accepter pays the 
amount of the bill. 
When the surety pays . the 
creditor. 
When the surety pays any-
thing in excess of his 
own share. 
The date' of thedetth of 
the deceased. ' 
The date of the occurrence 
causingtlic loss. 
When the inJurers elect 
to avoid the policy. 45 By the assured to recover pre-
mia paid under a policy 
voidable at the election of 
55 ___ ...:.th::.e~i:.-l1..:.su_r_c_rs_. ___ ._ .. __ .. '~ _____ ------------

39 of ltaS· 
11 
Description ofsait Period fIf HlIlitation TilM &eat which period 
belinl to run 
46 Under the Indian Succe •• ion 'J1arft ,,"no 
Act, 19~5. section 360 
or section 361, to com-
pel a refund by a penon to 
whom an executor or ad-
ministrator has paid a Ie-
pc}' or distributed "etl. 
47 For moDe)' paid upon an exia- Three years. 
ting CIOnai~rlltion which 
af'terwardJ tails. • 
48 For contribution by a party Three yean. 
who bas paid the whole or 
more than hit share of the 
amount dae under a joint 
decree. or by a lhaler in a 
join, estate who has paid 
the whore or more than his 
share of the amount of re-
venued'Uefrom nimaelfand 
his co-shllrerS. 
49 By a co-trUttee to enforce ThTccY"l'l. 
against the estate oi a de-
ceased trustee a claim for 
contribution. 
SO By the manager of a joint es- Three yean. 
tate of an tmdiTided family 
for contribution, in respect 
of a payment made by him 
on account of the estate. 
51 For the profits of immovable Three yean. 
property belonging to the 
plaintiff which have heeQ 
wroncfully received by the 
defendant. 
52 For arrears ofrent. Three y.an. 
53 Bv a vendor of immovable Three yNrI . 
. property for penona] pay-
ment of unpaid purchlle-
money. 
S4 For speak perbmance of a Three years. 
contract. 
ss For compensation for the Three yean. 
brelCh of any COftt1'lCt. 
expreu or implied not 
berriD apeci""'PI"vided. 
TJar ct. of the payment or 
di8b'illuhoa. 5 
The date of the payment in 
exec.. of the plaintUr'. 
10 
0Wft.ure. 15 
Wlte. thr ri,ht to contri-
buriCIIE accrues. 
The date of the payment. 
"hell tbe prolhlue received. 
When the arretln become due. 
20 
30 
35 
The time fixed for comple-
ting the we, or (where 
the title is ICCepted after 40 
the w. fDed for comple-
tion) the date of the 
acceptance. 
The date fixed for the 
performance, or, if no 4S 
such date is ftuod, when 
the plaintiff has notice 
that performance is re-
fused. 
When tbe contract is broken SO 
or (where there arc 
succeasive brelChes) when 
the breach in respect of 
which the luitia inatituted 
occurs or (where the breach S S 
is continuinS) when it 
ceasn. 

- DeIIcription ofsuit Time from which period 
begins to run I P,riod or Ih ...... oo 
--------------------------1-----------------\--------------------
P,wT III.-SUITS RELATII1GTO DECLAaATlO),;$ 
s 
IO 
56 To declare the forgery of an 
instrument issued or regis-
tered. 
57 To obtain a declaration that 
an alleged adoption is inva-
lid, or never, in fact, took 
place. 
Three years. 
Three}!ean. 
S8 To obtain any other declara- Three years. 
tion. 
~n th~ issue or registra-
tion becomes known to the 
plaintiB. 
When tht alleled adoption 
becomes known to the 
plaintUJ. 
When tbe right to sue first 
accrues. 
PART IV.-SUITS RELAT 100 TO DBCREES AND lNSTRlJMl!<'I.'S 
I~ 59 Tocancelorset a5ideani nstru-, Three years. 
..} ment or decree or for the 
rescissi on of a contract. 
60 To set .. id~ a transfer of 
:ZO property made by the guar-
dian of a ward-
30 
(a) by the ward who has Three yearN. 
attained majority; 
(b) by the ward's legal 
representati ve--
(i) when the ward dies with- Three years. 
in three years from the 
date of attaining 
majority; 
(ii) when the ward dies be- Three years. 
fore anaining majority. 
When tbe flal eNitiing the 
pWnti1f ttl hAvt ,he instru-
ment or decree cancelled 
or set aside Qr tbe contract 
rescinded firsl become 
known to him. 
When the ward attains 
majority. 
When d~ ward attains 
majority. 
When the ward dies. 
PART V.-SUITS RELATItIG TO IMMOVABLE PRVPERT¥ 
61 By a mortgagor- I 
(2) to redeem or recover Thirty yeaf5. 
possession of immovable 
property mortgaged; 
(b) to recover possession of Twelve years. 
immovable property mort-
gaged and afterwards trans-
ferred by the mortgagee 
for a valuable considera-
tion. 
Ce) to recover surplus colJcc- Three years. 
tions received by the mor~-
gagee after the mortgaee 
has been satisfied. 
When tile right to redeem 
or to recover _ possession 
accrues. 
When the trlUllfeI becomes 
known tl> the plaintiff. 
When the lllOrtI'&ar re-enters 
OD the mortpged property. 

20 
Description ofsuit Period of limitation Time from which period 
be,ina to run 
6:1 To enforce payment of money Twelve years. 
secured by a mortgage or 
otherwise charged upon 
immovable property. 
63 By a mortgagee:-
(2) forforeclosure; Thirty yean. 
(b) for pos8ession of immo- Twelve yean. 
vable property mortgaged. 
'4 For possession of immovable Twelve yean. 
property based on previous 
possession and not on title, 
when the plaintiff while in 
poaseslion of the property 
has been dispossessed. 
6S For P088e11sion of immovable Twelve years. 
property or any interest 
therein based on title. 
ExPlaniJrim -For the pur. 
poses of thi5 anide-
(<I) where tl~e suit is by a 
remainderman, a reversioner 
(other 1han a landlord) 
or a deviAee, the possmion 
of the defend ant shalt I-e 
dee"llc:d to become advene 
only when the estate of 
the remainderman. re-
versioner or devisee. as the 
case may be, falls into 
possession ; 
(b) where the suit is by a 
Hindu or Muslim entitled 
to the possession of immo-
vsble property on the death 
of a Hindu or Muslim 
female, the po!Isession of 
the defendant shall be 
deemed to become ad-
verse only when the fe-
male dies ; 
(c) where the suit ia by a 
purchaser at a sale in exe-
cution of a decree when 
the judgement-debtor WII. 
out of potsession 'at the 
date of the sale, the pur-
chaser shall be deemed~ 
When the money IUed for 
becomea due. 
When the money aecured 
by the mort • .,e becomes 
due. 10 
When the mort..,ee 
become. entitled to 
posleslion. 
The date of dilpollession. 
When the poIleisiOIl of the 20 
defendant hecomel ad-
vcnc to the plaindtr. 
30 
35 
40 
4.5 
50 

S 
10 
----------- -...,.------ -----,---------------
Deacrlption of .uit 
to be a representative of 
the judrement-debtor who 
was out of possession. ! 
66 For poaaeaaion of immovable 
J:.roperty when the plaintiff 
8 become entitled to 
posaesaion by reason of 
any forfeiture or breach 
of condition. 
67 By a landlord to recover pos-
seSlion from a tenant. 
Period of 
limitation 
Twelve years. 
Twelve yean. 
Time from which period 
begins to "m 
When the forfeiture is in-
curred or th, condition 
is broken. 
When the tenancy i. dete'l-
mined. 
PART VI.-SuITS RJlLATING TO MOVABLE PROPERTY 
For specific movable propeny I Three yean. 
100t, or acquired by theft. 
or diahODC8t misappro-
priation or convenion. 
69 For other specific movable Three years. 
When the person having 
the right to the possenion 
of the propeny tint learns 
in whose possession it is. 
20 property. 
When the property is wrong-
fully taken. 
70 To recover movable property I Three yearR. 
deposited or pawned from I a depositary or pawnee. 
71 To recover movable property Three yeBI"!. 
deposited or pawned, and 
afterwards bouaht from the 
depositary or pawnee for 
a valuable consideration. 
The date of refusal after 
demand. 
When the RIle becomes 
known to the plaintiff. 
PART VII.-SUITS RELATING TO TORT 
30 72 For compensation for doing 
or for omitting to do an act 
allCled to be in pursuance 
of any enactment in force 
for the time belng in the 
territories to which thJa Act 
extends. 
One year 
35 
45 
73 For compensation for false One year. 
imprisonment. 
74 For compenaation for 
malicious prosecution. 
a One year 
" For compensation for libel. One year. 
76 For compensation for slander. 
77 For compensation for 10'. of 
service oc:cuioned by the 
.eduction of the plaintiff's 
servant or daupter. 
One year. 
One year. 
When the act or OmiS.iOD 
takes place. 
When the imprisonment 
ends. 
When the plainti1£ is ac-
quitted or the prosecution 
is otherwise tenninated. 
When the Jibel is published. 
When the words are spoken, 
or, if the words are not 
actionable in themselves, 
when the special dam. 
complained of result •. 
When the loss occun. 

DelUiptiOll of suit hDod 1){ limitation I Timt from which period bcp.u (l) l'iIII\ 
78 For compensation for in- One ytar. 
ducina a penon to t:.'cak 
a contract with the plailltitr. 
79 Fe cOlllpCllllb:m for an ille~a1, One ytar. 
irregular 01' ezoeaive dIS-
tress. 
80 For compensation for wrona-
ful seizure of movable pro-
perty UDder lepA prGCeas. 
81 By executors, administrators 
~r represcntlltiftl uader tIR 
Legal Representatives' 
Suits Act, I1ISS. 
b Sy CltCCllton, admiIlistrators 
or repreeelltllti~. under 
the Indian Fatal Acci-
dent, Act, 1*55. 
One year. 
One year. 
Ont ytar. 
83 Under the Legal Repreaen- Two ytars. 
.. ca' Suite Act, 18SS 
against an eDCUtOl', an ad-
ministrator or any other 
representative. 
8-4 Apinst ODe who, having a right Two yean. 
to use property for s~fic 
purpoaes, perverts It to 
other purposes. 
8S For compcnsation for obI- T1Irce y .. :' 
tructin, a way or a water-
coune. 
86 For compenntion for divcrt- Three years. 
ing a watercourse. 
87 For compensatioD for tres- Three yean. 
pas. upon immovable pro-
perty. 
88 For compensation ·fbr in- Three years. 
fringing copyright or any 
other exchllvc privileie. 
19 To reatrain WIIIl'e. Three years. 
90 For compenMtion for injury Three~. 
caused by an iJljuaction 
W'I'OngfuDy otntrinet1. 
91 Por compcDMtioD,-
(a) for WI'ClnIfuIJy taking Three yeatl. 
or detaiaina 1liiy specific 
movable property loIt, or 
acqui~ by thdtt, or dis-
honeat mis-appropriation 
or convenion ; 
The date 01 the "rell. 
The date flIf the •• me. 
The date of the death of the 
pe~ wron,ed. 
5 
10 
IS u. of J 
1lIc date of the death of the 
pcI'IICII1 tiMed. 
When the wrong complained 20 
13 of I 
af is done. I2 of I 
Wiaaa tbe pernnir.m fint 2S 
bec:ama known to the 
penon injured thereby. 
The date of the obstruction. . 
30 
'!be date of the diwnlon. 
The date of the. infrinae-
ment. 
When the waste bcaina. .. 
When the m;.ction ce ... 
When the person baving the 45 
right to the posses~jon of 
the property first learna 
in 'WhOle paIMIsiaa it iii 

Period of limitation Time' from which period 
begins to run 
Description of suit 
s 
(6) fo~ .wr!3ngfully taking Three years. 
or InJurmg or wrongfully 
detaining any other specific 
Inovable property. 
When the property is wrong-
fully taken or injured, Or 
when the detainer's pos_ 
session becomes unlawful. 
PART VIII.-SUITS RELATING 1'0 TRUSTS AND TRUST PJIOPERTY 
92 To recover possession of Twelve yeus. 
iInmovable property con-
10 ,eyed or bequesthed in trust 
and afterwards trllnlferred 
by the trustee for a valuable 
considerat ion. 
93 To rcc:over possession of Three years. 
15 Inovable property conveyed 
or bequeathed in trust and 
afterwards transferred by 
the trustee for a valuable 
consideration. 
20 94 To set aside I transfer of 
iInInovable property com-
prised in I Hindu, Mu-
30 
35 
~liIn or Buddhist re-
ligious or charitable en-
dowment, made by a ma-
nager thereof for a valuable 
consideration. 
95 To set aside a transfer of 
Inovable property COIn-
prised in I Hindu, Mu-
sliEn or Buddhist reli-
gious or charitable endow-
ment, rnade by I manager 
thereof for a valuable con-
sideration. 
96 By the manager of a Hindu, 
MusliIn or Buddhist 
religious or charitable en-
dowtnent to recover pos-
session of movable or iIn-
movable property compri-
sed in the endowtnent 
which haa been transferred 
by a previous manager for 
a valuablc collliderition. 
Twelve years. 
Three yean. 
Twelve yean. 
Wben tbe tranuer becomes 
knOWll to the plaintiff, 
When the transfer becomes 
known to the plaintiff. 
When the trlDlfer becomes 
known to the plaintiff. 
When the transfer becomes 
known to the plaintiff. 
The datc of deathr resigna-
tion or remova of the 
transferor or the dlte of 
IP.pointment of the plain-
tif[ as manager of the CD-
dowment whichever is 
later. 
PART IX.-Sun:s RELATING TO M1SCJ!l.1..umn:s MATTFRS 
97 To enforce a right of pre-I 
emption whether the right 
is founded on iaw for general 
usage or on special contract. 
One year. When the purchaser tues, 
under the sale sought 
to be impeached, physi-
cal possession of the 
whole or part of the pro-
perty Bold, or, where the 
lubject matter of the 
aile doe. DOt admit of 

DelCription of IUlt Period of limltation Time frclm which period 
begina to run 
phyaic:al posses8ion of 
the whole or plrt of the 
property, when the in- S 
struJDCDt of sale is reo-
littered. 
98 By a penon .,ainlt whom One year. 
an order under rule 63 
The date of the final order. 
or rule 103 of Order XiXI 
of the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure, 1908 or an order 
underaection 28 of the Pre-
sidency Small Cause Couru 
10 
S of 1908. 
Act, 1882, has been made, 
to establish the risht which IS IS of 188a. 
he claims to the property 
compriaedin the order. 
99 To let aside a sale by a civil One year. 
or revenue cOUrt or a sale 
for arrears of Government 
revenue or for any demand 
recoverable as such arrears. 
100 To alter or set aside any de- One year. 
cision or order of a civil 
court in any proceeding 
other than a ,ui t or any act 
or order of an officer of Go-
vernment in hi. official ca-
pacity. 
101 Upon a· judamCDt, including Three yean. 
a foreign judgment, or a 
102 
103 
recopisance . 
Por property which the plain-
tiff has conveyed while 
inaane. 
To make good out of the 
general eatllle of a deceased 
trUStee the lOll occasioned 
by a breach of troIt. 
Three yean. 
Three yean. 
104 To establish a periodically Three yean. 
recurring risht. 
lOS By a Hindu for arrears of main- Three years. 
tenance. 
106 Por a legacy or for a share of Twelve yelrs. 
a residue bequeathed by a 
teJtltor or for a distributive 
share of the property of an 
inteltate against an execu-
tor or an administrator Or 
some other person legally 
~ged with the duty of 
distributing the catate. 
When the sale is confirmed 
or would otherwise have 20 
become final and conclu-
.ive had no luch su.it 
been brought. 
The date of the final order. 
The date of judsment or 
recogniaance. 
When the plaintiffia restored 
25 
to sanity and has know- 3S 
ledge of the conveyance. 
The date of the trustee'. 
death or if the lOla haa not 
then resulted, the date 
of the lou. 40 
When the plaintit'( ia first 
refused the enjoyment of 
the right. 
When the arrears Ire payable. 
4S 
When the legacy or share 
become. payable or deli-
verable. 
so 

25 
Deacrlption of lui t Period oflimitltion 
107 Por possession of a hereditary Twelve years. 
office. 
5 
&,/lMIJtiOlJ.-A hereditary 
ollc:e is possessed when 
the properties thereof 
10 are usually received, or 
(if there are no properties) 
when the duties thereof 
are uluaUy performed. 
108 
IS 
20 
zs 
109 
30 no 
III 
35 
lIZ 
45 
Suit during~helifeofaHindu 
or M\Jalim female 
by a Hindu or Muslim 
who, if the female died 
at the date of institutinS 
the luit. would be entitled 
to the posseuion of land, 
to have an aIlen_tion of 
such land mlele by the 
fel'lAle declared to be void 
except for her life or until 
her re-marriage. 
By a Hindu govemed by 
Mitakahara law to set aside 
his father's alienation of 
ancestrll property. 
By a person excluded from a 
jont family property to 
enforce a right to share 
therein. 
By or on behalf of any local 
luthority for possession of 
any public street or road or 
any part thereof from which 
it hIS been dispossessed or 
of which it has discon-
tinued the possession. 
Any 8uit by or on behalf ofthe 
Centrll Government or 
any State Govemment, 
(exccpt a suit before the 
Supreme Court in the ex-
erc:iae of it, origi nal Juril-
diction). 
Twelve yeln. 
Twelve years. 
Twelve yean. 
Thirty yelrs. 
Thirty years. 
Time from which period 
begins to run 
When the defendant iuel 
possession of the office 
advenely to the plain-
tiff. 
The date of the alienation. 
When the alienee takes pos-
session of the property. 
When the exclusion becomes 
known to the plaintiff. 
The dlte of the dispolsellion 
or discontinulftcc. 
When the period oflimitltion 
would begin to run under 
this Act .,.inlt I like 
suit by • private persoDe 
PART X.--SUITS pOR WB1CH T .... IS NO PIBICRIBED PJmIOD 
113 Any 8uit for which no period Three yelrs. 
SO of limitation is provided 
elsewhere in this Schedule. 
When the right to sue 1CC1'Ue1. 

SECOND DIVISION..-APPEALS 
Description of appeal . Period ofiimitaticn Time from which period 
begins to run 
Il4 Appeal from an order of 
ac:quittal,-
(Q) under sub-section (I) Ninety daft. The date of the. order ap- 5 
pealed from. or sub-section (2) of 
section 41J of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1'898; 
I 
(6) under sub-section (3) of Thirty day •. 
section 417 of that Code. 
I The date of the grant of 10 S of 1898. 
I special leave. 
115 Under the same Cod~ to' any Thirty da,.. 
court from a senuencc or 
order not being an order of 
acquittal or under tile Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, 
to any COUrt from any 
decree or order. 
u6 From a decree or order of any Thirty days. 
High Court to the same 
CoUrt. 
The date of the sentence, 
decree or order. 
The date of the decree or 
15 
order. 20 
THIRD DIVISION-APPLICATIONS 
Description of application Period of limitation Time from which period 
begins to run 
PdT I.-APPLICATIONS IN SPIIQFIED CASES 
117 For leave to appear in, and Ten days. 
defend a suit under sum-
mary procedure. 
118 UDder the Arbitration Act, 
1940,-
(a) for the filing in court of Thirty days. 
an award; 
(6) for letting aside an award Thirty days. 
or letting an award remit-
ted for reconsideration. 
Under the Code of Civil 
When the summons is served. 
The date of service of 
the notice of the malt-
ing of the award; 
30 
The date of service of the 
notice of the filing of the 35 
award. 
S of 1908• 
10 of 1940. 
• . 1.19 
Procedure, 1908, to have 
the legal representative of 
Thirty days . The date of death of the 
plaintiff, appellant, de- S of 1908. 
a deceased plaintiff or ap_ 
pellant or of a deceaaed 
defendant or respondent, 
made a party. 
120 Under the same Code for an Thirty days. 
order to set aaide an abate-
ment. 
fendant or respondent aa 
the case may be. 40 
The date of abatement. 45 

5 of I9OB. 
S of 1908. 
S of 1898. 
"'-"';";;"'..;..." -....;....-.:..:..-~-~~~~...:..:.:...:~~~---=.:~-­
DescriPtion of application I 'Ptri«\0flirnitatidn' 
121 
5 
10 
To restore a luit or appeal or ThIrty days. 
application for re\'iew or ,. , , ' 
revision dismissed for de-
fault of appearance or for 
want of prosecution or for 
failure to pay costs of service 
of procea. or to furnish 
aecurity for costs. 
To set aside a decree passed Thirty days. 
IX paTU or to rehear an 
appeal decreed or heard I 
,~ par',. 
B~pl#llticm.-For the pur-
,pose of thbarticle. 
substituted service un-
der rule 20 of. Order 
V of the Code of Civil 
, ~rocedure, 1908 shall not 
be deemed to be due 
service. 
2S 123 For a review of jUdgment by Thirty daya. 
a court other than the Sup-
preme Court. 
134 To record an adjustment or Thirry days. 
satisfaction cf a decree. 
30 12S Forthe payment ofthe: amount Thirty days. 
of a decree by instalments. 
3S 
40 
4S 
ss 
126 
127 
128 
To set aside a saie in execu-
,tion of a decree, including 
any such application by a 
judgment-debtor. 
For possession by one dis-
possessed ofimmovable: pro-
perty and disputing the 
right of the decree-holder 
or purchaser at a sale: in 
execution of a decree. 
For possession after removing 
resistance or obstruction 
to delivery of possession of 
immovable property dec-
reed or sold in execution 
of a decree. 
Thirty days. 
Thirty days. 
ThirtY days. 
129 Forleave to appeal as a pauper. ThirtY days. 
I 
To a, ny court for the exerCiae \''thir'ty dayi. 
of its powers of revision 
under the Code' of Ci vu ' 
Procedure, 1908 or the 
CodeofCriminalPrl)Cedure, 
1898• 
Time (rom which pericd 
begins to run 
The date of dismi6Sl1. 
The' date of the decree 
or where the .• umqtona 
or notice was Dot tlUly 
served', when' the ap-
plicaDt had knowledge lif 
the del!fte.·' 
The dltt of the'decree or 
order. 
When the payment or 
adjustment is made. 
The date of the decree. 
The date of the.aJe. 
The date of the di.possession. 
The date of resistance 
obstruction. 
or 
The date of decree ap-
pealed from. 
The date of the decree or 
order or ICntence souaht 
to be revis~4. ' , 
.( .... I I 

131 
IJ~ 
13) 
13. 
I3S 
136 
Description ofapplicadon I ~edod oUimitauon' Time from which periocl 
be,i III to run 
To the mfh Court for a ccrti- ThirtY day •. 
date 0 dwell to appeal to 
the Supreme Court under 
ciauae (1) of article 133, 
article 133 or lub-clauae (c) 
of clause (1.) of article 13. i 
of the Constitution or UD-
der any other law for the 
time bcln,in force. 
To the Supreme Court for 
lpecialleave to appeal.-
(II) in a caae inyolvin, death ThirtJ da". 
"m<n<ol I 
(6) in a caae where leIWe to Sizty d.,.. 
ilipeal waa refused by the 
'ahCourt; 
(.) in any other ~e. Ninety daYI. 
Por delivery of poelellion by One yClr. 
a purchaser of immovable 
property at a Iale in ell:ccu-
lion of a decree. 
Por the enforcement of a Three yean. 
decree ,rantio,a mandatory 
injunction. 
Por the ell:ccution of any decree 
(other than a decree ,rlllt-
Twelvc yean. 
iO, a mandatoryi njuoction) 
or order of any civil court. 
i 
The date of the decree. order 
or lentencc. 
5 
10 
The I.e of the judlft1ent, 
final order or lentcncc. IS 
The date of the order of 
refuaal. 
The date of the judllDent 
or order. ~ 
When the .. Ie bocome. 
ablolute. 
The date of the decree or 25 
where a date is bed 
for performance. IUch 
date. 
Where the decree or order 
becomes enforceable or 30 
where the decree or 
any lubsequent order 
directa any payment of 
money or the delivery 
of any property to be 35 
made at a certain date 
or at recurrin, periods, 
when default in makin, 
tbe payment or delivery in 
respect of which ell:ccu- 40 
lion is sought. takes 
place: 
I Provided that an applica-
I don for the enforce-
ment or ell:e~tion of a 45 
decree ,rantln, a per-
petual injunction ,han 
not be lubject to an y 
period of limitation. 
PdT II.-oTJDa Al9LICo\TIO~ 
ADy other application for 
which .no period of limita-
tion ia ~rovided elsewhere 
in thil Di'Yilion. 
Three yean. When the daht to apply 
accrue •. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
This Bill seeks to implement the Third Report of the Law Com-
mission on the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, with one important 
mOcl.i1ication. While giving effect to the recommendations of the 
Commission as :respects the re-arrangement of the articles contained 
in the First Schedule in accordance with their subject-matter and 
the rationalisation of the periods of limitation as far as possible, it 
is felt that it would be more advantageous to adhere to the existing 
scheme which in almost all cases indicates the specific point of time 
from which the period of limitation begins to run. 
The notes on clauses explain in detail the provisions of the Bill 
NEW DELHI; A. K. SEN. 
The l~th December, 1960. 
• 

Notes on ClaU&eB 
Clause 2.-A new definition of "application" is being inserted so 
as to include a petition, original or otherwise. 'I1le object is to pro-
vide a period of limitation far original applications and petitions 
under special laws as there is no such provision now. Consequen-
tial changes have been made in the definition of "applicant". 
'I1le definitions of "plaintiff" and "defendant" as they stand in 
the present Act include a person from or through whom a plaintiff 
or defendant derives his right or liability to sue or to be used. 'I1le 
object of this inclusive definiticn is to make it clear that the cause 
of action for a person in whom the right to sue is vested and the 
person on whom the right has subsequently devolved is one and 
the same. The position holds good in the case of executors, adlllinis-
trators and representatives also, and the inclusive definition is 
enlarged so as to make this position also clear. 
The new definition of "prescribed period" will make it clear that 
the period of limitation specified in the Schedule will have to be 
computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act; that is to say, 
wherever they apply, the sections of the Act will have the effect 
of extending the periods of limitation specified in the Schedule. 
Clause 3.-Sub-clause (2) (b) provides that a claim by way of 
set-off or counter-claim shall be treated as a separate suit and that, 
in the case of a set-off, time should cease to run from the date of 
the suit in which it is pleaded as the set-off arises out of the same 
transaction and should relate back to the date of the suit; and that 
in the case of a counter-claim, time should cease to run from the 
date on which the claim is made as it is really in the nature of a 
separate suit. 
Sub-clause (2) (c) sets at rest the conflict of decisions as to when 
exactly time ceases to run in the case of an application by notice of 
motion. It is now provided that time ceases to run when notice of 
motion is made and not when the notice is taken up by the court-
s view more favourable to the applicant. 
Clause 5.-Instead of leaving it to the different States or High 
Couris to extend the application of section' 5 to applications other 

81 
than thOle enumerated in that section as now in force. this clause 
provides for the automatic application of this section to all appli-
cations, other than those arising under Order XXI of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, relating to execution of decrees. In the case 
of special or local laws. it will be open to such laws to provide that 
section 5 will not apply. 
Clause 6.-This reproduces section 6 of the existing Act with the 
following modifications:-
(a) In sub-clause (4). a clarificatory amendment is being 
made by the substitution of the words "at the date of the death 
of the person whom he represents" for the words "at the date 
of death affected by any such disability"; 
(b) sub-clause (5). which is new. removes the conflict on 
the question whether, when a person under disability dies aftel" 
the disability ceases but within the time allowed to him by law 
to institute a suit, his legal representative can take advantage af 
the extended period to the same extent as in the case where the 
disability of a person continues upto his death. 
Clause 7.-The word "discharge" in the existing section 7 has been 
liberally interpreted by the courts to include all kinds of discharge, 
and not merely discharge of money claims. The Explanation, is 
intended to make the position clear. It is also made clear that, in 
the case of the manager of a Hindu joint family governed by the 
Mitakshara law, his authority to give a valid discharge can be infer-
red only when he is both the de jure and de facto manager. 
Clause 12.-The existing section 12 is being amended,-
(i) to include applications for revision within its scope; 
(ii) to provide expressly that the time requisite for obtain-
ing a copy of the judgment in the case of an application for leave 
to appeal is also to be excluded; 
,(iii) to make it clear that any delay in the office of the court 
in drawing up a decree or order before the application for a 
copy thereof is made, shall not be excluded. 
Clause 13.-Clause 13 is section 14 of the existing Act with the 
following changes: - ' • In sub-clause (1) for the words "cause of action" the words 
Umatter in issue" are being substituted as the former expression 
tends to make the relief too narrow. 

In sub-clause (3), which is new, it is provided that if a luit 
or application is withdrawn under Order XXIII of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, on grounds similar to those specified in 
this clause, the time spent in prosecuting such proceedings shall 
be excluded. There is no justification for denying a litigant this 
right when the grounds of withdrawal are those contemplated 
by this clause and to this extent Order XXIII r. 2 requires to be 
superseded. 
Incidentally, prior proceedings in a court of revision ar~ also 
brought within the scope of this clause. 
Clau.se 14.-ln sub-clause (2) provision is made for excluding the 
time taken in obtaining the consent of the Central Government or 
any. other authority for instituting any proceedings (for example, 
under sectiens 86 and 87 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908). Such 
cases axe analogous to those which provide for statutory notices, the 
period of which is excluded by the existing section. 
Sub-clause (3) is new. It is common knowledge that by the time 
a receiver or liquidator is appointed in insolvency or liquidaticn pro-
ceedings and the receiver or liquidator after getting information about 
the assets and liabilities of the estate sits down to the task of realis-
ing the assets of the estate, claims in favour of such estate or company 
get barred to the detriment o~ the persons entitled to the benefits 
of the assets. To avoid this hardship this sub-clause provides that 
the period between the filing of the petition for winding up or 
adjudication and the appointment of the receiver (including interim 
receiver) or liqUidator (including a provisional liquidator) and a 
period of three menths thereafter (to enable him to acquaint himself 
with the affairs of the estate) should be excluded. 
Sub-clauses (4) and (5) reproduce sections 13 and 16 of the exist-
ing Act. 
Clause 15.-Section 17 of the existing Act is confined to rights of 
action accruing after death. In Meyappa v. Su.bramanya (20 C.W.N. 
~3), the Privy Council observed that when the cause of action arises 
in favour ef a decreased person after his death time will at once begin 
to run. Scme courts have applied section 17 to cases ~here the right 
accrues on death as in the case of partnerships. The clause, as now 
proposed to be amended, will make it applicable to rights of action 
accl'Wn.i on death or thereafter. 

31 
Clause 16.,-Section 18 of the existing Act has been re-cast on 
the lines of section 26 of the Limitation Act, 1939, of the United 
Kingdom so as to include actions based on fraud and also for relief 
founded on mistake. The clause also seeks to afford suitable pro-
tection to purchasers for valuable consideration in all such cases. 
Sub-clause (2) incorporates the principle contained in the pro-
viso to section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, which now 
finds a place in this Bill (see article 135). The benefit is, however, 
made available only if the application for extension is made within 
one year from the date of discovery of the fraud or cessation of force. 
Clause 17.-Under the Schedule as now proposed, the time 
limit of 12 years for execution applications would not be capable of 
extension and, therefore, Explanation (c) makes it clear that an 
application for the execution of a decree or order shall not be deem-
ed to be an application in respect of any property or right. 
Clause 18.-For the reasons stated against clause 17, the Explana-
tion is amended to provide that the expression "debt" shall not in-
clude money payable under a decree or order of a court. 
Clause 20.-The existing section 22 is being amended so that an 
omission to implead a person owing to a bonafide mistake does not 
deprive him of his rights against that person if the court is satisfied 
in that behalf. 
Clauses 24 to 26.-The Law Commission has proposed that sec-
tions 26 and 27 of the existing Act, which deal with the acquisition 
of rights of easement by prescription, should be repealed and the 
Indian Easements Act, 1882 (the provisions of sections 15 and 16 of 
which correspond to sections 26 and 27 of the existing Act), should 
be extended to the territories to which sections 26 end 27 now apply. 
The Indian Easements Act, 1882, extends only to a few States, but 
as the pith and substance of that Act relates to rights in or over 
land (an entry in the State List) it is not possible by a Parliamentary 
law to extend that Act to the remaining parts of India to which it 
does not now extend. Hence clauses 24 and 25 seek to continue 
the operation of sections 26 and 27 of the existing Act. As and when 
the Indian Easements Act, 1882, is made applicable to any State by 
State legislation, sections 26 and 27 will automotically cease to apply 
thereto by reason of the provisions contained in clause 28 (4) . Sec-
tions 24 to 26 can be formally repealed when .action is taken by all 
~he States to put the Indian Easements Act, 1882, into force. 
Clause 28.-Sub-clause (2) amends section 29 (2) of the existing 
Act to provide that the principles contained in clauses 4 to 23 apply 

It 
uniformly to all special or local laws, in the absence of any local 
laws excluding the application of any or all of those provisions 1D 
My given case. 
Sub-clause (3) amplifies section 29 (3) of the existing Act so 81 
to exclude the application of this law to suits under any law dealing 
with marriage or divorce. 
Clauses 29 and 30.-Suitable provisions are being made to cover 
cases where the period of limitation is being reduced, a longer period 
being allowed in the case of suits for redemption, etc., as the period 
is being reduced from Sixty years to thirty years in such cases. In 
cases where the period is increased but the cause of action has al-
ready become barred, clause 30 makes it clEUr that the rights will 
not be revived thereby. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
FIRsT DIvISION 
Part I.-Suits relating to accoun.t. 
Articles I, 2, 3, 4 and 5 reproduce existing articles 85, 88, 89, 90 
and 106 and deal with suits for accounts. 
Part II.-Suits relating to con.tracts 
Articles 6 to 55 relating to contracts, including implied contraeta 
and quasi contracts, correspond to existing articles 7 to 9, 30, 31, 43. 
50 to 84, 86, 87, 97, 99 to 102, 107 to 111, 113, 115 and 116. All these 
articles are now grouped together, the period being ftxed at 3 year. 
in all these cases. Wherever possible, articles which can be dealt 
with together have been combined. (Example: articles 7 and 102 
have been combined in the new article 7). Similarly, articles which 
may conveniently be omitted in favour of the residuary entry have 
been omitted. (Example, articles 80, 83, 84, 108 and 116 have all 
been omitted in favour of the new residuary entry 113). The dis-
tinction between contracts in writing registered and other contract. 
is being done away with 8S not bein~ nec-eSRary and the unIformity 
in the period prescribed for all suits founded on contracts (including 
those falling under the residuary entry 113) will remove the ever 
arising conflict under the present law as to which artiele al)'DUe&-
whether the residuary article providin~ for a longer period of limita-
tion or any other specif'e article providing for a shorter period. 
Part II1.-Declaratory suit. 
Articles 56 and 57 reproduce existinll articles In and 118,. and 
article 58 combines existinll arttcles 93, 119 and 12ft All these arti-
cles relate to suits for declaration in respect of different matten. 

36 
Part IV.- Suit, relating to decrees and instrumenta 
Article 59 combines. existing articles 91 and 114, and article 60 re-
produces existing article 44 but is amplified to cover cases where the 
ward dies before attaining majority or within three years after 
attaining majority. 
Part V.-Suits relating to immovable property 
Article 61 replaces existing articles 148, 134 (in so far as it relates 
to mortgages) and 105, with the modification that in respect of suits 
for redemption the period is being reduced from 60 years to 30 years 
(and not to 12 yeats as recommended by the Law Commission). 
Article 62 replaces existing article 132, at the same time making 
it clear that the article applies to mortgages also. 
Article 63 replaces existing articles 147, 135 and 146, the period 
of limitation in respect of suits for foreclosure being reduced from 
60 years to 30 years in conformity with the period now being pre-
BCl'ibed for suits for redemption. 
Articles 142 and 144 of the existing Act have given rise to a good 
deal of confusion with respect to suits for possession by owners of 
property. Article 64 as proposed replaces article 142, but is restricted 
to suits based on possessory title so that an owner of property does 
Dot lose his right to the property unless the defendant in possession is 
able to prove adverse possession. 
Article 65 is new and deals with suits based on title. This will 
cover existing articles 136, 137 and 138 which are all suits based on 
title-that is to say, suits based on the title of the predecessor-in-
interest of the purchaser, whether under an ordinary purchase or 
an execution sale. Existing article 47 may also be left to be covered 
. by the new article 65 as recommended by the Law Commission in 
paragraph 124 of its Report. In view of article 65, existing article 
144 is unnecessary. The provisions of existing articles 140 and 141 
are being incorporated as suitable explanations to the new article 
65. The last explanation to the new article 65 is intended to make 
itc1ear that a purchaser at a sale in execution of a decree shall be 
deemed to be a representative of the judgment-debtor who was out 
of po88ession at the date of the sale although it may be unnecessary 
in view of the definition of "plaintiff" which includes a person from 
or through whom the plaintiff derives his right to sue. 
Articles 66 and 67 reproduce existing articles 143 and 139. 
Part VI.-Suits relating to moveable property 
Articles 68, 69, 70 and 71 reproduce existing articles 48 (first 
part) I 49 (first part), 145 and 48A (second part) respectively. In the 

36 
new article 70, the date of refusal after demand is made the startina 
point of limitation and there would then be no need for a 30 years 
period as in the existing article 145. . 
Part VII.-Suits relating to tort 
Articles 72 to 91 which correspond to existing articles 2, 19 to 29 
and 32 to 42 deal with suits based on tort. Most of the existing 
articles are being retained and the existing periods of limitation are 
also not being changed except in a few cases. For example, the new 
article 72, which reproduces existing article 2 increases the period 
from 90 days to one year as being more reasonable. Articles 22 and 
36 have been omitted in favour of the residuary entry 173. 
Article 91 reproduces the latter part of articles 48 and 49. 
Part VIII.-Suits relating to trusts and trust property 
Articles 92 to 96 reproduce respectively existing articles 134 (first 
part), 48A (first part), 134A, 48B, 134B and 134C. 
In the new article 96, replacing existing articles 134B and 134C, 
an amendment is made whereby the date of appointment of a new 
manager is also made the starting point of limitation in suitable cases. 
Part IX.-Suits relating to miscellaneous matters 
This Part groups together .articles which cannot be included 
within any of the earlier parts. 
Article 97 reproduces existing article 10. 
Article 98 combines existing articles 11 and llA. 
Article 99 replaces existing article 12. 
Article 100 combines articles 13 and 14. 
Article 101 combines existing articles 117 and 122 but reduces the 
period to three years. 
Articles 102, 103, and 105 reproduce existing articles 94, 98, 
131 and 128. 
Article 106 reproduces existing article 123 with the modiftcation 
that it is intended to apply where the suit is brought against an exe-
cutor or administrator or some person legally charged with the duty 
of distributing the estate. 
Articles 107, 108, 109, 110, 111 and 112 reproduce respectively 
existing articles 124, 125, 126, 127, 146A and 149. 
In article 112 dealing with suit by or on behalf of the Government, 
(which correspcnds to existing article 149) the period is' reduced from 
60 years to 30 years, which will also bring the period in accord with 

that prescribed for local authorities under article 111 (which corres-
ponds to existing article 146A). 
Part X.-Suits for which there is no prescribed period 
Article 113 (which corresponds to existing article 120) is the resi-
duary article for cases not covered by the earlier Parts and the period 
is fixed at three years so that no special advantage would be gained 
by anyone seeking to prove that the residuary article applies. 
SECOND DIVISION-ApPEALS 
Article 114 replaces existing article 157 with the addition that 
appeals against orders of acquittal in cases instituted on private com-
plaints where special leave has been obtained should be filed within 
one month from the grant of leave. 
Article 115 combines existing articles 150, 152, 154, 155, 156 and 
provides a uniform period Gf 30 days for all appeals. 
Article 116 replaces existing article 151 and provides a period of 
30 days for all appeals to a Uigh Court against its own decrees or 
orders. 
THIRD DIVISION-APPLICATIONS 
Part I.-Applications in specified cases 
Article 117 reproduces existing article 159. 
Article 118 combines existing articles 178 and 158. 
Article 119 combines existing articles 176 and 177 but reduces the 
period to 30 days from 90 days and Article 120 reproduces existing 
article 171, but reduces the period to 30 days. The reduction of the 
period in the case of the new articles 119 and 120 will not work any 
hardship as the court will have the power to excuse delay under the 
altered provisions of clause 5 of the Bill. 
Article 121, in replacement of existing articles 160, 163, 168 and 
172, provides a uniform period of 30 days for setting aside orders of 
dismissal for defaults, like failure to appear etc . 
. Article 122 combines existing articles 164 and 169. The Explana-
tion seeks to override the case-law that the expression "duly served" 
in column 3 includes substituted service. 
Article 123 groups together existing articles 161, 162 and 173 and 
provides a uniform period of 30 days for all cases of review. 
Articles 124 and 125 replace existing articles 174 and 175 . 
. Articles 126, 127 and ·128 reproduce existing articles 166, 165 and 
167. 

38 
Article 129 reproduces existing article 170 .. 
Article 130 is new. 
Articles 131 and 132 replace existing articles 153 and 179 by more 
comprehensive provisions for applications to the High Court for cer-
tificate of fitness to appeal to the Supreme Court or for special leave 
to appeal to the Supreme Court in all civil and criminal matters. 
Article 133. As existing article 182 is being omitted, article 180. 
which the proposed article 133 seeks to replace, will apply to all 
purchasers in execution, whether decree holders or not. The period. 
however, is being reduced to one year from three years. 
Article 134 is new and deals with decrees granting mandatory 
inj unctions. 
Article 135. Existing article 182 has been a fruitful source of 
litigation and therefore the proposed article 135, in lieu 
thereof, provides that the maximum period of limitation for the 
execution of a decree or order of any civil court shan be 12 years 
from the date when the decree or order became enforceable (which 
is usually the date of the decree or order) or, where the decree or 
subsequent order directs any payment of money or the delivery of 
any property to be made at a certain date or at recurring periods, 
from the date of the default in making the payment or delivery in 
respect of which the applicant seeks to execute the decree or order. 
There is no reason why a decree should be kept alive for more than 
12 years. Section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, provides 
that a decree ceases to be enforceable after 12 years. In England 
also the time fixed for enforcing a judgment is 12 years. Where. 
however, the judgment-debtor has by fraud or force prevented the 
execution of a decree within the prescribed period. suitable provi-
sions for extending the period are being made in clause 16 of the Bill 
on the lines of section 48(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
Existing article 183, which makes special provision for decrees and 
orders of courts established by Royal Charter, is no longer necessary. 
It is also provided that the period of 12 years will not apply to 
decrees granting perpetual injunctions. 
Part lI.~ther applications 
Article 136. As in the case of suits, article 136, which corresponds 
to existing article 181, is the residuary article for all applications, 
including petitions. 
Existing articles 1,3,5, 6, 15, 16, 17, 18, 45,46, 103, 104, 112, 121 pd 
130 have been omitted as recommended by the Law CommiuiOQ. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FkOM THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882 (No. 5 OF 1882) 
* • • • 
15. Where the access and use of light or air to and for any building Acquisiticm 
have been peaceably enjoyed. therewith, as an easement, without ~y prescrip-
. t . d f tlODo m erruptlon, an or twenty years, 
and where support from one person's land or things affixed there-
to has been peaceably received by another persons' land subjected 
to artificial pressure or by things affixed thereto, as an easement, 
without interruption, and for twenty years, 
and where a right of way or any other easement has been peace-
ably and openly enjoyed by any person claiming title thereto, as an 
easement, and as of right, without interruption, and for twenty 
years, the right to such access and use of light or air, support or 
other easement shall be absolute. 
Each of the said periods of twenty years shall be taken to be a 
period ending within two years next before the institution of the 
suit wherein the claim to which such period relates is contested. 
Explanation I.-Nothing is an enjoyment within the meaning of 
this section when it has been had in pursuance of an agreement with 
the owner or occupier of the property over which the right is claim:.. 
ed, and it is apparent from the agreement iliat such right has not 
been granted as an easement, or, if granted as an easement, that it 
has been granted for a limited period, or s~.bject to a condition on 
/'the fulfilment of which it is to cease. 
Explanation H.-Nothing is an interruption within the meaning 
of this section unless where there is an actual cessation of the en-
joyment by reason of an obstruction by the act of some person 
other than the claimant, and unless such obstruction is submitted to 
or acquiesced in for one year after the claimant has notice thereof 
and of the person making or authorising the same to be made. 
Explanation ilL-Suspension of enjoyment in pursuance of a 
contract between the dominant and servient owners is not an inter-
ruption within the meaning of this section. 
Explanation IV.-In the case of an easement to pollute water, the 
said period of twenty years begins when the pollUtion first preju-
dices perceptibly the servient heritage . 
• 

40 
When the property over which a right is claimed under this sec-
tion belongi to the Government, this section shall be read as if, for 
the words "twenty years" the words "sixty years" were substituted. 
• • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 (No. 5 OF 1908) 
• • • • 
Bxecution 48. (1) Where an application to execute a decree not being a 
barred in decree granting an injunction has been made, no order for the exe-
certain cases. cutton of the same decree shall be made upon any fresh application 
presented after the expiration of twelve years from-
(a) the date of the decree sought to be executed, or, 
(b) where the decree or any subsequent order directs any 
payment of money or the delivery of any property to be made 
at a certain date or at recurring periods, the date of the default 
in making the payment or delivery in respect of which the 
applicant seeks to execute the decree. . 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed-
(a) to preclude the Court from ordering the execution of a 
decree upon an application presented after the expiration of the 
said term of twelve years, where the judgment-debtor has, by 
fraud or force, prevented the execution of the decree at some 
time within twelve years immediately before the date of the 
application; or 
(b) to limit or otherwise affect the operation of article 183 
of the First Schedule to the Indian Limitation Act, lOO8, 
• • • • 
IPND-LS I-51 MofLaw-19-u-60-loo 

· . t.Ole. s.ABHA 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law for the limitation of suits and 
other proceediqs and tor purposes connected therewith . 
"~" 
.(Shri Aloi. K. Slit, 
Minuur of LarD.) 