As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
" 
-4 
,j 
Bill No. 95 of 1170 
TIlE DELHl MILK SUPPLY CORPORATION BILL, 1970 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
DELHI MILK SUPPLY CORPORATION 
3. Establishment of Delhi Mil~ Supply Corporation. 
4. Head office, offices and agencies. 
5. Capital of Corporation. 
6. Power of Corporation to borrow money. 
7. Vesting of properties in Corporation. 
8. Substitution of Corporation in Suits or proceedings. 
CHAPTER III 
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CORPORA'IlON 
9. Business of Corporation. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT 
10. Management of affairs and business of Corporation. 
11. Board of Directors. 
12. Members of Board to receive remuneration, etc. 
13. Term of office, etc., of Bl)ard of Directors. 
14. Removal and resignation of Directors. 
15. Executive Committee. 
16. Members <Jf Board not to vote in certain cases. 
17. Meetings. 
18. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board or 
Committees. 

CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
CLAUSES ., 
19. Funds of Corporation. 
20. Closure of accounts. 
2l. Appointment of auditor. 
22. Surplus profits. 
CHAPTER VI 
TRANSFER OF EMPLOYEES TO mE CORPORATION 
23. Special provisions for transfer of employees to Corporation. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
24. Reference to Delhi Milk ~heme. 
2S.' Declaration of fidelity and secrecy. 
26. Indemnity. 
27. Protection <tfaction taken in good faith. 
28. Offences. 
29. Provision relating to in~9me-tax, etc. 
30. Winding up of Corporation. 
3l. Power to make rules. 
32. Power to make regulations. 
33. Annual report. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

!!p.No, 'AJ!f,,!.!'!O 
11m DELHI MILK SUPPLY CO~ORATION BILL, 1910 
BILL 
to provide jew the establishment CYf a eorpcwa.ti07i:. tor the purpowe' ttf 
acquiring, distributiTlB and selling miJlk and milk products in the 
Un.tort territory 01 Delhi and other C11"tas and' few mtitte-;, COTinetted 
tf\ere'With (h mcide9ttdlfhe'teto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty·first Year of the RepubUe 
of fn'tiia tIS fonows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINABY 
, 1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Milk Supply CtWpi'll'atfOft Ad, Short 
1970. title, ex-
ientand 
(2) It extends to the Union terr:tory of Delhi and to the territories of com-
the State3 of Gufarat, Haryana, Rajal!ltita!! al'ld Utta¥ Pr~h and sUch mence_ 
6th~ territories as the Central Govetrtment ~. bY' ~tmc&tiorr in· tI'ie ment. 
10 Metal Oa'Zefte, specify ift this betlalf: aIftd' cDlfei-ait ~b!i!t ~ M 
made' ift r~t of different territories: 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the C'entral C;"ovemment 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2: In this Act, unless the context otllerwise requires,- DeftDi-
(or ''€ei'pGi!8tiOl1'' meaM the: 
established under section 3; 
Delhi MtUI &apply COI'99r~ tionl. 

Establish-
mentol 
Delhi Milk 
Supply 
Corpora-
offices and 
tion. 
Head 
office, 
alencies. 
...-.-.--. 
Capital of' 
Corpora-
tion. 
z 
(b) "Delhi Milk Scheme" means the scheme made by the ad hoc 
Milk Board constituted by the Resolution of the Government of India 
in the Ministry of Food· and Agriculture, No. 27-74156-L.S., dated the 
17th August, 1956 (published at page. 283, Part I, Section 1 of the 
Gazette of India of tl:le 25th August, 1956) for ensuring an adequate S 
supply of milk and milk products of good quality at a reasonable 
price.; 
(c) "milk" and "milk products" have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in or under the Prevention of Food Adulteration 37 of 1954. 
Act, 1954; 10 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(e) "scheduled ban~" means a bank for the time being included 
in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(1) "year" means the financial year. 
CHAPTER II 
DELm MILK SUPPLY CORPORATION 
IS 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette specify in this behalf, there shall be 
established, for the purposes of this Act, a Corporation to be known as the 20 
Delhi Milk Supply Corporation. 
(2) The Corporation aforesaid shall be a body corporate, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the pro-
visions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to con-
tract, and may by its name sue. and be sued. 25 
4. (1) The head office <1f the Corporation shall be at New Delhi or at 
such other place as the Central Government may, by notificat~on in the 
Official Gazette, specify. 
(2) The Corporation may establish offices or agencies at other places 
in or outside the Union territory of Delhi. 30 
5. (1) The original capital of the Corporation shall be such sum, 
~ exceeding seven crores of rupees, as the Central Government may 
determine and. such capital shall stand allotted to, and vested in, the 
Central Government. 
(2) AU non-recurring expenditure incurred by the Central Govern- 35 
ment for, or in connection with, the Delhi Milk Scheme up to the date 
of establishment of the Corporation, and declared to be the capital ex-
penditure by that Government, shall be treated as a part of .. the paid-up 
capital provided by the Central Government to the Corporation. 
(3) The Central Government may provide, by way of loan, any 40 
further capital that may be required by the Cor:poration for the carry-
ing OD of the business of the Corporation or for any purpose connected 
therewith OIl lueh terms and conditious as the Ceatr81 G01'ernment 
may determine. 
2 of 1934. 

8 
8. (1) The Corporation may, for. the purpose of carrying· out ita 
functions under thlS Act, take advances agamst stocks of milK or milk 
products held by it or borrow money from-
(a) any sch(;duled bank; or 
5 (0) any other bank OJ.' banking institution approved. by the Cen· 
tral liovernment in tillS behalf. 
(2) The Central Government may guarantee the advances taken or 
mouies borrowed by the Corpora'tion under sub-section (1) as tu the 
repayment of prinC:lpal and the payment of interest thereon and other 
10 incidental c:harges. 
Power of 
COlIPOra-
tion to 
borrow 
money. 
7. (1) All asse~s owned 01' acquired. by the Central Government for Vestinlof 
the purposes of the Delhi Mdk. Scheme before the establishment of the proper-
Corporation shall, on such establishment, vest in the Corporation. ties in 
Corpora-
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), assets acquired by the Cen- tion. 
J5 tral Gove~nt for the purposes of the Delhi Milk Scheme ihali be 
deemed to include rights, powers, authorities and privileges aDd aU pro-
perty, movable and immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, investments 
and all other rights and interests arising out of such property as were 
immediately before the establishment of the Corporation in the owner-
20 ship, possession, power or control of the Central Government for the 
purpose of the Delhi Milk Scheme, and all books of account, registers, 
rec:ords and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto and 
shall also be deemed to include all borrowings, liabilities and obligations 
of whatever kind then subsisting of the Central Government in relation 
2S to the Delhi Milk Sc:heme. . 
(3) If any question arises as to whether any assets were owned, 
possessed, held or controlled by the Central Government for the purposes 
of the Delhi Milk Scheme, or whether any right, obligation or liability 
was acquired or incurred by the Central Government for the purposes of 
30 the Delhi Milk Scheme, the same shall be decided by the Central Gov-
ernment. 
8. If, on the date of establishment of the Corporation, any suit, appeal 
or other proceeding of whatever nature, is pending by or against the 
Central Government for, or in connection with, the Delhi Milk Scheme, 
3S the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially 
affected by reason of the transfer of the assets oi the Delhi Milk Scheme 
to the Corporation and the Corporation shall, in every such suit, appeal or 
proce.eding, become substituted in place of the Central Government and 
after such substitution the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be con-
40 tinued, prosecuted or enforced by or against the Corporation. 
CHAPTER III 
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CORPORATION 
Substitu-
tion of· 
CorpOra-
tion in 
suits Or 
proceed-
ings. 
9. (1) Subject to the rules, if any. made by the Central Government Business 
in this behalf, it shall be the primary duty of the Corporation to carry on of Corpo-
4S all or any of the following business, namely, acquisition, supply or sale ration, 
of milk and milk products and storage, movement, transport or distri-
bution of milk or milk products. 

Manall-
menta! 
aftaira and 
business 
of Cor-
poration. 
Board of 
Directors. 
4 
, (J), In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregamg powers, the Corporation shall have power t~ 
(4) ensure an adequate supply of good milk and milk products 
at a reasonable price; 
(b) promote and encourage, by such means as it may think fit, S 
the pr.oci1.lCtion or supply, or both, of milk and milk preduet&; 
(c) ensure, by such means as it may think fit, that the milk or 
.,milk products sold or supplied by it conforms to the standards of 
~ty laid down by or under any law for the. time being in. force; 
(d) fix the prices at which milk or milk products :may be 10 
purchased or sold by it and its branches or agencies; 
(e) fix commissions, salaries' or other remuneration payable to 
the persons employed by it; 
I 
(f) acquire milk or milk products from such sources as it may 
.tJrlnk It; 1, 
(9) enter into and perfonn, all such contracts as are calculated 
'to further the efficient performance of its obligations under tfiis Act; 
(h.) set up, or assist in the setting up of, any industry for pro-
cessing milk or for the manufacture of any milk product; 
(ij perfOJ:m any functiollJ as agent or contractor in relatiOD .0 ao 
any milk or milk prodlact sold or distributed by any other pet:son~ 
(j) provide fot the transport, storage and preservation of milk 
aoquired by it from the different collecting centres; 
(k) sanction, without prior reference to the Central Goverh-
ment, capital expenditure of a sum not exceeding fffteen lakhs of zS 
Npees; 
(1) discharge such other funetions as may be preBCribed at' as 
aTe supp~ental, incidental or consequential to any of the functions 
co~ed on it by or under this' Act. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT 
10. (1) The general superintendence, ~ection and management of 
the aftaiq. and buliness. of the Corporation shall vest in a Board of Diree-
tors., which may exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things 
30 
as may be exercised or done by the Corporation under this Act 3S 
(2) In discharging its functions, the Board of Directors shall aet on 
business principles having regard to the interests of the producer and 
eomumer and sbal be guided by such instructions on questions of policy 
as may be given to it by the Central Government, 
11. (l) The Board of Directors of the Corporation (hereinafter refer- 40 
red to as the "Board") shall consist of the following, namely:-
(4) a Chairman; 
(b) twa members to represent the Ministry of the Central Gov-
ernment dealing with Agriculture; 
(c) two members to represent respectively the Ministries of the 4S 
Centr.al Government dealing' with-
(i) co-operation, and 

10 
5 
(ii) finance; 
(d) four members to represent respectively the Delhi Adminis-
tration, the Government <1f the State of Haryana, the Government of 
the. State of Rajasthan and the Government of the State of Uttar 
Pradesh; 
(e) Chairman, National Dairy Development Board; 
(f) Annual Husbandry Commissioner to the Government of 
'India in the Department of Agriculture; 
(g) J<rlnt Commissioner (Dairy Development) to the Govern-
ment of India in the Department of Agriculture; 
(h) one Managing Director. 
(2) All the members of the Board shall ba appointed by the Central 
Goverrunent. 
(3) The Managing Director shall-
IS .(a) exercise such powers and perform such duties as the Board 
may entrust or delegate to him; and 
(b) receive such salary and allowances and be governed by 
8utth terms and -conditions as the Board may, witlithe approfll1 of 
the Central Government, determine: 
20 Provided that the f\rst Managing Director shall receive such salary 
and allowances as the Central Government may fix . 
• 12. The members of the Board, other than the Managing Director, shall J4emberI 
be entitled to receive, by way of remuneration or fees, such sums as may ~ ~ve 
be prescribed: remune-
2S Provided that no official member shall be entitled to receive any ration, 
remuneration other than any allowanc~ admissible to him under the rules etc. 
regulating his conditions of service. 
13. The term of office of, and the manner of filling casual vacancies Term of 
among, the members of the Board shall be such as may be pres('rfbed. oftlce.~ .• 
ot Board 
oIDinc:-
tora. 
30 16. (1) The Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it is 
expedient in the interests of the Corporation so to do, after consu~tation 
with the Corporation, remove the Managing Director from of!\ceafter 
giving him a reasonable opportunity of shwing cause against the 
proposed removal. 
3S (Z) A member of the 'Board may resign hiB office by giving .notice 
thereof in writing to the Central Government and on auch resignatien 
1;>eing accepted, he shall be deemed to have vacated his office. 
'15. (1) The Board may constitute an ExecutiveCommlttee.y.rhich 
shall consist of -
(a) the Chairman of the Board, who shall be the Chairman of the 
Executive Committee; 
(b) the M~naging Director; and 
(c) three other members of the Board. 
Removal 
and resig_ 
nationot 
Director .. 
Executive 
Commit-
tee. 

Members 
of Board 
not to 
vote in 
certain 
cases. 
Meetings. 
Vacancies, 
etc., not 
toinvali-
datepro-
ceedings 
of Board 
oream-
mitteee. 
Fundeof 
Corpora-
tion. 
Closure of 
accounts. 
Appoint-
mentol 
auditor. 
6 
(2) Subject to the general control, direction and superintendence of 
the Board, the Executive Committee shall be competent to deal with any 
matter Within the competence of the Corporation. 
16. A member of the Board, who has any direct or Indirect pecuniary 
interest in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the S 
Board, shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come 
to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and 
the disclosure shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting of the 
Board and the member shall not take any part in any deliberation or 
decision of the Board or committee with respect to that matter. 10 
17. (1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard tQ' the transaction of business 
at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided 
by regulations made by the Corporation under this Act. 
(2) The Chairman of the Board or, if for any reason he is' unable to IS 
attend any meeting, any o1:her director elected by the directors present 
at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting. 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board 
shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members thereof 
present and voting, and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chair- 20 
man, or in his absence the perwn presiding, shall have and exercise a 
second or casting vote. 
18. No act or proceeding of the Board or any committee thereof shall 
be invalid merely by reason, of the existence of any vacancy in, <Yr any 
defect in the constitution of, the Board or such committee. 2S 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
19. (1) The CorporatiC'n shall have its own funds and all receip~ of 
the COrp<Yration shall be credited thereto and all payments of the Cor-
poration shall be made therefrom. 30 
(2) Such funds shall be applied for meeting all administrative ex-
penses of the Corporation and for carrying out the purposes of thls Ad. 
20. The CorporatiQ'n shall cause its books to be closed and balancE'd 
on the 31st day of March of each year. 
%1. (1) After the closure of accounts each year, the Corporation shall 35 
appoint, with the previouS approval of the Central G<Yvernment, an audi-
tor for the audit of the said accounts. 
(2) The auditor appointed by the Corporation shall be a person who 
is qualified to act as an auditor of a company under section 226 of the 
Companies Act, 1956, and shall receive such remuneratIon as the Corpora- 40 1 of 1966. 
tion may, in consultation with the Central Government, fix. 
(3) The auditnr shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance-
sheet and the profit and loss account of the Corporation and a list of all 
books kept by the Corporation, and it shall be the duty of the auditor to 

10£1958. 
S 
. --. _ .... ~.I : ...... 
eixamine the balance-sheet and the profit and loss account with th' 
aCOOUilts' and vouchers relating thereto, aDd in the performance of his 
duties, the auditor- ' 
(a) shall have, at all reasonable times, access to the books, 
,accounts and other documents 01 the Corpora~ion; 
.~b) may, at the expense of the Corporation, employ accountants 
or other 'persons to assist him in illvestIgating such account; and. ' 
(c) may, in relation to such accounts, examine the Managing 
Director or any officer o't employee of the Corporation. 
(4) The auditor of the Corporation shall make a report to the Cor-
10 pora,tiop,. ~pon the annual balance-sheet and the profit and loss acc.QIfts 
anCji~n el/~ry ,such report shall state- , 
IS 
2S 
. \. . 
(a) whether or ,not, in his opAl'1iQn, Ule b~lance-lih~eti.s ~ full al:lq 
fair oalance-sheet containing all the necesliary particulars and is pro-
, ,pedy cUawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of t~e affairs of 
Tolle Co'rporation, aDq. in case he had called ~9r aJlY explanaijAD or 
imfqrmation, whether it has been glVen and whether it ~ qti,Bfa(ltory; 
(b) whether or not the transactions of the Corporation, which 
have come to his notice, have been wu.nm the powers of the Corpora-
tion;' ' 
(c) whether or not the returns received from the offices and 
agencies of the Corporation have been found adequate fur tnepufpose 
of his audit; . , ; 
(d) whether or not the profit and loss account shows a' true .. balance of profit and loss for the period covered by such account; and 
(e) any other matter which he conslders should be brought io 
, .the. nauceof the Corporation. 
, ~ I. i ., {, . . l' . . . ' 
(5) The report of the auditor ~hall be verified, signed and tr~twd 
to the Cor~ration in 'such manner as may be presci;ibef,i.'· " " ' 
22. After malting provision for Dad ana doubtful debts, ,depredation 
in assets, contributions to staff and superannuation funds and all other 
30 ~attei'$ 1o~ which provision is ilecessary under any law,' or which' are 
" llS~~t 'provided ,for 'by cOmpanies under the Companies Act, '1~6, ~ 
C0rP0tat'ion 'shall tTan~erthe bahmce <:If. its profits to a reserve fund to 
be established by the Cor,P'Oration. ' 
35 CHAPTER VI 
TRANs~ OF EMPLOYEES '1'0 THE CORPORATION 
23. (1) On the establishment of the Corporation, it shall be law1ul fbr 
the Central Government to transfer, by order and with effect from such 
date or dates as may be specified in the order, to the Corporation any 
40 person employed by that Government for the purposes of the Delhi J4ilk 
Scheme: 
Provided that no order under this sub-section shall be made in relation 
to any person employed by the Central Government for the purposes of 
the Delhi Milk Scheme, who has, in respect of the proposal' of the Cen-
4S ,tral Government to transfer him ,to the Corporation, intimated, within 
such time as ,m,ay be specified in this behalf by that G<1venunent, his 
intention of not becoming an empluyee of the COfP9ration. 
Special 
porvisions 
for trans-
fer of 
employees 
to Corpo-
ration. 

\. P .'.. t,~ 
,(2) ,An officer or ether employee transferred by an order made undet 
sub-section (1) shall, on and from .the date of transfer, cease to be an 
employee of the Central Government and become an officer or other 
employee of the Corporation with such designation as the Corporation 
may determine anti shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3), S 
(4) and (5), be governed bi the regulations made by the Corporation 
under tq.is Act as respects remuneration and other conditions of service 
including penSion, leave and provident fund, and shall continue to be an 
officer or other employee of the Corporation unless and until his employ-
ment is duly terminated by the Corporation. 10 
(3) Every officer or other employee transferred by an order made 
under sub-section (1) shall, within six months from the date of transfer, 
exercise his option in writing to be governed,-
(a) by. the scale of pay applicable to the post held by him und~r 
. the Central Government immediately before the date of transfer or IS 
, '.' by the scale of pay applicable to the post under the Corporation 
to which he is transferred, 
(lJ) by the leave, provident fund, retirement or other terminal 
benefits admissible to officers or other employees of the ' Central 
Government in accordance with the rules and Ql'ders of the Central 20 
Government as. amended from time to time or the leave, provident 
fund or other terminal benefits admissible to the ofticers or other 
empl9yees of the Corporation under the regulations made by the 
Corporation under this Act, 
and s~ch option, once exercised, shall be final: 
Provided that the option exercised by an officer or other employee 
under clause (a) shall be applicable only in respect Q'f the post to which 
such officer or employee is transferred to the Corporation and in the event 
of his appointment to a higher post under the Corporation, he shall be 
25 
.eligible only for the scale of pay applicable to such higher post: 30 
Provided further that if immediately before the date of his transfer 
:.,any such officer or other employee is officiating in a higher post under the 
Central Government either in a leave vacancy or in any other vacancy. 
of a specified duration, his pay, on transfer, shall be protected for the 
unexpired period of such vacancy and thereafter he shall be entitled to 3S 
draw, at his "ption, pay in the scale of pay applicable to the post under 
the Central Government to which he would have reverted or to the scale 
of pay applicsble to the post under the Corporation to which he is trans· 
ferred: 
Provided also that when an officer or other employee serving in the 40 
Department of the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with the 
Delhi Milk Scheme is promoted to officiate in a higher post in that De-
partment subsequent to the transfer to the Corporation of any other officer 
. or employee senior to him in that Department before such transfer, the 
officer or other employee who is promoted to officiate in such higher 45 
post shall, on transfer to the Corporation, be entitled only to the scale of 
. pay applicable to the post he would have held but for such promotion . 
·.ot the scale of pay applicable to the post under the Corporation to which 
he is transferred, whichever he may opt. 

,.... ...• - 9 
(4) No officer or other employee transferred by an order made under 
sub-section (1),-
(a.) shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to· 
that competent to make a similar or equivalent appointment under 
S the CorpO'l'ation as may be specified in the regulations made by the 
Corporation under this Act; 
(b) shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except 
after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charge against 
him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of 
10 those charges and where it is proposed, after such inquiry, to impose 
on him any such penalty, until he has been given a reasonable oppor-
tunity of making a representation on the penalty proposed, but only 
on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inquiry: 
Provided that this clause .shall not apply,-
IS (i) where an officer or other employee is dismissed or re-
moved or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which haa 
led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or 
(ii) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove 
an officer or other employee or to reduce him in rank is satisfied 
20 that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, 
it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or 
l (iii) to an officer or other employee who, after transfer to 
the Corporation, is appointed to a higher post under the Corpora-
tion in response to an open advertisement and in competition 
25 with outsiders. 
(5) If, in respect of any such officer or other employee as aforesaid,: 
a question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry 
as is referred to in sub-section (4), the decision thereon of the authority 
empowered to dismiss or remove him or to reduce him in rank shall be 
30 final. 
(6) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to the members 
of the Central Secretariat Service or any other Service or to persons 'on 
deputation to the Department referred to in that sub-section or tQany of 
its attached or subordinate offices from any Ministry of the Central Gov-
35 ernment or from any State Government or from any organisation. 
CHAPTER' VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
24. Any reference to the Delhi Milk Scheme in any law, other than 
this Act, or in any contract or other instrument, shall be construed, on 
40 the establishment of the Corporation, as a reference to the Corporation. 
, 25. EveI:y Chairman, member of the Board, member of the Executive 
Committee, auditor, officer or other employee of the Corporation shan, 
before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of ftdelity and seCrecy 
in the form set out in the Schedule. 
,1'1 
Reference 
to Delhi 
Milk 
Scheme. 
Declara-
tion ot 
fideUty 
and 
.ecrecy. 
45 26. (1) Every member of the Board shall be indemnifted by the Cor-
poration against all losses and expenses incurred by him in, or in relafion 
to, the discharge of his duties except such as have been caused by hill 
own· Wilful act or default. 
Indem-
nity. 

Protec-
tion of 
.ction 
taken in 
,ood 
faiU.. 
Offence •• 
Provision 
relating to 
income-
tax, etc. 
Winding 
up of 
Corpora-
tion. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
10 
(Z) A member of the Board shall not be responsible for any aetion 
taken or anything done by any other member of the Boartl or by any 
ofBcer or Qiher employee of the Corporation or for any loss or, expense 
resulting to the Corporation from the insufficiency or· deficiency' of the 
value of, or title to, any property or security acquired or taken on 'behalf s-
of the Corporation in good faith, or bv the insolvency or wrongful' act 
of any person under obligation to the Corporation or by ~nything done in 
good faith, in the execution of the duties of his office or in relation there-
to. 
27. No suit or other legal proceeding shal1lie against the Corporation 10 
or any member of the Board thereof or any member of the Executive 
Committee, or any officer or other I!ffiployee of the Corporation at any 
other person authorised by the Corporation to discharge any functions, 
under this Act, for any loss or damar.e caused or likely to be caused by 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under or in 15 
p111'suance of this Act. 
'I' , 
28. (1) Whoever, witho1slt the consent in writing of the Corporation, 
uses its name in any prospectus or advertisement, shall be punishable 
W'lth imprisonment for a term which fuay extend to six morlths, OT with 
tine' w'hich may extend to one 'thousand rupees, or with both. 20 
(2) No coutt shall take cognizance of any offence ~nder s:ub-section 
(1) except on a complaint in writing by an officer authorised in this be-
hatf bY the Corporation. 
., i" 
D. For the purposes of the Income-t~ Act, 1961, or any other enact-
ment for the time being in force relating to income::tax, super-tax or any 25 
other tax on income, profits or gains, the Corporation shall be deemed 
to be an Indian company and a company in which public are substantililly 
interested and shall be liable to tax accordingly on its income' profits and 
gains. " 
30. No provision of law '!"~lating to the winding up of companies w 30 
corporations shall apply to the Corporation and it shall not be placed in 
liqnidatioh save by order of the Central Government and in such manner 
as that Government may direct. ' 
31. 0), The Central Government may, by notiflcaticm in the 'Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 3S 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice, to the generality of the fore-
going powers, such rules may provide for-:-
(a) the purchase, sale. stora~e, transportation or distributi0p. of 
milk or milk products by the Corporation; . 
. , (b) the ~~I'm of office of the tnembers of the Board and the Illan-,4Q 
her of filling vacancies among the members of the Board; 
" {c) the remuneration or fees which the members of the Board 
other;;than the Mimaging Director, shall be entitled to receive fr~ 
the Corporation: . 
, .' 
(d) the manner of verification and signature of the report o'f the 4S 
.u~r and the manner of transmission of 'such report to t)le Corp' 0-
;:rabon; and . 
edt ,( e.), '8Ueh other matters as'in&y be, or are !~q\1h'ed to b~~ p~e~rjb~ 

11 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the 
5 expiry of the session in which it is so laid 'or the session immediately fol-
lowing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule shOUld not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
10 shall' be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.' 
32~ (1) Th~ Corporation may, with the previous sanction of the Cen-
tral Government, by notification it) the Official Gazette, make regula-
tions not inconsistent wi,th thfJ prpvisions of this Act and the rules made 
IS thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary 
or expedi,~t for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going powers, such regillations may provide for-
(a) the method of appointment, the conditions of service and 
20 the scaJesof P4Y ot the officers and other employees of the Corpora-
tion· ", , , 
(b) The dutiesqnd cond~t of officers and employees of the 
Corporation; 
(c) the functions and duties which may be entruste.d or delegat-
2S ed to the Managing Director; 
(d) the times and places at which meetin~s of the Board or the 
Executive Committee thereof shall be held and the procedure to be 
followed thereat; , 
(e) the fees and allowances payable to the members of the Exe-
30 cutive Committee; 
(b) generally, the efficient co'nduct of the affairs of the Corpora-
tion. 
(3) The Central Government may, by ,notification in the Official 
Gazette, rescind any regulation which it has sanctioned and thereupon 
3S such regulation shall cease to have effect. 
(4) Any regulation which may be made by the Corporation under this 
Act may be made by the Central Government within three months from 
the establishment of the Corporation and anv regulation so made may, 
subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), be altered or rescinded by 
40 the Corporation in the exercise of its powers under this Act. 
Power to 
make 
regula-
tions. 
33. (1) The Corporation shall, as soon ~s possible after the end of each Annual 
year, submit to the Central Government an annual report on the working Report. 
and affairs of the Corporation. 
(2) The Central Government shall. ... s soon as may be after the receipt 
4S of such report, cause such report and t"e audit report re~elved by it to be 
laid before both Houses Qf parliament 

I· THE SCHEDULE "" • ." '."'l 
(See section 25) 
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY 
I,. ,..do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the 
best of my skill and ability execute and perform the duties required of S 
me as Chairman, member of the Board, member of the Executive Com-
mittee, auditor, officer or other employee (as the case may be) of the 
Delhi Milk Supply Corporation and which properly relate to the office 
or position in the said Delhi Milk Supply Corporation held by me. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communi- 10 
cated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information relating 
to the affairs of the Delhi Milk Supply Corporation or to the affairs of 
any person having any dealing with the Delhi Milk Supply Corporation; 
nor will I allow any such person to inspect or have access to any books or 
documents belonging to or in the possession of the Delhi Milk Supply IS 
Corporation and relating to the business of any person having any 
dealing with the Delhi Milk Supply Corporation. ' 
12 

STATEMEN~ OF bnJt;!CTS AND ltEASON~ 
The Delhi Milk Scheme which was hitherto being run on a depari .. 
mental basis by the Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Develop-
ment and Co-operation (Department of Agriculture) has been operat-
ing at a loss, since its inception. It need. not be gainsaid that it is an 
unenviable plight for a commercial organisation like the Delhi Milk 
Scheme. With a view to meeting this situation and to impart a degree of 
flexibHity in its operation, it has been decided to convert the Delhi Milk: 
Scheme into a Statutory Corporation. The Bill seeks to give effect to 
the said decision. 
The paid-up capital of the Corporation shall be an amount not exceed-
ing rupees seven crores as the Central Government may determine. This. 
amount will be equal to the value of the assets on the date of conversion 
of Delhi Milk Scheme into Statutory Corporation (estimated to be Rs. 3.60 
crores as on 1st of April, 1970). All non-recurring capital expenditure 
incurred by the Central Government for Delhi Milk Scheme shall be 
treated as a part of the paid-up capital provided by the Central Govern-
ment to the proposed Corporation. The entire paid-up capital of the 
Corporation shall be held by the President of India. In addition, Central 
Government may also advance loan to the Corporation from time to time 
as working capital. 
The functions of the Corporation will be mainly to ensure adequate 
supply of good milk and milk products, conforming to the standards of 
purity laid down under any law, for the time being in force, at a reason-
able price. The Corporation has also been empowered to borrow money 
from a scheduled bank or any other banking institution approved by the 
Central Government. Repayment of the money borrowed by the Cor .. 
poration will be guaranteed by the Central Government. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 10th August, 1970. 
ANNASAHIB P. SHINDE. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of le.tter No. 3-2170-LD.I, dated the 22nd August, 197(} from Shri 
Annasahib P. Shinde, Minister of State in the Ministry of Food, Agri-
culture, Community Development and Co-operation to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.] . 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill 
to provide for the· establishment of a corporation, for the purpose of 
acquiring, distributing and selling milk and milk products in the Union 
Territory of Delhi and other areas and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto, recommends under Article 117 (1) and (3) of 
Constitution of India read with Article 274 (1) thereof, the introduction 
of the Delhi Milk Supply Corporation Bill, 1970, in the Lok Sabha and 
also the consideration of the Bill by the Lok Sabhe. 
13 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
~he iriitial paid-up capital of the· Delhi Milk Supply 9~rpora~ion ~ha11 
be an amount not exceeding Rs. 7 crores as the Central Government m",y 
determine [Clause 5(1) of the Bill]. This a:~o~nt will be equal to the 
value of the assets on the date<;>f conversion of Delhi Milk Scheme into 
a Statutory Corporation (estimated,as,Rs. 3.~O cror~s,,,,s on 1st of April, 
1970). In addition, the Central Government may provide such further 
capital as may be required by the Corporation for carrying on the busi-
ness of the Corporation or for any purpose connected therewith on such 
terms and conditions as the Central GovernIl.lent may determine [Clause 
5 (3) of the Bill]. The Central Govemment may also advance loan to 
the Corporation from time to time 'as working capital. 
2. All assets and non-recurring expenditure of capital nature incur.red 
by the Central Government for or in connection with the Delhi Milk 
Scheme up to the actual date of the es~blishment of the Corporation 
shall be treated as a part of the paid-up capital provi~d by the Central 
Government to the Corporation [Clause 5(2) and Clauses 7 (1) andS(2) 
of the BUl]. 
3. The Central Government may alRo guarantee the advances taken or 
monies borrowed by the Corporation ·frbm· any scheduled bank or any 
other bank or banking institutions appraved by the Central Government 
as to the repayment of the principal and the· payment'of the interelit 
thereon and other incidental charges [Clause 6(2) of the Bill]. The ulti· 
mate liability arising out of such a guarantee IS) not expected to exceed 
Rs. 8 crores. ; 
4. Inasmuch as the Corporation is to take over completely the assets 
and liabilities of the Delhi Milk Scheme and consequeht1y that 6f the 
Central Government on the date of its conversion into CorporatiOn, neD 
liability on this account will accrue to the Central Government (Clause 7 
of the Bill). Similarly, pay and allowances of the staff and pensionary 
and provident fund liability will also be borne by· the CorPoration, except 
in the case of those employees who do not opt to serve the Corporation 
in terms of the provisions contained in Chapter VI of the draft Bill. On 
the assumption that 90 per cent of the stflft would opt ~o .come under the 
Corporation, the liability Qf the c.entr~l ·Government in r:espect of the 
remaining 10 per cent of the staff will not ex.~eed Rs. 50 lakhsbeing; the 
capitalised value of the liability on account of pension and provident 
fund spread over 15 years plus Rs. 10 lakhs per annum on account of pay 
and allowances of the remaining staff. 
14 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a corporation, for the purpl)se of acquiring, distri-
buting and selling milk and milk products in the Union territory of Delhi and 
other areas and for the ~tters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
• 
(Shri Annashib P. Shinde, 
Minister oj Stale in t~ 
Ministry of Food, AgriCllltJ4r€ 
Community Development .t6IC 
Co-operazilJ1l. ) 