BiU No. 95 of 1971 
'JHE WEST BENGAL STATE LEGISLATURE (DELEGATION 
OF POWERS) BILL, 1971 
BILL 
.to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the SUIte of 
We.st Bflngal to make laws. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-second Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the West Bengal State Legislature (Dele-
gation of Powers) Act, 1971. 
SIlort 
titb!. 
-s 2. In th~s Act, "Proclamation" means the Proclamation issued on the Definition. 
29th day of J line, 1971, under article 356 of the Constitution, by the Presi-
dent, an.:i published with the notification of the Government of India in 
the Ministry of Home Affairs No. G.S.R. 984 of the said date. 
3. (1) The power of the Legislature of the State of West Bengal to 
) 10 make laws, which has been declared by the Proclamation to be exercisable 
by or under the authority of Parliament, is hereby conferred un the 
President. 
(2) In the exercise of the said power, the President may, from time to 
time, whether Parliament is Or is not in session, enact, as a President's 
:IS Act, a B:ll containing such provisions as he considers necessary: 
Provided that before enacting any such Act, the President shall, 
whenever he eonsiders it pradicable to do so, consult a Committee consti-
tuted for the purpose, consisting of forty members of the Hou~e of the 
People nominated by the Speaker and twenty members of the Council of 
20 States nomiauded by the Chairman. 
Conler-
ment 
on the 
President 
of the 
Power of 
the State 
Le,isla-
ture to 
make 
laws. 

2 
.,. (3). Every Act enacted by the President under sub-section (2) sHall, as: 
'~ori·as ~inay be aftel' enact:inertt, be laid befere each House of Parliament. 
(4) Either House of Parliament may, by resolution passed within thirty 
days from the date on which the Act has been laid before it under sub-
section (3), which period m.ay be comprised in one session or in two EUC- S-
cessive sessions, direct any modifications to be made in the Act and if the 
mojifications are agreed to by the other House of Parliament during the 
session in whjch the Act has been so laid before it or the session succeed-
ing, such modifications shall be given effect to by the President by en-
acting an amending Act under sub-section (2): I~ 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the validity of the-
Act or of any action taken thereunder before it is so amended~ 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Proclamation of the President dated the 29th June, 1971, the-
powers of the Legislature of the State of, West~ are now exercisable 
by or under the authority of Parnainent. Such legislative measures as !lll.ay 
be necessary for the State- can be taken up by Parliament only bY'Post-
poning its business; and even then,it is likely that Parliament may 'Dot 
have time to deal with all legislative measures for'the State.rt·is,there': 
fore, propOsed that ParlillDlent should, in accordance with the provisions 
of sub-clause (a) of cfause (t) of article 357 of the Constitution, confer by 
law OD the- Pt-esidnt tfleo powers of the liegialatlire of the State of West 
Bengal to make laws fix' ~ State. The present Bill is intended' to give 
e1feet to tl'lis. pn.p8lRll~ , ' 
NEW Dltt.HI; K. C. PANT. 
1'llc 7th July,,197.L 

'nlflUfCIAL 1IIn'l~ 
The proviso to .ub~la"lIie 1(2) ef 'C:!lalilSe 3 of the Bill provides lor the 
constitution of a .cdrrtmittee ·for eoi1sultation regarding President's Acts, 
consisting of to ;membert; '-af the 'HGIIIIe'"of :the :People and 30 membel'l 
of 'the 'COurtCilofStMee; ·Bnd~..,ebies 18 be incw'red i-n connection with 
the rnet!titlgs ef. this COtnilliHae ·WOUJd·; ,be metftoom the COlliolidated 
Puttd -er ·IMia.This 'Committee 1rill"meet 'al: am "~n ftE!Ceuary. ~~e 
'i!~ettdUUl'e ·is not ex~ ,to· !be ... _ -is not likely to ex-ee.ed 
Rs. 1,26,000 during the period in which the Proclamation will be in 
force. 
t 
!\ 
". 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The power of the Legislature of the State of West Bengal to make laws 
which has been declared by th~ Proclamation issued under article 356 
of the Constitution in respect of that State on the 29th day of June, 1971, 
to be exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament, is sought to 
be conferred on the President under article 357 (1) (a) of the Consti-
tution. Before exercising the aforesaid power the President is required, 
whenever he considers it practicable to do so, to consult a Committee 
of Members of Parliament constituted for the purpose in accordance 
with the provisions of the proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 3. Any 
Act enacted by the President in exercise of the aforesaid power is re-
quired to be laid before each House of Parliament and Parliament may 
direct modifications to be made in the Act [v~de sub-claus~s (3) and (4) 
of clause 3]. The delegation of legislative power is in pursuance of 
Lhe express prov.sian in this behalf in article 357 (1) (a) of the Constitu-
tion and is l:ecessa:'y as it will not be easy for Parliament to find time 
to deal with the various legislative measures that may be required in 
respect of the State of West Bengal. Under the exceptional circumstancE:s 
arising out of the issue of a Proclamation under article 356 of the Consti-
tution, this delegation of legislative power is limited to the period when 
the aforesaid Proclamation dated the 29th June, 1971 will continue to be 
in force. To the extent that it has heen usual for Parliament to confer 
on the President such legislative powers, it can be regarded as of a 
normal character. 
. .r, , 
6 

LOK SABHA 
A 
HaL 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the State 
of West Bengal to make laws . 
~ 
... 
(Shri Krishna Chalulra Pant, 
Minister oj State in the 
Mfnistry of Home Affairs.) 