__ As rntRopucep in Lox SABHA

: Bill No. 95 of 1992
THE COPYRIGHT CESS BILL, 1992

A
BILL

to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on copying equipment
and for the transfer of the same to the owners of rights and for
matters connected therewith. |

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

1. (J) This Act may be called the Copyright Coss Act, 1992.

(2) It extends to thé whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint,

2, In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —

(a) “copyright society” means a copyright society referred io
in section 33 of the Copyright Act, 1957;

(b) “prescribed means prescribed by rules made under this
Act;

(c) “copying equipment” means any equipment referred to in
section 52B of the Copyright Act, 1957 or any tapes or audio cassette
or video cassette or the like recording media used with such equip-
5. ment; i |

Short
title,
extent
and
com=
mence-
ment,

Defini-
tions.


Levy

collec-

tion of
cess on

producers
of copying

equip-
ment,

Levy
and
collec-
tion of
cess on
importei

पड

of copy-

ing
equip-
ment,

of duty to
Crediting
proceeds

the Conso-

lidated
Fund of
India.

Power
to call
for
reports

returns.

Power
to make

2

!९ Central Government |
from time to time, specify by notification in the Official Gazette

(2) The duty of excise levied under sub-section (1) shall be in addi,
tion to the duty of excise if any, leviable on any such equipm
referred to in sub-section (1) under the Central Excises and Salt Act,
1944, or any other law for the time being in force,

(8) The duty of excise levied under sub-section (1) shall be pay.
able by the manufacturer of the copying equipment.

(४) The provisions of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and th
rules made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemp-
Hons from duty, shall, so far as may be, apply under that Act in
relation to the levy and collection of the said duty of excise as they
apply in relation to the levy and collection of the duty of excise on
any ‘such equipment referred to in sub-section (1).

4. (1) There shall be levied and collected by way of cess for the pur

Pose ० the Copyright Act, 1957, a duty of customs on all copying equip-
ment at such ate not exceeding ten per cent. of the. imported price of
copying equipment, as the Central Government may, from time to time,
Specily by notification in the Official Gazette,

(2) The duty of custo
addition to the duty of ८
the Customs

ms levied under sub-section (7) shall be in
‘ustoms leviable on copying equipment under
Act, 1962, or any other law for the time being inforce,

(3) The provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, and the rules and re.
gulations made thereunder, including those relatable to refund and exemp-

tion of duty shall, so far as may be, apply under that Act in relation to
levy and collection of th

० said duty of customs on copying equipment
under that Act.

5. The proceeds of the duty of excise levied under section 3 and the

customs levied under section shall first be
credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and the Central Government
may, if Parliament, by appropriation made by law in this behalf, so
Provides, pay to the copyright society, from time to time, from out of
such proceeds (after deducting the cost of colletion) such sums of
money as it may think fit for b

eing utilised for the Purposes of the
Copyright Act, 1957. .

6. The Central Government may require any manufacturers or im.
porter of copying equipment to furnish, for the purposes of this Act,
such statistical and other information in such form and within such
period as may be prescribed.

7. () The Central Government may,

by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the

provisions of this Act,

“@2) In particular and without prejudice to thé generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for the form in" which and


Pate ra

- 3

period within which statistical and other information may be fur-
ed under section 6. i

(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as
y be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the ex-
of the session immediately following the seasion or the successive
ions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
or both Houses agree that the yuie should not be made, the rule
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
set, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
uulment shall be without prejudice to jhe validity of anything pre-

ously done under that rule, | |


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Bill is complementary to the Copyright (Second Amendmei
Bill 1992 The Copyright (Second Amendment) Bill, 1992 seeks
amend the provisions of the Copyright Act, 1957 inter alia to make
vision for payment of remuneration to the owners of rights reprod:
of works by reprographic equipment or by means of devices such as
recorders and video-cassette recorders, where such reproduction wor
not under the existing law be infringement of copyright, shall be sul
to the payment of remuneration to copyright owners by means of a |
on such equipment, This Bill seeks to provide for levy, by way of cess,
duties of excise and customs on the manufacture and import respective
of the relevant equipment in order to give effect to the aforesaid pre
sions of the Copyright (Second Amendment) Bill, 1992,

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

New Dewi; ARJUN SIN(
The 6th May, 1992,



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks ‘to provide for the levy, by way of a cess,
a duty of excise on copying equipment as defined under clause 2.
Clause 4 seeks to provide for the levy, by way of cess, of a duty of cus-
toms on such equipment subject to the maximum rate of 10% . The
actual rate of levy is to be fixed by the Central Government by notifi-
cation.

2, The provisions of the Copyright Cess Bill, 1992, are to be rea
with those of clause 11 of the Copyright (Second Amendment) Bill, 1992.
The necessity for levy of cess will arise only after the Central Govern-
ment reaches the conclusion that the rights of copyright holders in
eny class of work are being administered generally throughout India by
one or more copyright societies as contemplated in clause 11 of the said
Bill. This will depend on the voluntary decision of copyright owners
to establish copyright societies and entrust administration of thier rights
to them. It will not be possible at present, to forecast. as to when the
societies will actually come into being in respect of different classes of
work. It is, therefore, not possible at this stage to forecast the quan-
tum of levy. However, on the basis of available information regarding
the production of the relevant copying equipment, it is possible to esti-
mate that after the levy is being collected on the relevant types of
copying equpiment, at an average rate of 5% of the value of equipment,
it may be of the order of Rs. 75 crores per annum. The expenditure
‘on the collection of the said cess would be deducted from the proceeds
and would be about four per cent of the proceeds as is being charged
normally in respect of similar levies. | |

3. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure, either recurring
or non-recurring.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 empowers the Central Government to make rules for |
ing olit the purposes of the proposed legislation. The matters with
respect to which ruies may be made have been detailed in sub-clause
(2) and relate mainly to prescribing the ‘orm for furnishing — statistical
and other information by the manufacturers or importers of copying
equipment. 1 |

2. As the matters with respect to which rules under the aforesaid
clause: are sought to be made are matters of procedure or detail or
matters with respect to which it is not practicable to make express pro-
vision in the legislation itself, the delegation of legislative power is of
normal in characier, |



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on copying equipm

and for the transfer of the same to the owners of tights and
matters connected therewith,

(Shri Arjun Singh, Minister of Human Resource Development)