63 of J948 5 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 9S of 1983 
THE OILFIELDS (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Oilfields (Regulation and Devclop- Short 
A title. men1.) mp.nriment Act, 1983. 
2. In section 6A of the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) 
Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause (b) of 
the proviso 1.0 sub-section (4), for the words "four years", the words 
"three years" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
6A. 
3. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitu-tion ofne-. 
10 su bstit·u ted, namely: - section for 
5 
"to. Every rule made under this Act and every notification issued 
under sub-section (4) of section 6A shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be com-
prised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
section 10. 
, , 
• Laying of 
rules and 
notifica-
tions. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (4) of section 6A of 
the Oilfield (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 so as to- enable 
the Central Government to issue a notification enhancing the rate of 
royalty on any mineral oil specified in the Schedule to the Act once 
during any period of three years, whereas under the existing provision 
such enhancement cannot be made more than once d'uring any period 
of four years. Thus, while no fresh power is proposed to be conferred 
on the Central Government. the existing restriction on the power to 
enhance the rate of royalty is proposed to be relaxed. The modification 
is necessary in view of the pace of changes in the factors which have 
to be taken into account in fixing or enhancing the rates of royalty. As 
a result of the amendment proposed to section 10 of the Act, all notifi-
cations under sub-section (4) of section 6A of the Act will have to be 
laid before both Houses of Parliament. The delegation of the legislative 
power involved in the aforesaid modification is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS F'ROM THE OILJo"lELDS (REGULATION AND DEvELOPMENT) ACT, 1948 
(53 OF 1948) 
• • • • • 
• • • • • 
6A,(1) • 
(4) 'l'he Central Government may, by notification in the ,Official 
Gazette, amend the Schedule so as to enhance or reduce the rate at 
which royalty shall be payable in respect of any mineral oil with effect 
from such date as may be specified in the notification: 
Provided that the Central Government shall not-
• • • • • .' .. 
(b) enhance the rate of royalty in respect of any mineral oil 
more than once during any period of four years. 
• • • • • 
10. All rules made under any of the provisions of this Act shall be 
laid before the House of the People as soon as may be after they are 
made. 
• • • • • .... 
5 
Royalties 
in respect 
of mineral 
oils. 
Rules to 
be laid 
before the 
Legisla-
ture. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BLI.L 
further to amend the Oil fields (Regulation and Development) ACt,' 19411. 
(Shri Shiv Shankar, 
Mini.'1ter of Energy). 