1
THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 40 of the Motor V ehicles Act, 1988, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that not more than one motor vehicle of same category shall be registered
with the same address of residence or place of business where the vehicle is normally kept.".
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 95  of  2016
Amendment
of section 40.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In the recent years it has been observed that road traffic especially in the metropolitan
cities has increased manifold. The number of vehicles being registered is increasing day
by day and it would not be a surprise if it is stated that eighty per cent. of the vehicles of
the country are registered in metropolitan and large cities. The increase in vehicles not
only cause high pollution levels but also increase the consumption of fuel resulting in a
considerable outgo of money abroad due to import of fuel. It has also been seen that there
are more than one vehicles of same category per family registered at same address. It is a
fact that the road network of any city cannot be expanded any further and, therefore,
increase in number of vehicles has resulted in heavy traffic on the roads leading to traffic
jams and congestion in parking space.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 with a view to
provide that not more than one motor vehicle of same category shall be registered at the
same residence or the place of business where the vehicle is normally kept.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; SHRIRANG APPA BARNE
March 9, 2016.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988
(Act No. 59 OF 1988)
* * * * * * *
40. Subject to the provisions of section 42, section 43 and section 60, every owner
of motor vehicle shall cause the vehicle to be registered by a registering authority in whose
jurisdiction he has the residence or place of business where the vehicle is normally kept.
* * * * * * *
Registration,
where to be
made.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—03L(S3)—25-04-2016.