As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 95 of  2024
THE BAN ON ENTRANCE EXAMINATION IN PROFESSIONAL 
COURSES BILL, 2024
By
Shri K. Na v askani, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for ban on entrance examinations to all professional courses in  
the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ban on Entrance Examination in  Professional Courses 
Act, 2024.
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement.
5

   2. Notwithstanding anything contained in any order, judgement or direction of any Court 
or any other law for the time being in force or any rule, notification or order issued in this 
behalf, on and from the academic year 2024-25, no entrance examination to the professional 
courses including medical and engineers shall be conducted by the Central Government or 
its agencies:
      Provided that if any entrance examination for the academic session 2024-25 for any 
professional courses has already been held, such examination shall be deemed to have been 
cancelled and declared null and void.
3. The Central Government shall ensure that admission to professional courses shall be 
made in accordance with the percentage of marks obtained in the courses or exams which is 
a prerequisite for the admission to the professional courses.
4. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years 
from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be laid  
before each House of Parliament.
2
10
5
Ban on 
conducting 
Entrance 
Examination 
for Professional 
Courses.
15
Admission to 
professional 
courses on 
the basis of 
percentage of 
marks.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 In the recent years, entrance examination are held for admission to various professional 
courses including medical and engineering, etc. Though a student, scores very high marks 
in the 12th examination he shall be given admission only if he scores high percentage in 
the entrance examination. Though the student is intelligent, he will not be able to crack the 
entrance examination as the syllabus is different from what he studied in the school.
 Moreover, he has to spend a great amount of money by way of taking admission in 
coaching institutes to pass the entrance examination. But the poor students especially from 
rural areas cannot afford such huge fees in coaching institutes. Therefore, their ambition of 
becoming a doctor or an engineer remains a dream.
 There are may instances of students committing suicide due to failure in the entrance 
examination. Due to this intelligent students are discouraged to take these examinations. 
Besides in the current times, there has been an alleged irregularities in the entrance 
examination conducted by Nation Testing Agencies.
 To avoid such instances, it is proposed to ban entrance examination to all professional 
courses to facilitate intelligent and poor students to have access to professional courses in 
the country.
 Hence this Bill.
       New Delhi;                                                               K. NAV ASKANI   
   July 8, 2024.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for ban on entrance examinations to all professional courses in the country and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri K. Navaskani, M.P.)