1
THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RABINDRA KUMAR JENA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Marriage (Amendment) Act, 1954.
(2) It shall come into force in a State on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different
States.
2. In section 5 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, for the words “has resided for a period
of not less than thirty days”, the words, “is residing” shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  95 of  2015
Amendment of
section 5.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 5 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 prescribes for notice of intended marriage
to the Marriage Officer of the district in which at least one of the parties to the marriage has
resided for a period of not less than thiry days immediately preceding the date on which such
notice is given. However, such procedural formality is being misused by unlawful groups or
individuals in order to interfere with marriages in the name of  ‘honour’  and ‘tradition’.
In order to curb the crimes committed in name of honour killing, the National Commission
for Women in its 2010 draft legislation ‘The Prevention of Crimes in the Name of Honour and
Traditions Bill, 2010’ and the Law Commission of India, in its Report No. 242, ‘Prevention of
Interference with the Freedom of Matrimonial Alliances (in the name of Honour and Tradition):
A Suggested Legal Framework’, August 2012, have recommended an amendment in the
Special Marriage Act, 1954, for removing the condition of residency of minimum thirty days
from the date of giving notice of marriage, as this gives the groups or individuals an
opportunity to interfere with the alliance.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend section 5 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 with a
view to remove the unnecessary requirement of ‘period of notice’ and ‘domical residence’ so
as to protect the victims or potential victims from the menace of honour killing.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RABINDRA KUMAR JENA
February 24, 2015
2

Notice of
intended
marriage.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE  ACT, 1954
(43 OF 1954)
* * ***
5. When a marriage is intended to be solemnized under this Act, the parties to the
marriage shall give notice thereof in writing in the form specified in the Second Schedule to
the Marriage Officer of the district in which at least one of the parties to the marriage has
resided for a period of not less than thirty days immediately preceding the date on which
such notice is given.
* * ***
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
————
(Shri Rabindra Kumar Jena, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5613LS(S3)—15-04-2015.