1
Short title.
Bill No. 95 of  2019
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. In article 85 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following proviso shall be added
at the end, namely:—
"Provided that the number of sittings of each House of Parliament in all sessions in a
calendar year shall not be less than one hundred and fifty days.".
Amendment
of article 85.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution of India does not specify the number of sittings of each House of
Parliament. It merely says that six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one
session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session. There is, of late, a
growing tendency to curtail the number of sittings of the Houses.
India is a country with complex problems which need immediate and durable solutions.
Parliament is the supreme law making body. If it meets only for a limited number of days, it will
cease to be an effective platform for the people to ventilate their grievances and seek remedy.
The All India Presiding Officers Conference discussed the matter and proposed that the
number of sittings of Parliament and State Legislatures be increased. But, so far, no initiative
in this regard has come from the Central Government.
Parliament and State Legislatures should meet more often to discuss legislative
proposals and other burning problems of the people.
The present Bill provides that the each House of Parliament should meet at least for
one hundred and fifty days in a calendar year. Thus it aims at fulfilling the long felt  desire of
the people and their representatives.
.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
June 11,  2019.
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to meet
at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last
sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The President from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the House of People.
* * * * *
Sessions of
Parliament,
prorogation
and
dissolution.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—573LS(S3)—20.06.2019.