1
THE CONSTITUTION  (ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution  ( One Hundred and Seventh Amendment)
Act, 2007.
2. In article 244 of the Constitution, in clauses  ( 1) and  (2), for the words “and
Mizoram”, the words “Mizoram and the areas under the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling in
the State of West Bengal”, shall respectively be substituted.
3. In article 332 of the Constitution, in clause (6), after the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(7) Subject to the provisions of clauses  (1) and (3), in  the Legislative Assembly
of the State of West Bengal, the representation of the Scheduled Tribes and non-
Scheduled Tribes in the constituencies included in the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling,
so notified, and existing prior to the constitution of the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling,
shall be maintained.”.
Amendment
of article 244.
Amendment
of article 332.
Short title.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 95 of 2007

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
An ‘In Principle’ Memorandum of Settlement (MOS) was singed on 06.12.2005 between
the Government of India, Government of West Bengal and Administrator, Darjeeling Gorkha
Hill Council (DGHC) for creating an autonomous self governing Council under the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution for the hill areas of Darjeeling District within the State of West
Bengal following due consultative, legislative and constitutional processes by the State and
Central Government, so as to fulfill the economic, educational and linguistic aspirations,
socio-cultural and ethnic identity of the hill people duly protecting the rights of the non-
tribals, and to speed up the infrastructure development in the till areas of Darjeeling District.
In terms of the MOS, the existing DGHC will be replaced by an autonomous self governing
Council called the Gorkha Hill Council, Darjeeling (GHC) in the State of West Bengal under
the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution. The State Government, at an appropriate time, will
dissolve the DGHC and repeal the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council Act, 1988 to pave the way
of creation of GHC.
2. Clause (2) of article 244 of the Constitution provides that the provisions of the Sixth
Schedule shall apply to the administration of the tribal areas in the States of Assam,
Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. In pursuance of the MOS dated 06.12.2005, it is proposed
to amend article 244 of the Constitution so as to bring the administration of the areas under
the GHC in the State of West Bengal within its amibit.
3. Article 332 of the Constitution provides for reservation of seats for Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States. For the autonomous
districts in the State of Assam, a provision in clause (6) of article 332 has been made so as to
protect the rights of non-tribals. Under clause ( 6), the then existing representation of the
Scheduled Tribes and non-Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Assam from the Bodoland Territorial Council Areas District was kept intact. Similarly, to
protect the rights of non-tribals in the Gorkha Hill Council in Darjeeling, in pursuance of the
MOS dated 6th December, 2005, the existing representation of the Scheduled Tribes and
non-Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State of West bengal from the
areas under the Gorkha Hill Council is proposed to be kept intact. It is, therefore, proposed
to insert a new clause after the existing clause (6) of article 332 of the Constitution.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SHIVRAJ V . PATIL.
The 23rd November, 2007,
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*****
PART X
THE SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL  AREAS
244. (1)* * * * *
(2) The provisions of the Sixth Schedule shall apply to the administration of the tribal
areas in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.
**** *
Administration
of Scheduled
Areas and
Tribal Areas.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Shivraj Vishwanath Patil, Minister of Home Affairs)
MGIPMRND—4884LS—27-11-2007.