AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 95 of 2025
THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD MARRIAGE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2025
By
Sඁඋං Lൺ ඏඎ Sඋං Kඋංඌඁඇൺ Dൾඏ ൺඋൺඒൺඅඎ,  M.P.
ൺ
BILL
       further to amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Child Marriage (Amendment) 
Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006, hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act,— 
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
Short title and commencement.
Amendment of 
section 2.6 of  2007.

‘(aa) “Betrothal” means engagement or any other similar event or custom 
involving a mutual promise, agreement, or contract to marry;’;
(ii) after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–
‘(ba) “Central Reporting Portal” means a portal created under section 16(C) 
of the Act;’;
(bb) “Child Welfare Committee” means a committee constituted under 
section 27 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
(iii) after clause (f), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–
‘(fa) “majority” means a person who, under the provisions of the Majority 
Act, 1875 is to be deemed to have attained majority.
(g) “Special Court” means a court designated as such under section 19A.
(h) “Special Juvenile Police Unit” means a unit of police designated as 
such for handling children under section 107 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
(i) “State Child Protection Society” means a society constituted under 
section 106 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
(j) “Support Person” has the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (f) of 
Rule 2 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Rules, 2020.
(k) “Unit” means either a State Special Child Marriage Prohibition Unit or a 
District Special Child Marriage Prohibition Unit constituted under clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) of section 16B and clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 16B.’.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, 
 (a) in sub-section (1), after the existing proviso the following proviso shall 
be inserted, namely:
Provided further that where the female contracting party to the marriage is 
above eighteen years of age and the male party is below twenty one years of 
age, such marriage shall be voidable at the option of the female party; and
 (b) in sub-section (3), for the words “two years of attaining majority”,  the 
following words “three years or three years after attaining the age of twenty one 
years in case the petition is being filed by the male contracting party” shall be 
substituted.
4. For section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:—
“9. (a) Whoever, being a male adult above eighteen years of age, contracts a 
marriage with a girl, who is a child, shall be punishable with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which shall not be less than five years and shall 
also be liable to fine:
Provided that where the girl contracting party to marriage is under fourteen 
years of age, then the male adult shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment 
for a term not less than seven years and shall also be liable to fine.”.
5. After section 9 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely:–– 
“9A. Any person who attempts to contract or solemnise a child marriage shall 
be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall 
not be less than three years and shall also be liable to fine.
Amendment of 
section 3.
Substitution 
of new section 
for section 9.
Punishment 
for male adult 
marrying a girl 
child.
2 of  2016.
9 of  1875.
Insertion of 
new sections 
9A, 9B, 9C, 
9D, 9E.
Attempt to 
contract or 
solemnise 
child marriage.

9B. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, any person, including the child, parent, guardian, whether lawful 
or unlawful, teacher, Panchayati Raj functionary, health worker or any other 
person in authority or care-giver, who has apprehension that an offence under 
this Act is likely to be committed or has knowledge that such an offence has 
been committed, he shall provide such information to police or Child Marriage 
Prohibition Officer, as the case may be.
9C. (1) Upon receiving a report from any person about the commission of an 
offence under this Act, the Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police shall 
follow the procedures laid down under Section 173 of the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, for recording and registration of the First Information 
Report.
(2) The Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police shall, without delay but 
within a period of twenty-four hours, report the matter to the Child Welfare 
Committee and the Special Court or where no Special Court has been designated, 
to the Court of Session, including need of the child for care and protection and 
steps taken in this regard.
9D. Any person who fails to report the commission of an offence under 
sub-section (1), (2) of section 9, 9A, sub-section (1), (2) of section 10, 
sub-section (1), (2), (3), (4) of section 11, sub-section (10), (11) of section 13 
shall be punishable,–
(a) if the person is a public servant, with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to one year and shall also be liable to a fine; or
(b) in case of any other person, with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to six months or a fine:
Provided that no child shall be liable to any punishment or fine under this 
section.
9E. (1) Any agreement, betrothal, engagement or contract to marry entered 
into, involving a child, shall be void ab initio and unenforceable under this Act 
and any other law for the time being in force.
(2) A child, who is betrothed under sub-section (1), shall be deemed to be a 
"child in need of care and protection" under sub-section (14) of section 2 of the 
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.”.
6. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:––
“10. Whoever performs, conducts, directs or abets any child marriage shall 
be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to five years and 
shall be liable to fine unless he proves that he had reasons to believe that the 
marriage was not a child marriage and has exercised due diligence in verifying 
the age of the parties:
Provided that where the female contracting party to marriage is under 
fourteen years of age, then the offence shall be punished with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term not less than seven years and shall also be liable to a 
fine.”.
7.  For section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:––
“11. (1) Where a child contracts a child marriage, any person having charge 
of the child, whether as parent or guardian or any other person or in any other 
capacity, lawful or unlawful, including any member of an organisation or 
Punishment 
for 
solemnising a 
child marriage.
Punishment 
for promoting 
or permitting 
solemnisation 
of child 
marriages.
Reporting of 
offences.
Recording of 
information by 
police.
Punishment 
for non-
reporting.
Betrothal of 
children to be 
void.
Substitution 
of new section 
for section 10.
Substitution 
of new section 
for section 11.
46 of  2023.

association of persons who does any act to promote the marriage or permits it 
to be solemnised, or negligently fails to prevent it from being solemnised, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not 
be less than five years and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1) of section 11, where the female 
contracting party to marriage is under fourteen years of age, then the person 
having charge of the female child shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment 
for a term not less than seven years and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that it shall be presumed, unless and until the contrary is proved, 
that where a minor child has contracted a marriage, the person having charge 
of such minor child has negligently failed to prevent the marriage from being 
solemnised.
(3) Whoever attends or participates in any child marriage shall be punishable 
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one year and 
shall also be liable to fine.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3), where the female contracting to 
marriage is under fourteen years of age, the same shall be punishable with a 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend upto two years and with 
fine:
Provided that no woman shall be punishable with imprisonment under this 
section.”.
8. After section 11 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely:–– 
“11A.(1) In any proceeding under this Act where the female contracting 
party, who is a child, alleges a sexual offence, or seeks annulment of marriage 
under section 3, the court shall appoint a support  person and extend the 
facility of NGOs experts and professional in accordance with section 39 of the 
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
(2) The non-governmental organisations, professional and experts support 
person shall render assistance to the female contracting party through the 
process of investigation and trial, or any other person assisting the child in the 
pre-trial or trial process in respect of an offence under the Act, annulment of 
marriage, access to medical, psychosocial support, compensation or any other 
entitlements, rights, services provided therein.
11B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law 
for the time being, no court shall take cognisance of an offence under this Act 
in respect of a child marriage solemnised prior to the date of commencement of 
this Act, unless the complaint is filed by,–
“(a) the female contracting party to the marriage, or
(b) a Child Marriage Prohibition Officer, based on reasonable information 
indicating continuous harm, coercion, or risk to the child.
(2) The complaint under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) may be 
filed at any time, but before the child filing the petition completes three years 
of attaining majority:
Provided that the Court may, after hearing the child or the Child Marriage 
Prohibition Officer, as the case may be, and for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
take cognisance of any offence under this Act, after the expiry of the three years 
under sub-section (2), if it is satisfied on the facts and in the circumstances of 
Insertion of 
new section 
11A.
Provision of 
support person 
in cases of 
sexual offence.
Limitation on 
retrospective 
prosecution 
of child 
marriages.
32 of 2012.

the case that the delay has been properly explained or that it is necessary to do 
in the interest of justice.
(3) Nothing in this section shall restrict the right of the child to approach 
the Court for the purpose of annulment of the marriage under sub-section (3) 
of section (3).”.
9. In section 13 of the principal Act for sub-section (10), the following sub-
sections shall be substituted, namely:
“(10) Whoever, knowing that an injunction has been issued under sub-section 
(1) against him, disobeys such injunction shall be punishable with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which shall not be less than five years and shall 
also be liable to fine:
Provided that no woman shall be punishable with imprisonment.
(10A) For the purpose of sub-section (10), where the female contracting party to 
marriage is under fourteen years of age, then it shall be punished with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term not less than seven years and shall also be liable to 
fine.”.
10. After section 15 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely:–– 
 “15A. (1) The District Legal Services Authority may, in appropriate cases, 
on an application filed by or on behalf of the child or on the recommendation of 
the court, grant interim compensation to meet the needs of the child for relief or 
rehabilitation, at any stage after the registration of the First Information Report. 
Such interim compensation paid to the child shall be adjusted against the final 
compensation, if any. 
(2) The procedure for making an application, assessment of the quantum of 
interim compensation, and disbursal shall be in the manner as may be prescribed.
11. In section 16 of the principal Act,–
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words  “the whole state”, the words “every 
district” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words “Child Marriage Prohibition 
Officer”, the words “Child Marriage Prevention Coordinator appointed under 
sub-section (1) of section 16A,” shall be inserted; and
(c) in sub-section (3), after clause (f), insert following clause:
(fa) to keep record of all child marriages, and rehabilitation status of such 
children and upload the same on the Central Reporting Portal, as may be prescribed.
12. After section 16 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely:–– 
“16A.(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint officers, in such numbers and for such parts of a district 
as may be prescribed, to be known as the Child Marriage Prevention 
Coordinator, who shall have jurisdiction over the area or areas specified 
in the notification.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Child Marriage Prevention Coordinator–
(a) to assist the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer in discharging his 
functions and duties under this Act;
(b) maintaining records of all child marriages within their jurisdiction;
Insertion of 
new section 
15A.
Amendment of 
section 13.
Compensation.
Amendment of 
section 16.
Insertion of 
new sections 
16A, 16B, 16C 
and 16D.
Child Marriage 
Prevention 
Coordinator.

(c) monitoring the rehabilitation status of the victims;
(d) updating the Central Reporting Portal established under Section 16C of 
the Act;
(e) to discharge such other functions and duties as may be assigned to him 
by the State Government. 
16B. (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish,-
(a) a State-Level Special Child Marriage Prohibition Unit for oversight, 
coordination, capacity building and grievance redressal for the Child 
Marriage Prohibition Officer, to be chaired/headed by the Secretary of the 
State Department dealing with children; and
(b) a District-Level Special Child Marriage Prohibition Unit, in every 
district where more than one Child Marriage Prohibition Officer has been 
appointed, for local-level oversight, coordination, capacity building, and 
grievance redressal for Child Marriage Prohibition Officers headed by the 
District Magistrate or an officer not below the rank of Additional District 
Magistrate, as designated by the State Government.
(2) The composition, functions, powers, and procedures of the State-Level 
Special Child Marriage Prohibition Unit and the District-Level Special Child 
Marriage Prohibition Units established under sub-section (1) shall be such as 
may be prescribed.
16C. Any public servant, including a Child Marriage Prohibition Officer, 
functionaries of Panchayati Raj Institution, who, having knowledge of a child 
marriage likely to be solemnised or already solemnised, wilfully fails to take 
timely action shall be liable to disciplinary proceedings and such wilful neglect 
shall be deemed an offence under clause (c) of section 199 of the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
16D. The Central Government shall create a national online portal for 
reporting and monitoring child marriage cases, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.
13. After section 19 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely:––
19A.(1)For the purposes of providing a speedy trial, the State Government 
shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, designate for each district a Court of Session to be a 
Special Court to try the offences under the Act.
(2) If a Court of Session is already notified as a Children's Court under the 
Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 or under any other law, 
it shall be deemed to be the Special Court for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that if the offence falls under the Protection of Children from 
Sexual Offences Act, 2012, the case shall be triable by the Special Court 
designated under the said Act.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 or the Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005, all 
offences under this Act shall be triable by the Special Court or the Children’s 
Court, as the case may be.
(4) The Special Courts shall ensure speedy trials and disposal of cases within 
six months from the date of filing of the charge sheet.
Special Child 
Marriage 
Prohibition 
Unit.
Disciplinary 
action for 
wilful neglect 
of duty.
Central 
Reporting 
Portal.
Insertion of 
new sections 
19A and 19B.
Designation 
of Special 
Courts.

(5) Where any offence under this Act is committed by a child, such child 
shall be dealt with under the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
(6) If any question arises in any proceeding before the Special Court whether 
a person is a child or not, such a question shall be determined by the Special 
Court after satisfying itself about the age of such person, and it shall record in 
writing its reasons for such determination.
(7) No order made by the Special Court shall be deemed to be invalid 
merely by any subsequent proof that the age of persons determined by it under 
sub-section (2) was not the correct age of that person.
19B. The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
empower the Special Juvenile Police Units, constituted under the Juvenile 
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, to investigate and manage 
cases of child marriage in accordance with the provisions of the Act.”.
14. After section 20 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely: –– 
“20A. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation 
of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force, and, in case of 
any inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on the 
provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency.
20B. (1) The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights constituted 
under section 3, or as the case may be, the State Commission for Protection of 
Child Rights constituted under section 17, of the Commissions for Protection 
of Child Rights Act, 2005 shall, in addition to the functions assigned to them 
under that Act, also monitor the implementation of the provisions of this Act in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The National Commission or, as the case may be, the State Commission, 
referred to in sub-section (1), shall, while inquiring into any matter relating to 
any offence under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in it under the 
Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005. 
(3) The National Commission or, as the case may be, the State Commission, 
referred to in sub-section (1), shall, also include, its activities under this section, 
in the annual report referred to in section 16 of the Commissions for Protection 
of Child Rights Act, 2005.
.
Special 
Juvenile 
Police Units.
Insertion of new 
sections 20A 
and 20B.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law.
Monitoring of 
implementation 
of Act.
4 of 2006.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has committed to ending child marriage by 2030 through the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs). Yet every minute, three girl child get married in India; 
however, only three cases are registered every day. 
Child marriage continues to violate the fundamental rights of children in the 
country. It disproportionately affects girls by undermining their health, education, 
safety, and development. Despite the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2026, 
which legally prohibits child marriages in the country, enforcement challenges, 
definitional ambiguities, and procedural gaps continue.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage 
Act, 2006, to ensure effective prevention, prohibition and prosecution of child 
marriage cases. The proposed Bill is an attempt to fill in all systemic gaps in 
enforcement and reaffirm the State’s commitment to end child marriage in all its 
present forms.
The Bill, inter-alia, seeks to provide for:—
(a) Graded punishments based on the culpability of the offending parties. 
(b) Introduces the concern of betrothals in the Act and makes them void ab 
initio.
(c) Proposes procedural safeguards such as appointment of support persons, 
and establishment of a fund for rehabilitation and compensation for the victims 
of child marriage.
(d) Mandatory appointment of exclusive, full-time Child Marriage Prohibition 
Officers (CMPOs) in every district and local regions thereof; appointment of 
Child Marriage Protection Coordinators to assist the CMPOs in discharging their 
duties.
(e) Creation of exclusive Special Courts for time-bound trials.
(f) Integration of Special Juvenile Police Units into the child marriage 
framework to strengthen child-sensitive investigation.
(g) Introduces a digital Central Reporting Portal to allow early reporting and 
prompt intervention.
Hence this Bill.
       Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;     LA VU SRI KRISHNA DEV ARAYALU  
July 7, 2025

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 12 of this Bill vide proposed section 16D provides for creation of a 
national online portal for reporting and monitoring child marriage cases by the 
Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. The expenditure related to the State Government 
shall be borne from the consolidated fund of the respective State. However, in case 
of Union Territory, the expenditure shall be met from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore 
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved.

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Pඋඈඁංൻංඍංඈඇ ඈൿ Cඁංඅൽ Mൺඋඋංൺ඀ൾ Aർඍ, 2006
(Aർඍ Nඈ. 6 ඈൿ 2007)
 *  *  *  *                       *
3. (1) Every child marriage, whether solemnised before or after the 
commencement of this Act, shall be voidable at the option of the contracting party 
who was a child at the time of the marriage:
Provided that a petition for annulling a child marriage by a decree of nullity 
may be filed in the district court only by a contracting party to the marriage who 
was a child at the time of the marriage.
(2) *  *  *  *                       * 
           
(3) The petition under this section may be filed at any time but before the child 
filing the petition completes two years of attaining majority. 
 *  *  *  *                       *
9. Whoever, being a male adult above eighteen years of age, contracts a child 
marriage shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two 
years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
 *  *  *  *                       *
10. Whoever performs, conducts, directs or abets any child marriage shall be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall 
be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees unless he proves that he had 
reasons to believe that the marriage was not a child marriage.
 *  *  *  *                       *
11. (1) Where a child contracts a child marriage, any person having charge of 
the child, whether as parent or guardian or any other person or in any other capacity, 
lawful or unlawful, including any member of an organisation or association of 
persons who does any act to promote the marriage or permits it to be solemnised, 
or negligently fails to prevent it from being solemnised, including attending or 
participating in a child marriage, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment 
which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend up 
to one lakh rupees: 
Provided that no woman shall be punishable with imprisonment.
(2) For the purposes of this section, it shall be presumed, unless and until the 
contrary is proved, that where a minor child has contracted a marriage, the person 
having charge of such minor child has negligently failed to prevent the marriage 
from being solemnised.
 *  *  *  *                       *
13. (1)  *  *  *  *                       *         
(2)  *  *  *  *                       *          
(3)  *  *  *  *                       *           
(4)  *  *  *  *                       *          
(5)  *  *  *  *                       *           
(6)  *  *  *  *                       *          
(7)  *  *  *  *                       *           
Punishment 
for promoting 
or permitting 
solemnisation 
of child 
marriages.
Child 
marriages to 
be voidable 
at the option 
of contracting 
party being a 
child.
Punishment 
for male adult 
marrying a 
child.
Punishment 
for 
solemnising a 
child marriage.
Power of 
court to issue 
injunction 
prohibiting 
child 
marriages..

(8)  *  *  *  *                       *           
(9)  *  *  *  *                       *           
(10) Whoever knowing that an injunction has been issued under 
sub-section (1) against him disobeys such injunction shall be punishable with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years or with 
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both: Provided that no woman 
shall be punishable with imprisonment.
16. (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint for the whole State, or such part thereof as may be specified in that 
notification, an officer or officers to be known as the Child Marriage Prohibition 
Officer having jurisdiction over the area or areas specified in the notification. 
(2) The State Government may also request a respectable member of the locality 
with a record of social service or an officer of the Gram Panchayat or Municipality 
or an officer of the Government or any public sector undertaking or an office bearer 
of any non-governmental organisation to assist the Child Marriage Prohibition 
Officer and such member, officer or office bearer, as the case may be, shall be 
bound to act accordingly. 
(3) It shall be the duty of the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer— 
(a) to prevent solemnisation of child marriages by taking such action as he 
may deem fit; 
(b) to collect evidence for the effective prosecution of persons contravening 
the provisions of this Act; 
(c) to advise either individual cases or counsel the residents of the 
locality generally not to indulge in promoting, helping, aiding or allowing the 
solemnisation of child marriages; 
(d) to create awareness of the evil which results from child marriages; 
(e) to sensitize the community on the issue of child marriages; 
(f) to furnish such periodical returns and statistics as the State Government 
may direct; and 
(g) to discharge such other functions and duties as may be assigned to him 
by the State Government.
 *  *  *  *                       *
Child 
Marriage 
Prohibition 
Officers.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006.
————
(Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu, M.P .)