LOK SABRA 
CO&.UGE1;DA 
to 
THE EA,: KDJG CJt1P A.lH5S (AC~~ISITIJN AND TrC~JSFT'..ill OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1980 
(To be/As in troduced in 10k Sabha) 
1 • Page 2, in the marginal heading t8 clause 4, .. 
liu: "Undert 3.kin gil 
2. Page 8, line 2,-
for 
3. Page 11, 
for 
l\jE~.j DSIHI; 
June q. 1980 
"0 r emp 10 yee " 
line 24,-
"actvities" 
Jyaistha 19, 1902 (Saka) 
read "Undertakings" 
read "or other employee" 
~ II acti vitie s" 

lof 1956. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK sA:aHA dI.{ 
1 ') ... 
,~~l No. 96, :tJ-
THE BANKING COMPANIEs (ACQUISITION AND TRANSJ'ER 
OF' UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1980 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer o.J the undertaking, of 
certain ban1cing cC1mpanies, having regard to ~r size, resources. 
coverage and organisation, in ordel' further to control the Might' rJf 
the economy, to meet progressively, and serve better, tAe .cedl of 
the deV'e~opment of the economy and to promote the welJare of the 
people, iot conformity with the policy of the State t01Vllrds securing 
the principLes laid down in clauses (b) and (c) of article 39 of the 
C~titution and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
, Jh.e;7;eto. 
BE it enacted by Parliam~nt in the Thirty-first Year of the Republte 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S I, (1) This Act may be called the Banking Companies (Acquisition Short 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980. tit. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 15th day of 
APril •. J~80, 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
10 ,(a) "banking company" does not include a foreign company 
, within the meaning of section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956; 
(b) '~corresponding new bank", in relation to an existing bank, 
means the body corporate specified against such bank in column 2 
of the First Schedule; 
'S ,(c) "C;::ustodian" means ,the person who becomes, or is appointed, 
a Custodian under section 7; 
(d) "existing bank" means a ~an1dng company specified in 
column 1 of the First Schedule, belnl a company the total of the 
and 

Establish-
ment of 
corres-
ponding 
new banks 
and busi-
ness 
thereof. 
Under-
taking of 
existing 
banks to 
veot in 
correa.. 
ponding 
new 
banks. 
General 
effect of 
vesting. 
2 
demand and time liabUities in India of which, as shown in the 
return as on the 14th day ~ March, 1980, furnished to the Reserve 
Bank under section 42 of the i&eserve Bank of India Act, 1934 
amounts to not less than rupees twohundrect crores; 
2 of 1934. 
(e) words and expressions used herem and not defined but 
defined in the Banking Regul;;ttion Act, 1949, have the meanings res- 5 10 of 1949. 
pectively assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF EXISTING BANKS 
3. (1) On the commencement of th:s Act, there shall be constituted 10 
sU'Ch corresponding new banks as are specified in column 2 of the First 
Schedule. 
(2) The paid-up capital of every corresponding new bank constituted 
under sub-section (1) shall, until any provision is made in thb behalf 
in any scheme made under Mction 9, be equal to the paid-Up capital of 15 
the existing bank in relation to which it is the corresponding new bank. 
(3) The entire capital of eaeh corresponding new bank shall stand 
vt!sted in, and allotted to, the Cent!:,l Government. 
(4) Every corresponding new bank shall be a body corporate with 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the 20 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, and to 
contract, and may sue and be sued in its name. 
(5) Every corresponding new bank shall carey on and transact the 
business of banking as defined in clause (b) of section 5 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, and may engage in one or more forms of business 25 10 of 1949. 
specified in sUb-section (1) of sectIon 6 of that Act. 
(6) Every corresponding new bank shall establish a reserVe fund to 
which shall be transferred the share premiums and the balance, if any, 
standing to the credit of the reserve fund of the existing bank in rela-
tion to which it is the corresponding new bank, and such further sums, 30 
if any, as may be transferred in accordance with the provisions of sec-
tion 17 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 10 of 1949. 
4. On the commencement of this A,c,t, the undertaking of every 
existing bank shall be tr msferred to, and shall vest in, the correspond· 
ing new bank. :15 
5. (1) The undertaking of each existing bank shall be deemed to 
include all assets, righ~s, powers, authorities and privileges and all 
property, movable and immovable, cash balances, reserve 'funds, invest~ 
ments and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such pro-
perty as were immediately before the commencement of this Act in the 40 
ownership, possession, power or control of the existing bank in relation 
to the undertaking, whether within or without Incl1a, and all books of 
accounts, registers, records and all other documents of whatever nature 
relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings, lia-
bilities and obligations Of whatever kind then lubsistlng of the exist- 4.:-
ing bank in relation to the undertaking. 

3 
(2) If, according to the laws of any country outside India, the pro-
visions of this Act by themselves are not effective to transfer or vest 
any asset or liability situated in that country which forms part of the 
undertaking of an existing bank to, or in, the corresponding new bank, 
5 the affairs of the existing bank in relation to such asset or liability shall, 
on and from the commencement of this Act, stand entrusted to the 
chief executive officer for the tijrne being of the corresponding new 
bank, and the chief executive officer may exercise all powers and do all 
such acts and things as may be exercised or done by the existing bank 
10 for the purpose of effectively transferr~ng such assets and discharging 
such liabilities. 
(3) The chief executive officer of the corresponding new bank shall, 
in exercise of the powers conferred on him by sub-section (2), take all 
such steps as may be required by the laws of any such country outside 
IS India for the purpose of effecting such transfer or vesting, and may either 
himself or through any person authorised .y him in th;s behalf teal1ae 
any asset and discharge any liability of the existing bank. 
(4) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all contradll, 
deeds, bonds, agreemen"Ls, powerrs of attorney, grants of legal repre-
20 sentation and other instruments of whatever nature subsist'ng or having 
effect immediately before the commencement of this Act and to which 
the existing bank is a party or which are in favour of the existing bank 
shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the corres-
ponding new bank, and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and 
25 effectually as if in the place of the existing bank the corresponding new 
bRnk had been a party thereto or as if they had heen issued in favour 
of the corresponding new bank. 
(5) If, immediately before the commencement of this Act. any suit, 
appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any busi-
30 ness of the undertaking which has been transferred under section 4, 
is pending by or against the existing bank, the same shall not abate, be 
discontinued or be in any way, prejudicially affected by reason' of the 
transfer of the undertaking of the existing bank Or of anvthin1 contained 
in this Act but the suit. appeal or other proceeding may be continued, 
35 prosecuted and enforced by or against the corresponding new bank. 
(6) Nothing in this Act shall be construed all applying to the assets, 
rights, powers, authorities and pr;vileges and prC'4?erty, movable and 
immovable, cash balances and investments in any country outside India 
(and other r~ghts and interests in, or arising out of, such property) and 
borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever k;nd SUbsisting im· 
40 mediately before the commencement of this Act, of any existing bank 
operating in that country if, under the laws in force in that country, 
it is not permissible for a bank;ng company, owned or controlled by 
Government, to carryon the business of banking there. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT 
6. (1) Every existin~ bank shall be given by the Cen'tral Government 
sum amount in re'>peet of the transfer, under section " to the .,.,... 
ponding new bank of tbe undertakin(' of the existing buk ... a •• pecfft.ed 
~ against each such bank in the Sec!ond Schedule • • 0 
Payment 
of 
amount. 

4 
(2) The amount referred to in sub-seC'tion (1) shalt be given to every 
existing bank, at its option,-
(a) in cash'(ta be paid by cheque' drawn on the ~eri'e- Bdkf 
in three equal annual inStalmdiits, the atnodirt of eMIl . iriltalftwtt' 
catlryling' interest rtt the rate (jf ftv~ and a half per' eentf pet dlhlDil 5 
henri' the cbmmencerrumt of this Act; or 
(b) in saleable or otherwise transferable promissory notes or 
stock certificates of the Central Government issued and repayable' 
at par, and maturing at the end of-
(i) ten years from the eommencemeat of this Ad and 10 
carrying intereSt from suc!'h commencement at the rate of- six' 
per cent. per annum, or 
(ii) thirty years from the eommE'dcemel1't of this Act afid' 
carrying interest from such commeneerrient at the rate of seven 
per cent. per annum; or IS 
(c) partly in cash (to be paid by cheque drawn on the Reserve 
Bank) and partly in such number of securities specified in sub-
cI.use (i) or sub-claus~ (ii), or both, of clause (b), as may Jtt, 
required by the exi~ting bank; or 
(d) partly in such number of securities specified in sub-dause 20 
(i) of clause (b) and partly in such number of securities spet1fied 
in sub-clause (ii) of that dause. as may be required by the existiii'g' 
bank, 
(3) The first of the three equal annual instalments referred to in 
clliuse (a) of sub-section (2) shall be paid, and the securities referred 25 
t.o in clause (b) of that sub-section shall be issued, within sixty days 
from the date of receipt by the Central Government of the option 
referred to in that sub-section, or where no such option has been exer-
cised, from the latest date before which such option ought to have 
been exercised. 30 
(4) The option referred to in sub-section (2) shall be exercised by 
every existing bank before the expiry of a period of thr~e months from 
the commencement of this Act (or within such further time, not exeeed" 
ing three months, as the Central Government may, on the application 
. of the existing bank, allow) and the option so exercised shall be- ftnal3S 
and shall not be altered or rescinded after it has been exercised. 
(5) Any existing bank which omits or fails to exercise the option 
referred to in sub-section (2), within the time specified in sub-se~tion 
(4), shall be deemed to have opted for payment in securities speCified iIi 
sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (2). 
(6) Notwith.u.nding anything contained in thi~ sediion, any existing 
bank may, before the expiry o.f three months from the commtencement 
of this Act (or within such further time, not exceedin~ three months, 
as the Central Government may, on the application of the existing 
baJIk, allow) make an applica'tion in writing to the Cel1trai Govern- 4$ 
mflbt lot 8ft interim peyment of an amount equal to seventy-five per 
cent. .. ·tIIIe .... ount of the paid-up capital of such bank, intme!d'tiltelY 
Wore lAIeh eemmencement. indIcating therein whether th'e payment 
ts deshed .. eash or in ~1,\ritjes specifle'd in SUb-!le~tiQn. (~), or in both .. 

5 
(7·)Th .. ()eBti'al Gonn.nent· shaH., wifhin sixty .tap f~ml dN reaipt 
of,-a. appIiatiea, 'Nferre.tto"in 'sub-section (6); maketkeill __ -..,.., 
~-. dire-:eJdattuabaDtc -ill accordanlCe with th.' optioR I 1IAIl, .llar:_ 
sudfIRptttlc! ..... 
S (8) The interim payment made to an existing bank under' gb. 
section (7) shall be set off against the total amount payable to such 
mating' bank under this Act and the balance of the amonnt remab:rlng 
cn:rtstIUidtrlg aftet such payml!nt shall be given to the ~xisting bank tn; 
at<J1'dane'ewtththe option exercised, or deemed to have beenexerelsed, 
10 under sUb-section (4) or sub-'Section (5), as'the case may be~ 
Prov1.ded that where any part of the interim payment is obbdnf!tI by 
a'fil extstfng bank in cash, the I?ayment so obtained shall be set .dft? 
in ''the first' instance, against the first instalment of the cash paJ!Mft't 
refe1Ted to in sub-section (2), and in case the payment sO obtainedejt ... 
'ty ceeds' the amount df the first instalment, the excess amount shall' be 
a6jits~ against the second instalment and the balance of such ~ 
amount, if any, against the third instalment of the cash payment. 
20 
CHl<\PTER IV 
MANAGEMENT OF CORRESPONDING NEW BANKs 
7. (1) The head office of each corresponding new bank shall be at such 
place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Offt'ciaI 
Gazette, specify in this behalf, and, until any such place is so specified, 
shall· be at such place at which the head office of the existing banJo" in 
relation to which it is the corresponding new bank, is on the commenae--
2S meltt of this Act, located, 
(2) The general superintendence, direction and management of the 
affairs and business of a correfQonding new bank shall vest in a Board 
of Directors which shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do 
all such acts and things as the correfQonding new bank is t'uthorised to 
30 exercise and do, 
(3) . (4) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the 
Central G()vernment shall, in consultation with th", Reserve Bank, con-· 
stitute the first Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank, con-
sisting of not more than seven persons, to be appointed by the Central 
35 GeYemment, and every director so appointed shall hold offtce until< the 
Board of Directors of such corresponding new bank is- constitutecir in 
accordance with the scheme made under section 9: 
ProvIded that thl! Central Government may, if it is of opinion that 
it is necessary in the interests of the corresponding new bank so to do, 
r~ a f?eFSon from the membership of the first Board of 'Directors 
40 and, appoint any other pel'son in his plaee. 
(b) Every member of the first. Board of Directors (not being an 
officer of the Central Government or o,f the Reserve Bank) shall receive 
such remuneration as is equal to the remuneration which a member of 
fli~'BoardofDfrectors of the existing bank was entitled to receive fm. 
45 Mediately before the commcmcement of this Act, 
Head 
oftlce and 
mana,e. 
menl 

Corres-
ponding 
new banks 
to be 
guided 
by the 
direc-
tions of 
the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern_ 
ment to 
make 
scheme. 
6 
(4) Until the first Board of Directors is appointed by the Central 
Government under sub-section (3), the general superintendence, direc-
tion and management of the affairs and business of a corresponding new 
bank shall vest in a Custodian, who shall be the chief executive officer 
of that bank and may exercise all powers and do all acts and things as 5 
mQy be exercised or done by that bank. 
(5) The Chairman of an existing bank holding office as such imme-
diately before the commencement of this Act, shall be the Custodian of 
the corresponding new bank and shall receive the same emoluments as 
h. was receiving immediately before soch commencement: 10 
Provided that the Central Government may, if the Chairman of an 
eXIsting bank declines to become, or to continue to function as, a Cua-
todian of the corresponding neW' bank, or, if it is of CQinion that it is ne-
cessary in the interests of the corresponding new bQnk so to do, appoint 
any other person as the Custodian of a corresponding new bank and the 15 
Custodian so appointed shall receive such emoluments as the Central 
Government may specify in this behalf. 
Erplanation.-In this sub-section and in sub-section (1) of section 
l~, the expression "Chairman", in relation to any existing bank, includes 
the I;lerson carrying out the duties of the Chairman or otherwise func- 20 
tinning as the chief executive officer of that bank. 
(6) The Custodian shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central 
Government. 
8. Every corresponding new bank shall, in the discharge of its func-
tions, be guided by such directions in regard to matters of poliey in- 25 
volving publk intere~t as the Central Government may, after consulta-
tion with the Governor of the Reserve Bank, give. 
9. (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the 
lteserve Bank, make a scheme for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2)· In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore- 30 
going power, the said scheme may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the capital structure of the eorresponding new bank, sO how-
ever that the paid-up capital of any such bank shall not be in excess 
of rupees fifteen crores; 35 
(b) the constitution of the Board of Directors, by whatever 
name called, of the corresponding new bank and all such matters in • 
connection therewith or incidental thereto as the Central Govern-
ment ml'ly consider to be necessary or expedient; . 
(e) the reconstitution of any corresponding new bank into two 40 
or more corporations, the amalgamation of any corresponding new 
bank with any other corresponding new bank .or with another bank-

1 of 1956 
7 
lng institution, the transfer of the whole or any part of the under-
taking of a corresponding new bank to any other banking· institution 
or the transfer of the whole or any part of the undertaldng of any 
other banking institution to a corresponding new bank; 
5 (d) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as 
10 
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(3) . Every Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank, consti-
tuted under any scheme made under SUb-section (1), shall include-
(a) representatives of the employees, and of depositors, of such 
bank; and 
(b) such other persons as may represent the interests of each of 
the following catf'gories, namely, farmers, workers and artisans, 
to be elected or nominated in such manner as may be specified in the 
scheme. 
15 (4) The Central Government may, after consultation with thE' Re-
serve Bank, make a scheme to amend or vary any scheme made under 
sub-section (1). 
(5) Every scheme made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
20 Parliament, while it is m session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the scheme or both Houses agree that the scheme should 
25 not be made, the scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that scheme. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
10. (1) Every corresponding new bank shall cause its books to be 
closed and balanced on the 31st day of December of each year and shall 
appoint, with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank, auditors for the 
audit of its accounts. 
3S (2) Every auditor of a corresponding new bank shall be a person who 
is qualified to act as an auditor of a company under section 226 of the 
Companies Act, 1956 and shall receive such remuneration as the Reserve 
Bank may fix in consultation with the Central Government. 
(3) Every auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance-
40 sheet and profit and loss account and a list of all books kept by the corres-
ponding new bank, and it shall be the duty of the auditor to examine the 
balance-sheet and profit and loss account with the accounts and vou-
chers relating thereto, and in the performance of his duties, the auditor-
4S 
(a) shall have, at all reasonable times, access to the books, ac-
counts and other documents of the corresponding new bank; 
(b) may, at the expense of the corresponding new bank, employ 
accountants or other persons to assist him in investigating such ac-
counts; and 
Closure 
ot ac-
count. 
anddia-
posal of 
Profttl. 

COrNI-
poriIng 
new 
bank 
deemed 
to bean 
Indian 
company. 
Vacation 
of 
ofllceof 
Chairman, 
etc. 
,;,6 
(c) may, in relation to such accc;wnta" ~4ne ~ .Custodian 
or. any 04icer or employee of the cor~eQQ~di:J),g" pew :bfillk. 
,(tfI),Evuy,&Uditor of a correepondini~uw,bU)k, aaalLmake '. re-
port to the~entral Government upon tAe,amnalbaYaO&llbeet.,aad ac-
counts and in every such report shall state- S 
(a) whether, in his opinion, the balance-sheet is a !ull-~ fair 
balance-sheet containing all the necessary particulars and is properly 
-,drawn up so as to exhibit II 'true and fair view of the' affairs· ()f the 
co.r~espol1dingnew bank, and in- case he had celled for any explana-
tion or information, whether it has been giVen, and w~~eJ: .it is satis- 10 
factory; 
(b) whether or not the transactions of the corresponding new 
. :.bank, which have come to his notice, have been within the powers 
-of that .bank; 
. (c) ,whether or not the returns received from the' offices and IS 
branches of the corresponding new bank have been found adequate 
for, .the purpose of his audit; 
,,(d) whether the profit and loss account ~hows a true Qala~. of 
profit or loss for the period covered by such account;, aDd 
(e) any other matter which he considers should be brought to 20 
the ngtice of the Central Government. 
(5) 'The l'EIport of the auditor shall be -verified, signed and transmitted 
l to:the Central Government. 
"',(6) 'The auditor shall also forward a copy of the audit report to the 
-corresponding new bank and to the Reserve Bank. loS 
(7) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciaMon 
,in _assets, contributions to staff and superannuation funds and all o~er 
matters for which proviSion is necessary under any law, or which $l'e 
._ usually provided for by banking companies, a ,corre~pqnding .QilW I~nk 
shan transfer the balance of profits to the Central Govern.u:lent. 30 
(8) The Central Government shall cause every auditor's report and 
report on the working and activities of each corresponding new bank to 
be laid for not less than thirty days before each House of Parliament as 
soon as may be after each such report is received by tl).e. Central Gov-
1If1llDent. 3' 
. '·U.-F-or the purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1961, every cor~e~~- fa ot 1911. 
-ing DeW- bank shall be deemed to be an Indian cOIIl/?any and a COD)pany 
in which the public are substantially interested. 
"'liZ.' (1)' :Every' person holding oftice, immediat~ly be~ore the~om­
-meeeement' of- ·this Act, as Chairman of an existing bank shaH, if he. be- 40 
.aemes 'Oustodian of the corresponding new bank, be deemed, . (in . such 
-eonunencement, to have vacated office as such.ChairlIlan. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sup-section (1)., every officer or 
Mhe!"~mployee of an existing bank shall become, on thecommenc;~ent 
of this Act, an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the carres- 4S 
petMhg.41ew bank and ·shall· hold his office or service in- that bank on the " 
.... ·tel'me . and conditions' and with. the iJame rights to pension, gratuity 

·-. 9 
.... ' ()(f),et'l.tfeH""aIf'WbUtti A1ttl\fe~·'adtbtsStblf·tc) 'hlm" 'l''\h1! Wc!Mak-
tq,-.. of!\th!'eJdtJtttg :'blftlt hM',Ilt)t J 'b~ ~trahsMnM:'td"an1! 'ftStlM hil-t!~ 
~~ n .... 1 batlk ~aft.'~titlef1;d M- 'SO ,u"MJs'8ftti luntfr ibl! , ,~ 
ployment inI)_'e'Ot'ft!s~« 1\~W"blmlt ig·tlttrrttnatett~t uWtI1~~~' tlF 
s muneration, terms or conditions are duly altered -by the, CGI'I'8IPOllding 
new, bank. 
(ay' F\ir·th~ ~rson~' wh~ immMi~t~ly 'befo're the conunenoement of 
ttlls' Act'we~ 'the' trune~s 'fOr' any penSion, provident,gratClity or other 
like 'funtl constit\lted'forth~ oft\cers or other employees of :an exiStb1g 
10 bank, there shall be substituted as trustees such' Persons as the Central 
Government may. by general or spec:ial 'order; ,specify. 
(41 NotMthstatldlng anything contained iIi the IndUstrial'DISpJltet 
1. of 1947. Act,' 194'7; or in any other liiw f6r'the time being hi fotce, the transfer 
of'the servlees of' any offtcer or other employee from an ,e~strng, b~iik 
I sto a corres~ndi'ng neW' bank' sha.ll not entitle such' offlc~r or other em-
ployt!e to any compensation under this Act or any other law for the' time 
being in force and no stlch claim shnll be entertained 'by any court, trl~ 
bunal or other authority. 
13, (1) E\rery corresponding new bank shall obServe, except as other-
Wise required by law, the practices and 'usages customary among bankers, 
20 an'd, in' particular, it shall not diVulge any inf()rmation relatfilg to or. to 
the affairs of its constituents except in ci1"CUmstallces in which it is, in 
~d8ft~ with,Ia.w or prBetieesanci 'uSages cURt&mart arn'Otllg 'bariVers, 
~sHy'or' appropriate fM' the- correspontUngnewb8l\k-to 'cHvullte''Suah 
2S informaMon. ' 
(2) Every director, member of a local bOard or a committee, or 8udftOf, 
adviser, officer or other- employee of a cQrresponding. new" bnk 811lall, 
before entering upon his duties, makE!' a OOclaration of ,fidelity anci"s8Cl'ec:y' 
in the form set out in the Third Schedule. 
30 (B) Evert Ctlstodl8fl of a eOr~SfJIOt\dft1'g n'eW' ba"" sWau,' • "soml' at 
pouibl"e'; mllk~ a 'declAration of ft"tl1!lity and secrecy in' the' fOtm. setout 
in the Third Schedule. 
14. Every Custodian ofa corresponding new bank shall be deemed to 
bea public servant for the purposes of Chapter IX of 'the Indian Penal 
45 of 1860 35 COde. . 
15. (1) All acts done by the Custoaian, acting in good fatth , shall, not-
withstanding any defect in his appointment. or ill the proaedure,be valid. 
'(2l"Nd 8d"ot:-proceedihgc'ofaftY~a~: of·~tM d1" a'l~allboard 
or committee-'of ll' ciorMPOll\ttn'!-'nttW' bank shall 'beo innlfd' i'Mety ,on 
40 th~ .. ground of the,--eltisteac'e'Oif a1tyvaelltreyo tn, or'dttfett in the 'COIW~tIon 
C1f~ sllch'boani'or committee, atth!,'case mlly ~. 
'(3)' All acts done by a person acting in good fai~h a&a director or 
member of a local board or committee of a correspondi~:new ~ank shall 
be valid, notwithstanding that it may afterwards be ?lscovered that his 
appointment was invalid by reason of, My defeet 01' ~_lifteation Of 
45 had tet'fllinated by virtue of anY' provbWn contained'llt any law' for the 
time being in force: 
:. '\ :. 
0bl4l .... 
~ ....... 
t,t~: 
lity~. 
secrecy .. 
Custodian 
to be 
publlc 
servant. 
Certain 
defects 
not to 
invali-
date 
acts or 
proceed-
ings. 

Indem-
nity. 
Conatruc-
tion of 
references 
toexiltlnl 
banb. 
Dlsaolu-
tion. 
Power to 
make 
regula-
tions. 
, , 
10 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to give validity 
to any act by a director or member of a local board or committee at a 
corresponding new bank after his appointment has been shown to the 
corresponding new bank to be invalid or to have terminated. 
16. (1) Every Custodian of a corresponding new bank and every officer S 
of the Central Government or of the Reserve Bank: and every officer or 
other employee of a corresponding new bank, shall be indemnified by 
such bank against all losses and expenses incurred by him in or in re-
lation to the discharge of his duties except such as have been caused by 10 
his own wilful act or default. 
(2) A director or member of a local board or committee of a corres-
ponding new bank shall not be responsible for any loss or expense caused 
to such bank by the insufficiency or deficiency of the value of, or title to 
any property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the corresponding IS 
new bank, or by the insolvency or wrongful act of any customer or debtor, 
or by anything done in or in relation to the execution of the duties of 
his oftlce. unless such loss, expense, insufficiency or deficiency was due 
to any wilful act or default on the part of such director or member. 
17. Any reference to any existing bank in any law, other than this Act, 20 
or in . any contract or other instrument shall, in so far as it relates to the 
undertaking which has been transferred by section 4, be construed as a 
reference to the corresponding new bank. 
18. No provision of law relating to winding up of corporations shall 
apply to a corresponding new bank and no corresponding new bank shall 25 
be placed in liquidation save by order of the Central Government and 
in such manner as it may direct. 
1'9. (1) The Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank may, after 
consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of 
the Central Government, make regulations, not inconsistent with the 30 
provisions of this Act or any scheme made thereunder, to provide for all 
matters for which provision is expedient for the purpose of giving effect 
to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In p~rticular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, the regulations may provide for all or any of the following is 
matters, namely:-
'(a) the powers, functions and duties of local boards and restric-
tions, con'ditions or limitations, if any. subject to which they may be 
exercised or. performed, the formation and· constitution of local com-
mittees and committees of local boards (including the number of 40 
members of any such committee), Hie powers, functions and duties 
of such committees, the holding of meetin~s of local committees and 
committees of local boards and the conduct of business thereat; . 
'(b) the m.anner in which the business of the local boards shall .,_ 
be transacted and the procedure in connection therewith; 4S 
(c)" the· delegation of powers and functions of the Board of DIrec-
tors of a corresponding new bank to the general manager, dir@~~qr, 
Om~Qf Qr other employee of tliat. b~nk; I ; 
I 

10 of 1949. 
5 
10 
11 
. ,(d) the conditions or limitations subject to which the crirresf>dnd.-
mg ne~ bank may appoint advisers, officers or other employees· and 
fix theU' remuneration and other terms and conditions of service; 
" (e) the duties and conduct of advisers, officers or other employees 
of the corresponding new bank' , I 
<f) the establishment and maintenance of superannuation, pen-
sion, provident or other funds for the benefit of o1B.cers or other 
employees of the corresponding new bank: or of the dependants of 
such officers or other employees and the granting of superannuation 
allowances, annuities and penSions payable out of such funds; 
(g) the conduct and defence of legal proceedings by or against· 
the corresponding new bank and the manner of signing pleadings; 
(h) the provision of a seal for the corresponding new bank: and 
the manner and effect of its use; I 
(~) the form and manner in which contracts binding on the cor" 
responding new bank may be executed; 
(j) the conditions and the requirements subject to which loana 
or advances may be made or bills may be discounted or purchased by " 
the corresponding new bank; 
(k) the persons or authorities who shall administer any pension, 
provident or other fund constituted for the benefit of officers or other 
employees of the corresponding new bank or their dependants; 
(l) the preparation and submission of statements of programmes 
of actvities and financial statements of the corresponding new bank 
205 and the period for which and the time within which such statements 
and estimates are to be prepared and submitted; and 
(m) generally for the efficient conduct. of the affairs of'the cor .. 
responding new bank. 
(3) Until any regulation is made under sub-section (1), the articles of 
association of the existing bank and every regulation, rule, bye-law or 
30 order made by the existing bank in force immediately before the com-
mencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the regulations made under 
sub-section (1) and shall have effect accordingly and any reference therein 
to any authority of the existing bank shall be deemed to be a reference to 
the corresponding authority of the corresponding new bank anq until 
35 any such corresponding authority is constituted under this Act slIall be 
45 
deemed to refer to the Custodian. I 
20. (1) In the Banking Regulation Act, 1949,- Amend. 
. ment of 
(a) in section 34A, in sub-section (3), for the words "and any; certain 
subsidiary bank", the words, figures and brackets "a COrrespondiDgc • enact.. 
bank constituted under section 3 0:( the Banking OlDpanlU ment& 
~~:quisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, an,d any subsi-
• "diary bank" shall be substituted; 
(b) in section 36AD, in sub-section (3), for the"word8 "and any 
b 'di bank" the words figures and brackets a corresponding suslary,' . ani" new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Comp as 

Repeal 
and 
saving. 
12 
~AI;q~n. .and. Tnn~er. of .. UndeJ:~~, ~t,.l88P"ancilan,..8Ubs1. 
~ .. ~"_.ahalL,.be~\l~~d; 
i,.e); .. eection; 51,·4&r' h '1Ml'ds 'Hor·Bl'ty'other 'ba1tlting iDStttuttcm. 
.DOti.fied..~y. ~ G~al:t~o~tqJq,,~b!n,~ ,behl,1.(' .. ~0Ifs;.ftgures 
and brackets "or any correspondin~ "new . ..bau.. ~ ,,~4er 5 
section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Un-
-deIltUiDl') IAtt,IJ860,' or'-eny ·,tlther banking· institution' Doti8ed ~y 
, .... CeDtraJr Govemment;in .his Dehatf""Bhdll--be subltittrted. 
(2). In .the IJidustrial.Di,5pu.tes A.c,t .. 1947 •. in IeC.tion..~ in clause , ~bb) , for 14 of 1947. 
the words '1and. 8fJy.. s\lQsi~QI' -J~",. ~ lIrO~, .fipes.md ,~~ ~~a 10 
corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Com-
paDies I "'cquifdlicm:.add'l~,of: Undertaking,) AM," t9lO,' aDd any 
subsiiiaryhDeak"!illUi1l 1 be se~ted. 
,~ lD .u.e au.wng Oempanies: (Legal ;Pnctiftonen~' (!)lients'·Accounts) 
Act, 1949, in section 2, in clause (a), for- tJle. wo.ds" "ll1d· any. Mlbsidil!'y IS 46 of 1949. 
ban.k:',. 1;he. "Orqs,1 ~es..alld .. bfadi~ts '~a ~Q~ponWp.g.~A ~ cons-
tituted under section 3 of the B~Co~~ (~lli:ii.Uon..aod.~-
fer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, and any subsidiary bank" shall be 
su~ 
(4) In the Deposit Insurance and Credill Guarantee,~rporatiQll ~t, 20 
1961, in section 2, in clause (ee), after the figures "1970", the words, figures 47 of 1961; 
md"''braekatS"Dr·· a"correspoa:1din:g 'newi . babk'ccmstitu.Md·· undel"6eeUon 3 
of the (BaBlring' eompanies ' (Mq'lli2ntion' 8lld."'I'raneler ·bff Underi8kinga) 
Act, 198()" ShUll' ,be inserted. 
(j)11ID *be-$tata. ~pieiBhlra1. e.actiu. C:~atiolas_..kt.;1i6B,tiQ eection 2S 
2, iD·bla1lle 1·(ti.) ,:..*e1'llthelJisu.res·"ltQO:',tibe'iYloais,l~ and.bratkets 
"or".'oije"'8poddiJlg.'J_~7}/bankuouWuted lUltileJ3~QQ.~3;·oJ ,Ule a.n~ 60 of 1968 
Companies (AcquiSWDIl.)8I1d.:Tr&DJtier of·.~) ~t,.lSOO" ~l 
be ~r¥. I 
n. (1) The Banking Companies (Acquisition and.Transfer of Under- 30 3 of 1980. 
takings), Ordinance, 1980, is hereby repealed. I 
.fJ.) ~otWha.taJ:1ding such repeal, 8l)~ 'done or any action'taken, 
inclup,iAg..apy .order ,mad~, notification isSued. or.'direction:given,~der 
the"'~~,~Qe deemed to.. have been do~e; taken,. made, lSSUed 
or atV.fl~,:aa.,~,~, JDf.ly'b~, :un4e':r the corresport~g pro\r'isi<m.s-ot-'thls-!S 
Act. 'I j - :," 
rTUI J'l8ST:-SCIDVULE 
, tt/ee- se~ons"l2, 3 and4) 
Existing bank • Corresponding new bank 
Column 1 40 
4 ,~ 
:ihet" ...... L~Liaitld . . Andhra-:Ba1lk 
.eorpeRlti8B!~ Umi*ed. .. '. CoJPQl'aUon .Bank 
The NeW'BatUt otlrt&a bimited .. :-lIiaw~t of.:lwUa 
The Oriental Bank of Commerce Limited -' '0I'ieMaluBaakro'ComJDMre 
The 'PaDj1lb ~fBu:k, Wanit8d ~b.,aud .Sind, Bank 45 
Vij8.1a-15aDk'l.dJiIited 'IV4jfJl~ B.aak. 
----~iP-;------..... -

11 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 6) 
Name of existing bank Amount 
S The. '.Arulh.a i Banki Limited. 
.(in lak:bs of rupees>. 
"'10 
COJ'poration 'Bank Limited 
The~"'TBank{·of l india I LimBed 
Tlul.or1ental ~.of. CODlll).etce'Limiteci 
The~ 9,uPiab; aDd..sind·. Baak; l,imVed 
10 Vij.,a ;Baak11rimMd 
.', , , 
I THE ,mlBO . ..8CKEDULE 
180 
"I!lO 
100 
.. :2.10 
-.. , 
[See sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 13] 
c~ID&N,.I).,. 1IIDBLllY...AJm, ~ 
.J, , . do hereby' declare 'that I· wtlf fBkh!tllly, .trtlly·an.c:l ta ... 
I S best of my 'skfll arld abiHty execute--an.'(t-petlorm'-tM~duttw·IN!""d"'· 
me as Custodian;!Mector,·memb.r--oft~F=BoIfd,·omem_ ofl u.l' 
Committee, auditQl", adviser, officer or other employee (as the case may 
beo}'6f> the" "end.wlDdr,.-operly:"" fioi t ...... IOJ:I.,..UQl( 
in 'the said· '., lEki by me. I 
20 lfurlher'declare that I wtll'not commUDiel1teol" aHOWJt(t'be'eocaN-
nieated to ~y: person not l,egally entltledthei'eto-any1ftfoftHtiClDftlatiJl. 
to the affairs .ot the· I 
or.~ the.daira ,ot' ~y penoa..n.v.iQ .ljf1y.de,lh1C 
with. "he. ;nnDr\,.mlllallaw.l~y·fAWhi·perlOll. to,ta.apect .or .. b&ve 
25 accelS .to.aIlY .bollks\~.d08Wllanta beloAiiA, to.Ol'in ~ p'lawioD.of the· 
"llIi&-ftlldWlP.ioI58e bm~ 0' the· 
or rto 1Ule.·bUliaessnohaay persD1l ba¥ing..a,y,.dlealiq .cth .. the· 
flQName,.of, oCOrr.pon~ ·new. baBk.t6 be. fUledJn. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASoNS 
To gain control over the commanding heights of the eConomy for 
the attainment of the national, social and economic objectives, fourteen 
major Indian scheduled banks, each with deposits of Rs. 50 crores or 
more, were nationalised in July, 1969. It was then visualised. that public 
ownership of these banks would help in more effective mobilisation of 
savings and their channelisation for productive purposes. Since the 
nationalisation of such banks, bank services have grown rapidly, particu-
larly, in the hitherto under-banked rural and semi-urban areas. There 
has also been a progressive increase in the deployment of bank resources 
for the neglected sectors and weaker sections of society. 
2. The Government are committed to implement the 20-point pro-
gramme vigorously. In pursuance of this objective, the public sector 
banks have undertaken to increase their credit to priority sectors to 40 
per cent. of their total advances over a period of five years. 
3. In order further to control the heights of the economy, to meet 
progressively, and serve better, the needs of the development of the 
economy and to promote the welfare of the people, in conformity with the 
policy of the State towards securing the principles laid down in clauses 
(b) and (c) of article 39 of the Constitution, si~ Indian private sector 
banks, each having deposits of Rs. 200 crores or more on 14th March. 
1980, were nationalised by the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1980, promulgated by the President 
on the 15th April, 1980. The Ordinance was also considered necessary 
for providing larger credit to priority sectors, for establishing a more 
effective and meaningful direction and control over the operations of 
these banks and also for making these banks an integral part of the 
national development effort. The Ordinance, apart from providing for 
thE: transfer and vesting of the undertakings of the six banks in the 
corresponding new banks, provided for payment of an amount for the 
acquisition of such undertakings, the management of the corresponding 
new banks and other necessary and consequential provisions. 
4. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 3rd June, 1980. R. VENKATARAMAN. 
14 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Cla.us~ 4 of the Bill provides for the acquisition Of the undertakings of 
six exIsting banks. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the payment of the 
amounts specified thereiil and the manner in which such amounts shall 
be paid to the existing banks for such acquisition. The aggregate amount 
payable will be Rs. 18.50 crores as indicated in the SecQn.d Schedule to the 
Bill and is payable in cash or in Central Government securities, according 
to the option of each recipient existing bank. If a recipient existiq 
bank opts for payment in cash only, the payment will be made in three 
equal annual instalments, each instalment carrying interest at the rate 
of 50! per cent. per annum from the date of commencement of the Act, 
namely, 15th April, 1900. If a recipient existing bank opts to take the 
amount, either wholly or partly, in the form of securities, it can choose 
either a 100year security repayable at par carrying interest at 6 per cent. 
per annum or a 3D-year security repayable at par carrying interest at 7 
per cent. per annum. A similar option regarding payment in cash or 
security or both has been provided also in respect of an interim payment 
of an amount equal to 75 per cent. of the paid-up capital of the concern-
ed existing bank, if it so opts. 
The option provided under clause 6 of the Bill is exercisable by 
every existing bank before the expiry of a period of three monthS from 
15th April, 1980. In view of the availability of this option, it is not possi-
ble to indicate precisely the amount which will be actually payable in 
each financial year. However, if all the six existing banks opt for pay-
ment entirely in cash, the principal amount which will be paid in each 
of the three years beginning from 1980-81 will be about Rs. 6.17 crores. 
In that event, the interest payable will be about Rs. 50 lakhs in 
1980-81, Rs. 67.83 lakhs in 1981-82 and Rs. 33.92 lakhs in 1982-83. 
Apart from this recurring expenditure for the first three years, no other 
expenditure, either recurring or non-recurring, will be incurred there-
after. In the event of some of the existing banks choosing to receive 
the payment of the amount in Government securities, or partly in cash and 
partly in Government securities, as provided for in the Bill, the interest 
payable on account of payment of amount in cash ma~ be reduced while 
the interest payable on securities may increase de~~mding on the propor-
tion and nature of the securities which may be lSSUed by the Govern-
t It ·s therefore not practicable at this stage to calculate the men . 1 " • hi h '11 be amount of recurring expenditure on account of mterest w c WI 
payable each year. 
15 

MEMORANDUM··· R.EGAImING DEI..£GATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make a 
scaeme"after . CQIls1lltation·;with the Resuve. Bank, . fat 1 CUZ'J~,OUi the 
PJOVisioo&.,of··the.AG" The··seaame wDl,I,imu'aliaj pNvitl&--for.matMn 
r_tiBlc,to·the. capital-·,stnlcWN,·O£' t~ cerrellp.IlIdiDlf,~lleWt-:b""'. tJae 
coutitution·-ef.. the-.rBoaD4-..of, Dire~ Oft·SlleA,baak·i8Bd· luoh-.tneideDUl, 
centlletiueRtial,end·B\ippl8Rleatal· ma .... ea-may be I~: tfor dft'JiDg 
out. ·the'PJGvteion •. of·,tfte,:t\et.. EftIJ7y~'SCh~me.fIO' made.1s.aq1liI1lci';tcf: be 
laid·,befoN·.·betb·JI~USes of· ·PultlilDent a.d .• very;~stae:ht·scUm.,sllan.be 
nltjeet tG' modification' -or annulment rby PaPiiam.ent.· 
O •••. 19"Of.tRe·Bij1.empowel'8the.&ard af.,:DiNctoR of· •. ce&ftIPODd-
ing,.w,baak··to make.·rep1eUOR8i after ~nslllaation· wttht,the ReNne 
Beak. aad wi1n,the previoU8 '88Dction' of the· Centltal·Gov8l'B111e..t. Tlae 
mette118 in reapeet -of ' which .. replation •. ,may be· 'ma~ inter 'aliA"l'tdate 
ta' the.powers,r.fuactione·ildd dUties -of··local, 00.1'4 .... ·1_ manner ja.·wWoh 
the"busmea.·· of· the 10del-lboardtt··shall·, be·tl'aasacted", tAe .. dele.ation-.,of 
peW818' aad·.functions o£.· the- Boant . .of,Dilleewr .. of a· cOlWSpQndiag,ll8w 
baak ... d·.foI' -silniiar· matters-tol' rthe eIloieRt .conducv of -its I aifan . Soah 
regulations shall not be inconsistent with the,previsions of·tlte·Ao~ or any 
scheme made thereunder . 
. me matfers in respect of whl~" an~- scheme or regulations may be 
made' are matfers of adihl!1tstr8t1v~ delllil or proeed1ir~. 'nle 'delegatitin 
of 'legislative powers is, tl\~refot~, at '8 nnrmal ·chara·c:ter, 
18 T 

5 of 1970. 
21 of 1976. 
5af 1970. 
21 -:oj, 1~76. 
23 of 1955. 
5 of 1970. 
21 of 1976. 
.. " .. ; .... :', 
..... ' 
••.• ,. .• I. (1'" 
.. 
'tlNNZ'XURE: ,. ~!'., i 
E:ltTrtACTs' FROM ntE BA!tKrNGft~UL~~N Acl . t~J ' 
, j -.'" ;.; 'I)', 
(10 OF 1949) 
• • • • • ~#.! ~',,:. 4' ~ ••• 
•. .341\..· (1) 
.~. . .. 
;' 
• • • • " 
C;. ,~i~ ) ~9J;:th,e purposes of t¥,s; sectio~ "blUl~ CQmJWIPy" ,iaciud~ the 
lndustnal Development Bank of India, the Reserve Bank, the State Bank 
('If Indi~, a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 
1970, a Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional 
Rural Ban~s Act: 1976, aM any subsidiary bank. ' ' 
• • • • • 
i' 
36AD. (1) • • • • 
(3)' For the purposes of this section, "banking company" includes the 
Reserve Bank, the Industrial Development Bank Of India, the State 
Bank of India, a corresponding new bank const1tu~ under sectiOn 3 of 
the-. Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer M Undert~ld'ngs) 
Act. ~,l!Y.JO; a Regional Rural Bank established ,unaer section, ~ of the 
Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, and any subsidiary bank. 
• • • • 
51. Without prejudice to the provisions of the State Bank of India 
Act. 1955, or any other ena'::tment, the provisions of sections 10, 13 to 15, 
17, 19 to 21, 23 to 28,29 [excluding sub-section (3) 1, ,31,34, 35, 36A, 36 
[excluding clause (d) of sub-section (1) J, 46 to 4/3, 50, 52 and 53 shall 
also apply, so far as may be, to ,~nd in relation to the State Bank of India 
or any corresponding new bank' constituted under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisiti'bn and Transfer of Under:akings) Act, 191o, Or a 
RegiQlilal,.,R,ural Ban~ established under section 3 of the Regional. Rural 
Banks Act, '1~176, or any other banking institution notified by the Central 
Government in this behalf as they apply to and in relation to banking 
cnthpllhil!S:' , 
" '.~ovide~ :th~t- . . 
'n ':: <-l nothing dtltained ih:dause (c) :.of sub-sectlOll (·1) .of .et:tion 
,'. ; Ie sh1l11 ap~y ttl the citBirrtlan of the' S~te Bank of Inciia 01' . to 8 
:/~~l: roanitger M anysUbeidiary bank' 1ft ,SO .f~.aI ·the .aiclcla"..lSe 
precludes him from being a director of, or holdmg an office'!A, any 
institution approved by the Res~rve Bank; • ... " 
17 
Produc-
tion of 
docu_ 
ments 
of eona. 
dential 
nature. 
Puniah-
ments for 
certain '\ 
aetl~l~·" : 
ties in ' , 
relation 
to bank-
ing com-
panies. 
Applica-
tion of 
certain 
provi-
sions 
to the 
State 
Bank of 
India and 
oth.-, .: 
notiftacl·' 
banks. 

Defini-
tions. 
Defini-
tions. 
18 
(b) nothing contained in section 19 shall apply to the hol.dina by 
the State Bank of India of shares in the capital of any sud1 subsidiary 
bank; and 
(c) nothing contained in section 46 or in section 47A shall apply 
to any officer of the Central Government or the Reserve Bank or the 
State Bank of India, nominated or appointed as director of the State 
Bank of India, or any such subsidiary bank or any other banking 
institution notifted by the Central Government under this section. 
• 
• 
• • • 
ExTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DIsPtrn:s ACT, 1947 
(14 OF 1947) 
• • • 
• 
• 
Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
• • • • • 
(bb) "banking company" means a banking company as deftned 
in section 5 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, having branches or 
other establishments in more than one State, and includes the In-
dustrial Development Bank of India, the Reserve Bank of India, the 
State Bank of India, a corresponding new bank constituted under 
section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970, and any subsidiary bank as defined in the 
State Bank of India (Subsidiary BanJu) Act, 1959; 
• • • • • 
ExTRACT FROM THE BANKING COMPANII8 (LEGAl. PRACTITIONERS' 
CLIENTS' ACCOUNTS) ACT, 1949 
(46 OF 1949) 
• • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
(a) "banking company" means any banking company 88 deftned 
in section 5 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, and includes the 
State Bank of India, a corresponding new bank constituted under 
section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfft' of 
Undertakinp) Act, 1970, a Regional Rural Bank eatablished under 
section 3 at the Regional Rural Banka Act, 1978, and any sublldiary 
bank as deftned in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banb) Act, 
1859; 
• • • • • 
10 of 1949. 
5 of 1970. 
38 of 1959. 
10 of 19.9. 
50f 1970. 
21 of 1976. 
380t 1969. 

5 of 1970. 
5 of 1970. 
19 
EXTRACT FROM THE DEPOSIT INSt1ll.ANCB AND CREDIT GUAJlAN'I'D: COlIPOIIA-
TlO. Aer, 1961 
(47 OJ' 1961) 
• • • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(ee) "corresponding new bank" means a corresponding new 
bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acqui-
sition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970; 
• • • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE STATE AGRICULTURAL CREDIT CORPORATIONS ACT, 1968 
(60 OF 1968) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(ii) "corresponding new bank" means a corresponding new bank 
constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970; 
• • • • • 
Deftni-
UODL 
Deftni-
tiona. 

BILL 
t'O provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of certain 
banking companies, having regard to their size, resources, coverage 
and organisation, in order further to control the heights of the 
e,.conomy, to meet progressively, and serve better, the needs of the 
development of the ec-onomy and to promote the welfare of the people, 
in conformity with the policy of the State towards securing the prin-
ciples laid down in clauses (b) and (c) of article 39 of the Constitu-
tion and for matters connected therewith Or incidental thereto. 
(Shri R. Venkataraman, 
. Minister of Fin~mce.) 