Bill No. " of 1951 
THE COUNTESS OF DUFFERIN'S FUND 
BILL, I9s7 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

5 
21 of IB60 . 
10 
15 
Bill No. " of 1957 
TIm COUNTESS OF DUFFERIN'S FUND BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide fOT the transfer of the Fund known a.s the Countess of 
Dufferin's Fund to the Central Government. 
BE it emcted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Countess of Dufferin's Fund Act, Short tille. 
1957. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Association" means the' National Association for Sup-
plying Medical Aid by Women to the Women of India, being a 
society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860; 
(b) "Fund" means all property, movable or immovable, of or 
belonging to the Association; 
3. On the commencement of thJs Act-
(a) the Association shall stand dissolved; 
(b) the Fund shall vest in the Central Government; and 
(c) all the debts and liabilities of the Association shall be 
transferred to the Central Government and sball thereafter be 
discharged and satisfied by it out of the Fund 
1 
Definitions. 
DlaaolutiOll 
of Aasoc:fa. 
tioD and 
transfer of 
Fund. 

Validation ot 
certain act. 
done before 
the com-
mencement 
of this Act. 
2 
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time be-
ing in force, all acts and things done, before the commencement of 
this Act, by any person acting or purporting to act inpurS1JEUlce of 
the Resolutions passed at the extraordinary general meeting of the 
Association held on the 19th day of April, 1948, shall be valid and S 
shall be deemed always to have been valid and no suit or other pro-
ceeding shall be. instituted, maintained or continued against any 
person whatever on the ground that any such act or thing was not 
done in accordance with law. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The National Association for Supplying Medical Aid by Women to 
the Women of India was established in 1885 with the object of impart-
ing medical education to women, rendering medic.al relief, and sup-
plying nurses and midwives for hospitals and private work. In 1888, 
the Association was registered as a Society under the Societies Rep 
tration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). The fund which was raised by public 
subscriptions both in India and the United Kingdom, was known as 
"The Countess of Dufferin's Fund" and was managed by the Ass0-
ciation. Mter partition it became necessary to wind up the Associa- . 
tion. The Association passed a resolution to this effect on the 19th 
April, 1948. This Bill seeks to provide for the transfer of the assets 
and liabilities of the Association to the Central Government. It also 
seeks to provide for the validation of all action taken since the 19th 
April, 1948. 
NEW DELw; D. P. KARMARKAR. 
Tn. 28th ND'Uft'tber" 1957. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the transfer of the Fund known as the 
Countess of Dufferin's Fund to the Central Gov-
ernment. 
(Shrl D. P. Karmarkar, Minister of Health.) 