Bill No. 96 of 19S8 69 
THE DELHI RENT CONTROL 
BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

THE DELHI RENT CONTROL BILL, 1958 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPI'ER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Act not to apply to certain premises. 
CHAPTER II 
PROVISIONS REGARDING RENT 
4. Rent in excess of standard rent not recoverable. 
5. Unlawful charges not to be claimed or received. 
6. Standard rent. 
7. Lawful increase of standard rent in certllin cases. 
8. Notice of increase of rent.' 
9. Controller to fix standard rent, etc. 
10. Fixation of interim rent. 
11. Limitation of liability of middlemen. 
12. Limitation for application for fixation of standard rent 
13. Refund of rent, premium, etc., not recoverable under the Act. 
CHAPTER III 
CONTROL OF EVICTION OF TENANTS 
14. Protection of tenant against eviction. 
15. When a tenant can get the benefit of protection against 
eviction.! 
16. Creation and termin'ltion of :mb-tenancy. 
17. Sub-tenant to be tenant in certain cases. 
18. Recovery of possession for occupation and re-entry. 
19. Recovery of possession for repairs and rebuilding Bnd re-entry. 

""-.:;' ,,_.; 
ii 
CLAUSES 
20. Recovery of possession in case of tenancies for limited period. 
21. Special provision for recovery of possession in certain cases. 
22. Permission to construct additional structures. 
23. Special provision regarding vacant building sites. 
24. Vacant possession to landlord. 
CHAPTBR IV 
DEPOSIT OF RENT 
25. Receipt to be given for rent paid. 
26. Deposit of rent by the tenant. 
27. Time limit for making deposit and consequences of incorrect 
particulars in application for deposit. 
28. Saving as to aceeptanee of rent and forfeiture of rent in 
deposit. 
CHAPl'ER V 
HOTELS AND LODGING HOUSES 
29. Application of the Chapter. 
30. Fixing of fair rate. 
31. Revision of fair rate. 
32. ChBrges in excess of fair rate not recoverable. 
33·' Recovery of possession by manager of a hotel or the owner of 
a lodging house. 
CHAPTER VI 
ApPOINTMBNT OF CONTROLLERS AND THEIR POWERS AND FUNCTIONS 
AND APPSALS 
34. Appointment of Controllers 8l'1d additional Controllers. 
35. PowerS of Controller.' 
31). Procedure to be followed by Controller 
37. Appeal to the Tribunal' 
38. Second appeal.' 
39. Amendment of orders. 
40. Controller to exercise powers of a magistrate for recovery of 
fine. [ 
41. Controller to exercise powers of civil court for execution of 
other orders.; 
42. Finality of order,' 

iii 
CHAPTER VII 
PROVISIONS REGARDING SPECIAL OBLIGATIONS OF LANDLORDS AND PENALTIES 
43· Landlord's duty to keep the premises in good repair. 
44. Cutting off or withholding essential supply or service. 
45. Landlord's duty to give notice of new construction to Govern-
ment. I 
46. Leases of vacant premises to Government. 
47. Penalties. 
48. Cognizance of offences. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
49. .Jurisdiction of civil courts barred in respect of certain matters. 
50. Controllers to be public servants. 
51. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
52. Saving of operation of certain enactments. 
53· Power to make rules. 
54. Repeal and savings. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 

8m No. 96 of 1958 
THE DELHI RENT CONTROL BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the control oj rents and evictions, and jor the Zeuse of 
vacant premises to Government, in certain areas in the Union 
territory of Delhi. I 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the RepubJic of 
India as follows:-, 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act l1l6.y be called the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958. Short title, 
extent and 
(2) It extends to the areas included within the limits of the New commence-
Delhi Municipal Committee and the Delhi Cantonment Board and to ment. 
such urban areas within the limits of the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi as are specified in the First Schedule: 
10 Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, extend this Act or any provision thereof to any other 
urban area of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi or exclude any area 
from the operation of this Act or any provision thereof. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
[5 ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "basic rent", in relation to premises let out .before the 
2nd day of June, 1944, means the basic rent of such premises as 
determined under the provisions of the Second Schedule; 
20 (b) "Controller" means a Controller appointed under sub-
section (1) of section 34 and includes an additional Controller 
appointed under sub-section (2) of that section; 
(c) "fair rate" means the fair rate fixed under section 30 
and includes the rate as revised under section 31; 
25 (d) "hotel or lodging house" means a building or part of a 
building where lodging with or without board or other serVIces 
is provided for e monetary consideration; 
(e) "landlord" means a person who, for the time being is 
receiving, or is entitled to receive, the rent of any premises, 
Definitions. 

Act not to 
apply to 
certain 
premises. 
2 
whether on his own account or on account of or on behalf of, or 
for the benefit of, any other person or as a trustee, guardian or 
receiver for any other person or who would so receive the rellt 
or be entitled to receive the rent, if the premises were let to a 
tenant; 5 
(1) "lawful increase" moons 8n increase in rent permitted 
under the provisions of this Act; 
(g) "manager' of a hotel" includes any person in charge of 
the m8!lagement of the hotel; 
(h) "owner of a lodging house" means a person who receives ro 
or is entitled to receive whether on his own account or on behalf 
of himself and others or as an agent or a trustee for any other 
person, any monetary consideration from any person on account 
of board, lodging or other services provided in the lodging house; 
(i) "premises" means any building or part of a building 15 
which is, or is intended to be, let separately for use as a residence 
OJ! for commercial use or for any other purpose, and includes-
(i) the garden, grounds and outhouses, if any, appertain-
ing to such building or part of the building; 
(ii) any furniture supplied by the landlord for llse in 20 
such building or part of the building; 
but does not include a room in a hotel or lodging house; 
, (j) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Ad; 
(k) "standard rent", in relation to any premises, meens the 25 
standard rent referred to in section 6 or where the standard rent 
has been increased under section 7, such increased rent; 
(1) "tenant" means any person by whom or on whose account 
or behaU the rent of any premises is, or but for a special contract 
would be~ payable; 30 
("Tn) "urban' area" has the same meaning as in the Delhi 
Municipal Cor.poration Act, 1957. 
3. Nothing in this Ad shall apply-
(a) to any premises belonging to the Government; or 
(b) to any tenancy or other like relationship created by a 35 
grant fr.om the Government in respect of the premises taken on 
lease, or requisitioned, by the Government. 
66ofI9S7. 

a 
CHAPTER II 
PROVISIONS REGARDING RENT 
4. (1) Except where rent is liable to periodical increase by virtue Rent ill 
,. excess of ot an agreement entered mto before the 1st day of January, 1939, uo standard 
S tenant shall, notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary, be rent not I . . recoverab e. linble to pay to hIS landlord for the occupation of any premIses any 
10 
amount in excess of the standard rent of the premises, unless such 
amount is a lawful increase ot the &tandard rent in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), any agreement 
for the payment of rent in excess of the standard rent shall be null 
and void and shall be construed as if it were an agreement for the 
payment of the standard rent only. 
5. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, no person shall claim Unlawful 
15 or receive any rent in excess of the standard rent, notwithstanding ~~~~g~iai~~d 
20 
any agreement to the contrary. orrc:ccived. 
(2) No person shall; in consideration of the grant, renewal or 
continuance of IB tenancy or sub-tenancy of any premises,-
(a) claim or receive the payment of any sum as premium 
or pugree or claim or receive any consideration whatsoever, in 
cash or in kind, in addition to the rent; or 
(b) except with the pr;evious permission of the Controller, 
claim or receive the payment of any sum exceeding one month's 
rent of such premises as rent in advance. 
25 (3) It shall not be lawful for the tenant or any other person 
acting or purporting to act on behalf of the tenant or a sub-tenant to 
claim or receive any payment in consideration of the relinquishment 
of his tenancy or sub-tenancy, as the case may be, of any premisell-
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply-
30 (a) to any payment made in pursuance of an agreement 
ent.ered into before the 1st day of January, 1939; or 
(b) to any payment made under an agreement by any person 
to a landlord for the purpose of financing the construction of the 
whole or part of any premises on the land belonging to the land-
35 lord. if one of the conditions of the agreement is that the land-
lord is to let to that person the whole or part of the premises 
when completed for the use of that person or any member of 
his family: 
Provided that such payment does not exceed the amount of agreed 

Standard 
rent. 
4 
rent for a period of five years of the whole or part of the premises 
to be let to such person. 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of clause (b) of this sub-section, 
a "member of the family" means, in the case of an undivided Hindu 
family, any member of such family. and in the case of any other 5 
family, the husband, wife, son, daughter, father, mother, brother, 
sister or any other person dependent on him. 
6. "Standard rent", in relation to any premises, means--
(a) where the premises have been let out at any time before 
the 2id day of June, 1944, the basic rent of such premises as 10 
determined under the provisions of the Second Schedule together 
with ten per cent. of such basic rent; 
(b) where the premise& were constructed before the 2nd 
day of June, 1951, and let out at any time on or after the 2nd 
day of June, 1944-
(i) in any case where the rent of such premises has been 
fixed under the Delhi and Ajmer Merwura Rent Control Act, 
1947, or the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952, the rent 
so fixed together with ten per cent. of such rent; or 
15 
(ii) in any other case, the rent calculated on the basis 2.0 
of annual payment of an amount equal to eight and one-
fourth per cent. per annum of the aggregate amount of the 
reasonable cost of construction and the market price of the 
land comprised in the premises on the date of the com-
mencement of the construction: 2.S 
Provided that so long as standard rent is not so fixed 
under this sub-clause, the rent at which the premises were 
first let out together with ten per cent. of such rent shall be 
deemed to be thf' standard rent; 
(c) where the premises have been constructed on or after 30 
the 2nd day of June, 1951, including premises constructed after 
the commencement of this Act, the rent calculated on the basis of 
annual payment of an amount equal to eight and one-fourth per 
cent. per annum of the aggregate amount of the reasonable cost 
of construction and the market price of the land comprised in the 35 
premises on the date of the commencement of the construction: 
Provided that-
(a) in the case of any premises constructed on or after 
the 2nd day of June, 1951, but before the 9th day of June, 
19 of I 947. 
380f1 952. 

5 
1955, the rent at which the premises were let for the month 
of March, 1958, or if they were not so let, the rent at which 
they were last let out shall be deemed to be the standard rent 
for a period of seven years from the date of the completion 
of the construction of such premises; and 
(b) in the case of any premises constructed on or after 
the 9th day of June, 1955, including premises constructed 
after the commencement of this Act, the rent agreed upon 
between the landlord and the tenant when such premises 
10 were first let out shall be deemed to be the standard rent 
for a period of five years from the date of such letting out. 
7, (1) Where a landlord has at any time, whether before or after ~wful 
th t f h ' At' d d't f ,mcreaseof e commencemen 0 t IS c, mcurre expen I ure or any Im- standard 
provement, addition or structural alteration in the premises, not re!1t in cer-
b ' d't d t' t t bI' tam cases, 15 emg expen 1 ure on ecora IOn or enan a e repaIrs necessary or 
usual for such premises, and the cost of that improvement, addition 
or alteration has not been taken into account in determining the rent 
of the premises, the landlord may lawfully increase the standard 
rent per year by an amount not exceeding eight and one-fourth per 
2') cent. of such cost. 
(2) Where a landlord pays in respect of the premises any charge 
for electricity or water consumed in the premises or any other 
charge levied by a local authority having jurisdiction in the area 
which is ordinarily payable by the tenant, he may recover from 
25 the tenant the amount so paid by him; but the landlord shall not 
recover from the tenant whether by means of an increase in rent 
or otherwise the amount of any tax on building or land imposed in 
respect of the premises occupied by the tenant, unless an agreement 
between the landlord and the tenant otherwise provides, 
3c (3) Where a part of the premises let for use to a tenant has been 
35 
sub-let by him-
(a) the landlord may lawfully increase the rent payable 
by the tenant-
(i) in the case of any premises let for residential pur-
poses, by an amount not exceeding twelve and one-half per 
cent, of the standard rent of the part sub-let; 
(it) in the case of any premises let for other purposes, 
by an amount not exceeding twenty-five per cent. of the 
standard rent of the part sub-let; 

Notice of in-
creaae of 
rent. 
Contro Her 
to fix stan-
dard rent, 
etc. 
8 
(b) the tenant may lawfully increase the rent payable by 
the sUb-tenant-
(i) in the case of any premises let for residential pur-
poses, by an amount not exceeding twenty-five per cent. of 
the standard rent of the part sub-let; and 5 
(ii) in the case of any premises let for other purposes, 
by an amount not exceeding fifty per cent. of the standard 
rent of the part sub-let; 
(c) the tenant shall, on being so required in writing by the 
landlord, supply, within fourteen days of such request being 10 
made, a statement in writing giving full particulars of any sub-
lettmg mcluding the rent charged. 
8. (1) Where a landlord wishes to increase the rent of any pre-
mises, he shall give the tenant notice of his intention to make the 
increase and in so far as such increase is lawful under this Act, it IS 
shall be due and recoverable only in respect of the period of the 
tenancy after the expiry of thirty days from the date on which the 
notice is given. 
(2) Every notice under sub-section (1) shall be in writing signed 
by or on behalf of the landlord and given in the manner provided 20 
in section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. 
(3) For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that the 
provisions of this section apply equally to any increase in rent pay-
able by tbe sub-tenant. 
9. (1) The Controller shall, on an application made to him in this 25 
behalf, either by the landlord or by the tenant, in the prescribed 
manner, fix in respect of any premises--
(i) the standard rent referred to in section 6; or 
(ii) the increase, if any, referred to in section 7. 
(2) In fixing the standard rent of any premises or the lawful in- 30 
creaSe thereof, the Controller shall fix an amount which appears to 
him to oe reasonable having regard to the provisions of section 6 
or section 7 and the circumstances of the case. 
(3) Where for any reason it is not possible to determine the 
standard rent of any premises on the principles set forth under 35 
section 6, the Controller may fix such rent as would be reasonable 
having regard to the situation, locality and condition of the pre-
mises and the amenities provided therein and where there are simi-
lar or nearly similar premises in the locality, having regard also to 
the standard rent payable in respect of such premises. 40 

(4) The standard rent shall in all cases be fixed for a tenancy of 
twel','e months: 
Provided that where any premises are let or re-Iet for a penod 
of less than twelve montns. the .. tandard rent for ~uch tenancy shall 
S bear the same proportion to the annual standard rent as the period 
of tenancy bears to twelve months. 
(5) In fixing the standard rent of any premises under this section, 
the Controller shall fix the standard rent thereof in an unfurnished 
state and may also determine an additional charge to be payable on 
10 account of any fittings or furniture supplied by the landlord and it 
shall be lawful for the landlord to recover such additional charge 
from the tenant. 
(6) In fixing the standard rent of any premises under this 
section, the Controller shall specify a date from which the stand-
15 ard rent so fixed shall be deemed to have effect: 
Provided that in no case the date so specified shall be earlier 
than one year prior to the date of the filing of the application for 
the fixation of the standard rent. 
10. If an application for fixing the standard rent or for determin- K:t~~~~~~J~'t. 
2':> ing the lawful increase of such rent is made under section 9, the 
Controller shall, as expeditiously as possible, make an order specify-
ing the amount of the rent or the lawful increase to be paid by the 
tenant to the landlord pending final decision on the application and 
shall appoint the date from which the rent or lawful increase so 
25 specified shall be deemed to have effect. 
11. No collector of rent or middleman shall be liable to pay to Limitation] 
h· ., I . t f . b f 1 ofliability IS prmclpa , m respec 0 any premIses, any sum y way 0 renta of middle-
charges which exceeds the amount which he is entitled under this men. 
Act to realise from the tenant or tenants of the premises. 
30 12. Any landlord or tenant may file an application to the Con- Limitati,olllJ 
troller for fixing the standard rent of the premises or for determining ~~:F!Uca-
the lawful increase of such rent,- fixation of 
Itandard 
(a) in the case of any premises which were let, or in which rent. 
the cause of action for lawful increase of rent arose, before the 
35 commencement of this Act, within one year from such com-
mencement; 
(b) in the case of any premises let after the commencement 
of this Act, within one year from the date on which it is so let; 
and 

8 
(c) in the cast! of any premises in which the cause of action 
for lawful increase of rent arises after the commencement of 
this Act, within one year from the date on which the cause of 
action arises: 
Provided that the Controller may entertain the application after 5 
the expiry of the said period of one year, if he is satisfied that the 
applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the applica-
tion in time. 
Refund of 13. Where any sum or other consideration has been paid, whether 
re~t, pre- before or after the commencement of this Act, by or on behalf of 10 mlwn, etc., 
not recover- a tenant to a landlord, in contravention of any of the provisions of 
~!e ~~er this Act or of the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952, the Con-
Protection 
of tenant 
against 
eviction. 
troller may, on an application made to him within a period of one 
year from the date of such payment, order the landlord to refund 
such sum or the value of such consideration to the tenant or order IS 
adjustment of such sum or the value of such consideration against 
the rent payable by the tenant. 
CHAP'l'Elt 111 
CONTROL OF EVICTION OF TEN ANTS 
14. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 2() 
any other law or contract, no order or decree for the. recovery of 
possession of any premises shall be made by any court or Controller 
in favour of the landlord against a tenant: 
Provided that the Controller may, on an application made to him 
in the prescribed manner, make an order for the recovery of posses- 25 
sion of the premises on one or more of the following grounds only, 
namely:-
(a) that the tenant has neither paid nor tendererl the whole 
of the arrears of the rent due within one month of the date on 
which a notice of demand for the arrears of rent has been served 30 
on him by tbe landlord in the manner provided in section 106 
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882; 
(b) that the tenant has sub-let, assigned or otherwise parted 
with the possession of the whole or any part of the premises-
(i) if the premises have been let out after the 15th 35 
day of April, 1952. without obtaining the consent in writing 
of the landlord; or 

JO 
J:, 
20 
35 
9 
(ii) if the premises have been let before the said date, 
without obtaining his consent; 
(c) that the tenant has used the premises for a purpose 
other than that for which they were let-
(i) if the premises have been let after the 15th day of 
April, 1952, without obtaining the consent in writing of the 
landlord: or 
(ii) if the premises have been let before the said date. 
without obtainin/:! his consent: 
(d) that the premises were let for uSe as a residenCE and 
neither the tenant nor any member of his family has been resid-
ing therein for a period of six months immediately before the 
date of the filing of the application for the recovery of posses-
sion thereof: 
(e) that the premises let for residential purposes are 
required bona fide by the landlord for occupation as a residence 
either for himself, if he is the owner thereof, or for any person 
for whose benefit the premises are held and that the landlord 
or such person has no other suitable accommodation; 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause, "premises let 
for residential purposes" include any premises which having 
been let for use as a residence are, without the consent of the 
landlord, used incidentally for commercial or other purposes; 
(f) that the premises have become unsafe or unfit for human 
habitation and are required bona fide by the landlord for carry-
ing out repairs which cannot be carried out without the pre-
mises being vacated; 
(g) that the premIses are required bona fide by the land-
Jord for the purpose of building or re-building or making thereto 
any substantial anditions or alterations and that such building 
or re-building or addition or alteration cannot be carried out 
without the premises being vacated: 
(h) that the tenant has, whether before or after the com-
mencement of this Act, built, acquired vacant possession of, or 
been allotted. a suitable residence: 
(i) that the premises were let to the tenant for use RIll II 
residence by reason of his beine: in the service or employment 
of the landlord, and that thE} tenant has ceased, whether beforf;' 

10 
or after the commencement of this Act, to be in such service 
or employment; 
(j) that the tenant has, whether before or after the com-
mencement of this Act, caused or permitted to be caused sub-
stantial dama~e to the premlses, or notwithstanding previous 5 
notice, has used or dealt with the premises in a marmer con-
trary to any condition lmposed on the landlord by the Govern-
ment or the Delhi Development Authority or the Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi while giving him a lease of the land on 
which the premises are situate; 10 
(k) that the landlord requires the premises in order to 
carry out any building work at the instance of the Government 
or the Delhi Development Authority or the Municipal Corpora-
tion of Delhi in pursuance of any improvement scheme or deve-
lopment scheme. 15 
(2) No order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall 
be made on the ground specified in clause (a) of the proviso to 
sub-section (1), if the t'!nant makes payment 01' deposit as required 
by section 15: 
Provided that no tenant shall be entitled to the benefit under 20 
this sub-section, if, having obtained such benefit once in respect of 
any premises, he again makes a default in the payment of rent of 
those premises for three consecutive months. 
(3) No order for the recovery of possession in any proceeding 
under sub-section (1) shall be binding on nny sub-tenant referred 25 
to in section 16 who has given notice of his sub-tenancy to the land-
lord under the provisions of that section, unless the sub-tenant is 
made a party to the proceeding Dnd the order fo!' eviction is made 
binding on him. 
(4) For the purposes of clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section 30 
(1), the Controller may presume that the premises have been sub-
let by a tenant-
(a) in any case where such premises have been let for use 
as a residence, if the Controller is satisfied that any other per-
son, not being a servant or a member of the family of such 35 
Rervant, has been residing in the premises or any part thereof 
for a period exceeding one month otherwise than in commen-
sality" with the tenant; or . 
(b) in any case where such premises have been let for being 
" used for the purposes of business or profession, if the Controller 40 

II 
is satisfied that the tenant without obtaining the consent in writ-
ing of the landlord hes, after the 16th day of August, 1958, 
entered into a partnership with any other person to carryon 
business or profession in those premises. 
S (5) No application for the recovery of possession of any premises 
shall lie under sub-section (1) on the ground: specified in clause (c) 
of the proviso thereto, unless the landlord has given to the tenant a 
notice in the prescribed manner requiring him to stop the misuse 
of the premises and the tenant has refused or failed to comply with 
10 such requirement within one month from the date of the service of 
notice; and no order for eviction against the tenant shall be made 
in such a case, unless the Controller is satisfied that the misuse of 
the premises is of such a nature as is detrimental to the interests of 
the landlord. 
IS (6) Where an order for the recovery of possession of any premises 
is made on the ground specified in clause (e) of the proviso to sub-
section (1), the landlord shall not be entitled to obtain possession 
thereof before the expiration of a period of six months from the date 
of the order.1 
20 (7) No order for the recovery of possession ot any premises shall 
be made on the ground specified in clause (g) of the proviso to sub-
section (1), unless the Controller is satisfied that the proposed re-
construction will not radically alter the purpose for which the 
premises were let or that such radical alteration is in the public 
~s interest, and that the plans and estimates of such reconstruction have 
been properly prepared and that necessary funds for the purpose are 
available with the landlord.! 
15. (1) In every proceeding for the recovery of possession of any When a 
premises on the ground specified in clause (a) of the proviso to sub- tenant 
30 section (1) of section 14, the Controller shall, after giving the parties b:!ft:~e 
an opportunity of being heard, make an order directing the tenant pro~ection 
to pay to the landlord or deposit with the Controller within one month =~~. 
of the date of the order, an amount calculated at the rate of rent 
at which it was last paid for the period for which the tenant may 
35 have made default including the period subsequent thereto upto 
the end of the month previous to that in which payment or deposit 
is made and to continue to payor deposit, month by month, by the 
fifteenth of each succeeding month, a sum equivalent to the rent 
at that rate. 
40 (2) If, in any proceeding for the recovery of possession of any 
premises on any ground other than that referred to in sub-section 
(1), the tenant contests the claim for eviction, the landlord may, 

Creation 
aDd ter-
minltion 
of sub-
tenancy. 
12 
at any stage of the proceeding, make an application to the Controller 
for an order on the tenant to pay to the landlord the amount of rent 
due and the Controller may, after giving the parties an opportunity 
of being heard, make an order in accordance with the provisions of 
the said sub-section. 5 
(3) If, in any proceeding referred to in sub-section (1) or aub-
section (2), there is any dispute as to the amount of rent payable 
by the tenant, the Controller shall, within fifteen days of the date 
of the first hearing of the proceeding, fix an interim rent in relation 
to 'the premises to be paid or deposited in accordance with the pro- 10 
visions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), as the case may be, 
until the standard rent in relation thereto is fixed having regard to 
the provisions of this Act, and the amount of arrears, if any, calcu-
lated on the basis of the standard rent shall be paid or deposited by 
the tenant within one month from the date on which the standard 15 
rent is fixed or such further time as the Controller may allow in 
this behalf.! 
(4) If in any proceeding referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), there is any dispute as to the person or persons to whom 
the rent is payable, the Controller may direct the tenant to deposit 20 
with the Controller the amount payable by him under sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), as the case may be, and in such 
a case, no person shall be entitled to withdraw the amount in deposit 
until the Controller decides the dispute and makes an order for 
payment of the same. 25 
(5) If the Controller is satisfied that any dispute referred to in 
sub-section (4) has been raised by a tenant for reasons which are 
false or frivolous, the Controller shall order the defence against 
eviction to be struck out and proceed with the hearing of the appli-
cation. 30 
(6) If a tenant makes payment or deposit as required by sub-
section (1) or sub-section (3), no order shall be made for the re-
covery of possession on the ground of default in the payment of rent 
by the tenant, but the Controller may allow such costs as he may 35 
deem fit to the landlord. 
(7) If a tenant fails to make payment or deposit as required by 
this section, the Controller may order the defence against eviction 
to be struck out and proceed with the hearing of the application. 
16. (1) Where, after the commencement of this Act, any premises 40 
are sub-let either in whole or in part by the tenant with the previous 
consent in writing of the landlord, the tenant or the sub-tenant to 
whom the premises are sub-let may, in the prescribed manner, give 

11 
flotlce to the iandlord of the creation of the sub4enancy within one 
month from the date of such sub-letting and notify the termination 
of such sub-tenancy within one month of such termination. 
(2) Where, before the commencement of this Act, any premises 
5 have been lawfully sub-let either in whole or in part by the tenant, 
the tenant or the sub-tenant to whom the premises have been sub-let 
may, in the prescribed manner, give notice to the landlord of the 
creation of the sub-tenancy within six months of the commencement 
of this Act, and notify the termination of such sub-tenancy within 
10 one month of such termination. 
(3) Where in any case mentioned in sub-section (2), there is no 
consent in writing of the landlord and the landlord contests that the 
premises were not lawfully sub-let, the Controller shall, on an appli-
cation made to him in this behalf either by the landlord or by the 
IS sub-tenant, within two months of the date of the receipt of the 
notice of sub-letting by the landlord or the issue of the notice by the 
tenant or the sub-tenant, as the case may be, decide the dispute. 
17. (1) Where an order for eviction in respect of any premises 3ub-tenant 
is made under section 14 against a tenant but not against a sub-tenant f~~:r::nt 
20 referred to in section 16 who has given notice of the sub-tenancy to .:ases. 
the landlord, the sub-tenant shall, with effect from the date of the 
order, be deemed to become a tenant holding directly under the land-
lord in respect of the premises in his occupation on the same terms 
and conditions on which he would have held from the tenant, if the 
2S tenancy had continued. 
(2) Where, before the commencement of this Act, the interest of 
a tenant in respect of any premises has been determined without de-
termining the interest of any sub-tenant to whom the premises 
either in whole or in part had been lawfully sub-let, the sub-tenant 
30 shall, with effect from the date of the termination of the tenancy, 
be deemed to have become a tenant holding directly under the land-
lord on the same terms and condhions on which he would have 
held from the tenant if the tenancy had continued. 
(3) Where, before the commencement of this Act, u tenant has 
35 sub-let the whole of the premises let to him, whether with or with-
out the consent of the landlord, and the Controller, on an applica-
tion made to him in this behalf by the sub-tenant within twelve 
months of such commencement, is satisfied that the whole of the 
premises are, as from the 16th day of August, 1958, in occupation of 
the sub-tenant and that the tenant himself is not residing therein, 
40 then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of 

Reeoveryof 
poaaeasion 
for oc:cupa-
tionand 
re-entry. 
14 
ihis Act or in any other law, the Controller may declare that the 
interest of the tenant in such premises shall cease and the sub-tenant 
shall, with effect from the date of such cessation, become a tenant 
holding direetly under the landlord on the same terms and conditions 
on which he would have held from the tenant, if the tenancy had 5 
continUed. 
18. (1) Where a landlord recovers possession of any premises from 
the tenant in pursuance of an order made under clause (e) of the 
proviso to sub-section (1) of section 14, the landlord shall not, except 
with the permission of the Controller obtained in the prescribed 10 
manner, re-Iet the whole or any part of the premises within three 
years from the date of obtaining such possession, and in granting 
such permission, the Controller may direct the landlord to put such 
evicted tenant in possession of the premises. 
(2) Where a landlord recovers possession of any premises as IS 
aforesaid and the premises are not occupied by the landlord or by 
the person for whose benefit the premises are held, within two months 
of obtaining such possession, or the premises having been so 
occupied are, at any time within three years from the date of obtain-
ing possession, re-Iet to any person other than the evicted tenant 20 
without obtaining the permission of the Controller under sub-section 
(1), the Controller may, on an application made to him in this behalf 
by such evicted tenant within such time as may be prescribed, direct 
the landlord to put the tenant in possession of the premises or to pay 
him such compensation as the Controller thinks fit. 2S 
Recove!)' of 19. '(1) In making any order on the grounds specified in clause <I) 
ro:~~!i:! or clause (g) of the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 14, the 
and rebuild- Controller shall ascertain from the tenant whether he elects to be 
~!ntry. and placed in occupation of the premises or part thereof from which he 
is to be evicted and if the tenant so elects, shall record the fact of 30 
the election in the order and specify therein the date on or before 
which he shall deliver possession so as to enable the landlord to 
commence the work of repairs or building or re-building, as the case 
may be. 
(2) If the tenant delivers possession on or before the date speci- 35 
fied in the order, the landlord shall, on the completion of the work 
or repairs or building or re-building, place the tenant in occupation 
of the premises or part thereof. 
(3) If, after the tenant has delivered possession on or before the 
date specified in the order, the landlord fails to commence the work 40 
of repairs or building or re-building within one month of the speci-
fied date or fails to complete the work in a reasonable time or having 

oompleted the work, fails to place the tenant in occupation of the 
premises in accordance with sub-section (2), the Controller may, on 
an application made to him in this behalf by the tenant within such 
time as may be prescribed, order the landloi d to place the tenant in 
S occupation of the premises or part thereof on the original terms and 
conditions or to pay to the tenant such compensation as the Controller 
thinks fit. 
20. Where a landlord does not require the whole or any part of any Rccove~ of 
premises for a particular period, and the landlord, after obtaining f::~~~f 
10 the permission of the Controller in the prescribed manner, lets the ~en~~~esd 
whole of the premises or part thereof as a residence for such period :e~i~r:;~te 
as may be agreed to in writing between the landlord and the tenant 
and the tenant does not, on the expiry of the said period, vacate 
sucb premises, then, notwithstanding anything contained in section 
IS 14 or in any other law, the Controller may, on an application made to 
him in this behalf by the landlord within such time as may be pres-
cribed, place him in vacant possession of the premises or part thereof 
by evicting the tenant and every other person who may be in occupa-
tion of such premises. 
2::> 21. Where the landlord in respect of any premises is any company Special 
or other body corporate or any local authority or any public institu- f~~;!~~ry 
tion and the premises are required for the use of employees of such o.f posaes-
landlord or in the case of a public institution, for the furtherance of ~i:: :~~~­
its activities, then, notWithstanding anything contained in section 14 
25 or in any other law, the Controller may, on an application made to 
him in this behalf by such landlord, place the landlord in vacant 
possession of such premises by evicting the tenant and every other 
person who may be in occupation thereof, if the Controller is satis-
fied-
35 
(a) that the tenant to whom such premises were let for use 
as a residence at a time when he was in the service or e~ploy­
ment of the landlord, has ceased to be in such service or employ-
ment; or: 
(b) that the tenant has acted in contravention of the terms, 
express or implied, under which he was authorised to occupy 
such premises; or 
(c) that any other person is in unauthorised occupation of 
such premises; 01' 
(d) that the premises are required bona fide by the public 
institution for the furtherance of its activities. 

is 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of t.hi& section, "public institution" 
includes any educational institution, library, hospital and cheritable 
dispensary . 
Permission 22. Where the landlord proposes to make any improvement in, or 
:diti~~~ct construct any additional structure on, any building which has been 5 
Itructures. let to a tenant and the tenant refuses to allow the landlord to make 
Special 
provision 
regarding 
vacant 
building 
litea. 
Vacant 
possession 
to landlord. 
such improvement or construct such additional structure and the 
Controller, on an application made to him in this behalf by the land-
lord, is satisfied Ul.'lt the landlord is ready and willing to commence 
the work and that such work will not cause any undue hardship to 10 
the tenant, the Controller may permit the landlord to do such work 
and may make such other order as he thinks fit in the circumstances 
of the case.: 
23. (1) The provisions of this section shall apply notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 14, but only in relation to premises in 15 
the areas which the Central Government may, from time to time, 
specify by notification in the Official Gazette. 
(2) Where any premises which have been let comprise vacant 
land upon which it is permissible under the building regulations or 
municipal bye-laws, for the time being in force, to erect any building, 20 
whether for use as a residence or for any other purpose and the land-
lord proposing to erect such building is unable to obtain possession 
of the land from the tenant by agreement with him and the Control-
ler, on an application made to him in this behalf by the landlord, is 
satisfied that the landlord is ready and willing to commence the 25 
work and that the severance of the vacant land from the rest of 
the premises will not cause undue hardship to the tenant, the 
Controller may-
(a) direct such severance; 
(b) place the landlord in possession of the vacant land; 30 
(c) determine the rent payable by the tenant in respect of 
the rest of the premises ; and 
(d) make such other order as he thinks fit in the circum-
stances of the case. 
24. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, where 35 
the interest of a tenant in any promises is determined for any reason 
whatsoever and any order is made by the Controller under this Act 
for the recovery of possession of such premises, the order shall, 
subject to the provisions of section )7, be binding on all persons who 
may be in occupation of the premises and vacant possession thereof 40 
shall be given to the landlord by evicting all such persons therefrom: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any person 
who has an independent title to such premises. 

17 
CHAPTER IV 
DEPOSIT OF RENT 
25. (1) Every tenant shall pay rent within the time fixed by ~eceiPtJ:en 
S contract or in the absence of such contract, by the fifteenth day of for rent 
the month next following the month for which it is payable. paid. 
10 
(2) E\,ery tenant who makes a payment of rent to his landlord 
shall be entitled to obtain forthwith from the landlord or his 
authorised agent a written receipt for the amount paid to him. 
signed bV the landlord or his authorised agent. 
(3) If the landlord or his authorised agent refuses or neglects to 
deliver to the tenant a receipt referred to in sub-section (2), the 
Controller may, on an application made to him in this behalf ":JV the 
tenant within two months from the date of payment and after hear-
ing the landlord or his authorised agent, by order direct the land-
IS lord or his authorised agent to pay to the tenant by way of damages, 
such sum not exceeding double the amount of rent paid by the 
tenant and the costs of the application and shall also grant a certifi-
cate to the tenant in respect of the rent paid. 
26. (1) Where the landlord does not accept any rent tendered by Deposbit hof 
... ,., h . h· h· f d . i 25 f rent y t e -.. t e tenant WIt m t e tlme re erre to In sect on or re uses or tenant. 
neglects to deliver a receipt referred to therein or where there is a 
bona fide doubt as to the person or persons to whom the rent is pay-
able, the tenant may deposit such rent with the Controller in the 
prescribed manner . 
.)5 (2) The deposit shall be accompanied by an application by 1he 
So 
tenant containing the following particulars, namely:-
(a) the premises for whic!1 the rent is deposited with a 
description sufficient for identifying the premises; 
(b) the period for which the rent is deposited; 
(c) the name and address of the landlord or the person or 
persons claiming to be entitled to such rent; 
(d) the reasons and the circumstances for the application 
for deposit of the rent; 
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
35 (S) On such deposit of the rent being made, the Controller shall 
send in the prescribed manner a copy or copies of the application to 

18 
the landlord or persons claiming to be entitled to the rent with an 
endorsement of the date of the deposit. 
(4) If an application is made for the withdrawal of any deposit of 
rent, the Controller shall, if satisfied that the applicant is the person 
entitled to receive the rent deposited, order the amount of the rent 5 
to be paid to him in the manner prescribed: 
Provided that no order for payment of any deposit 0.£ rent shall 
bE: made by the Controller under this sub-section without giving all 
persons named by the tenant in his application under sub-section (2) 
as claiming to be entitled to payment of such rent an opportunity 10 
of being heard and such order shall be without prejudic~ to the 
rights of such persons to receive such rent being decided by a court 
of competent jurisdictIon. • 
(5) If at the time of filing the application under sub-section (1), 
but not after the expiry of thirty days from receiving the notice of IS 
deposit, the landlord or the person or persons claiming to be entitled 
to the rent complains or complain to the Controller that the sJ.ate-
ments in the tenant's application of the reasons and circums~an::es 
which led him to deposit the rent are untrue, the ControJlC!r. atter 
giving the tenant an opportunity of being heard, may levy on the 20 
tenant a fine which may extend to an amount equal to two 
months', rent, if the Controller is satisfied that the said statements 
were materially untrue and may order that a sum out of the fine 
realised be paid to the landlord as compensation. 
(6) The Controller may, on the complaint of the tenant and after 25 
giving an opportunity to the landlord of being heard, levy on the 
landlord a fine which may extend to an amount equal to two months' 
rent, if the Controller is satisfied that the landlord, without any 
reasonable cause, refused to accept rent though tendered to hlDl 
within the time referred to in section 25 and may further order that 30 
a sum out of the fine realised be paid to the tenant as compensation. 
Time limit 27. (1) No rent deposited under section 26 shall be considered to 
~o:posft'aki.:~ have been validly deposited under that section, unless the deposit 
CODsequen- is made within fifteen days of the time referred to in section 25 for ces of in- . 
correct parti- payment of the rent. 35 
culara in 
application 
for deposit. (2) No. such deposit shall be considered to have been validly 
made, if the tenant wilfully or negligently makes any false state· 
ment in his application for depositing the rent, unless the landlord 
has withdrawn the amount deposited before the date of filing an 
application for the reeovery of possession of the premises from thE' 40 
tenant. 

Hi 
(3) If the rent is deposited within the time mentioned in sub-
section (1) and does not cease to be a valid deposit for the reason 
mentioned in sub-section (2), the deposit shall constitute payment 
of rent to the landlord, as if the amount deposited had been validly 
5 tendered. 
28. (1) The withdrawal of rent deposited under section 26 in the Saving as to 
·ded th . h 11 t dm·· . aa:eptance 01 manner prOVl erem s a not opera e as an a IS810n agamst rent and 
the person withdrawing it of the correctness of the rate of rent, the forfeiture 
period of default, the amount due, or of any other facts stated in the ~~po~~~r in 
10 tenant's application for depositing the rent under the said section. 
(2) Any rent in deposit which is not withdrawn by the landlord 
or by the person or persons entitled to receive such rent shall be 
forfeited to Government by an order made by the Controller, if it 
is not withdrawn before the expiration of five years from the date 
15 of posting of the notice of deposit. 
(3) Before passing an order of forfeiture, th(: Controller shall 
gIve notice to the landlord or the person or persons entitled to 
receive the rent in deposit by registered post at the last known 
address of such landlord or person or persons and shall also publish 
2J lhe notice in his office and in any local newspaper. 
CHAPTER V 
HOTELS AND LODGING HOUSES 
29. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all hotels and AfP~cation 
ludging houses in the areas which, immediately before the 7th day Ch:p~r. 
25 of April, 1958, were included in the New Delhi Municipal Committee. 
Municipal Committee, Delhi and the Notified Area Committee, Civil 
Station, Delhi and may be applied by the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Quette, to hotels and lodging houses 
within the limits of such other uroan area of the Municipal Corpa-
30 ration of Delhi as may be specified in the notification: 
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that it 
would not be desirable in the public interest to make the provisions 
of this Chapter applicable to any class of hotels and lodging houses, 
it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt such class of 
35 hotels and lodging houses from the operation of this Chapter. 
30. (1) Where the Controller, on a written complaint or otherwise, Pi.xing of 
has reason to believe that the charges made for board or lodging ralr rale. 
or any other service provided in any hotel or lodging 

Revision 01 
fair rate. 
20 
house are excessive, he may fix a fair rate to be charged for board, 
lodging or other services provided in the hotel or lodging house and 
in fixing such fair rate, specify separately the rate for lodging, board 
vI' other services. 
(2) In determining the fair rate under sub-section (.1), the Con- 5 
troller shall have regard to the circumstances of the case and to the 
prevailing rate of charges for the same or similar accommodation, 
board and service, during the twelve months immediately preced-
ing the 1st day of June, 1951, and to any general increase in the 
cost of living after that date. 10 
31. On a written application from the manager of a hotel or the 
owner of a lodging house or otherwise, the Controller may, from 
time to time, revise the fair rate to be charged for board, lodging or 
other service in a hotel or lodging house, and fix such rate as he 
may deem fit having regard to any general rise or fall in the cost 15 
of living which may have occurred after the fixing of fail' rate. 
Charges in 32. When the Controller has determined the fair rate of charges 
excess of. t f htl ld' h fair rate U1 respec 0 a 0 e or 0 gmg ouse,-
not recover-
able. (a) the manager of the hotel or the owner of the lodging 
house, as the case may be, shall not charge any amount in excess 20 
of ,the fair rate and shall not, except with the previous written 
consent of the Controller, withdraw from the lodger any con-
cession or service allowed at the time when the Controller 
determined the fair rate; 
(b) any agreement for the payment of any charges in 2S 
excess of such fair rate shall be void in respect of such excess 
and shall be construed as if it were an agreement for payment of 
the said fair rate; 
(c) any sum paid by a lodger in excess of the fair rate shall 
1)e recoverable by him at any time within a period of six months 30 
from the date of the payment from the manager of the hotel 
o~ the owner of the lodging house or his legal representatives 
and may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, be 
deducted by such lodger from any amount payable by him to 
such manager or owner. 35 
Itec()ve~y of 33. NotWithstanding anything Qontained in this Act, the manager 
b';'I:~~:er of a hotel or the owner of a lodging house shall be entitled to re-
of a hotel cover possession of the accommodation provided by him to a lodger 
~: !~=:r on obtaining a certificate from the Controller certifying-
!louse. 
(a) that the lodger has been guilty of conduct which is 8 40 

nuisance or which causes annoyance to any adjoining or 
neighbouring lodger; 
(b) that the accommodation is reasonably and bona fide re-
quired by the o~ner of the hotel or lodging house, as the case 
5 may be, either for his own occupation or for the occupation of 
any person for whose benefit the accommodation is held, or any 
other cause which may be deemed satisfactory to the Controller; 
(c) that the lodger has failed to vacate the accommodation 
on the termination of the period of the agreement in respect 
10 thereof; 
(d) that the lodger has done any act which is inconsistent 
with the purpose for which the accommodation was given to 
him or which is likely to affect adversely or substantially the 
owner's interest therein; 
15 (e) that the lodger has failed to pay the rent due from him. 
CHAPTER VI 
ApPOINTMENT OF CONTROLLERS AND THEIR POWERS AND !':JNCTIONS 
AND APPEALS 
34. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Appoint-
20 Official Gazette, appoint as many Controllers as it think.. fit, and C::rol1e~f 
define the local limits within which, or the hotels and lodging hOllSes and addi-
f h· h h C II hI' b tiona! Con in respect 0 w IC ,eac ontro er 5 a I exercise t e powers con- trdlers. 
ferred, and perfonn the duties imposed, on Controller'i by or under 
this Act. 
25 (2) The Central Government may also, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint as many additional Controllers as it 
thinks fit and an additional Controller shall perform such of the 
functions of the Controller as may, subject to the control of the 
Central Government, be assigned to him in writing by the ControUe •. 
30 and in the discharge of these functions, an additional Controller shall 
have and shall exercise the same powers and discharge the same 
cluties as the Controller. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Control-
ler or an additional Controller, unless he has for at least five years 
35 held a judicial office in India. 

Powers of 
Controller. 
35. (1) The Controller may-
(a) transfer any proceeding pending before him for disposal 
to any additional Controller, or 
(b) withdraw any proceeding pending before any additional 
Controller and dispose it of himself or transfer the proceeding 5 
for disposal to any other additional Controller. 
(2) The Controller shall have the same powers as are vested in 
a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying 
a suit. in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any persOll 10 
and examining him on oath: 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses; 
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed; 
and any proceeding before the Controller shall be deemed to be a 15 
judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 
of the Indian Penal Code. and the Controller shall be deemed t.o be 
s civil court within the meamng of section 480 and section 482 of 
s of J898. the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1 HYH. 
(3) For the purposes of holding any inquiry or discharging any 20 
duty under this Act, the Controller may,-
(a) after glving not less than twenty-four hours' notice in 
writing, enter and inspect or authorise any officer subordinate 
to him to enter and inspect any premises at any time between 
sunrise and sunset; or 25 
(b) by written order, require any person to produce for his 
inspection all such accounts. books or other documents relevant 
to the inquiry at such time and at such place as maYDe specified 
in the order. 
(4) The Controller may, if he so thinks fit, appoint one or more 30 
persons having special knowledge of the matter under consideration 
as an assessor or assessors to advise him in the proceeding before 
him. 
Procedure to 36. (1) No order which prejudicially affects any person shall be 35 
be followed made by the Controller under this Act without Riving him a reason-
~lr ... Control- able opportunity of showin~ cause against the order proposed to be 
made and until his objections. if any. and any evidence he may 

produce in support of the same have been considered by the 
C~ntroller. 
(2) Subject to any rules that may be, made unrler this Act, the 
Controller shall, while holding an inquiry in any proceeding before 
5 him, follow as far as may be the practice and procedure of a court 
of small causes, including the recording of evidence. 
(3) In all proceedings before him, the Controller shall (onsider 
the question of costs and award such costs to or against any party 
as the Controller considers reasonable. 
10 37. (1) An appeal shall lie from every order of the Controller AthPp~ral'b to . e n u-
made under this Act to the Rent Control Tribunal (hereinafter nal. 
referred to as the "Tribunal' ) consisting of one person only to be 
appointed by the Central Government by nottftcation In the OfBcial 
Gazette. 
15 (2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be preferred within 
thirty days from the date of the order made by the Controller: 
Provided that the Tribunal may entertain the appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in 
20 time. 
(3) The t.ribunal shall have all the powers vested in a court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when hearing an appeal. 
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (3), the 
Tribunal may, on an application made to it or otherwise, by order 
25 transfer any proceeding pending before any Controller or addi-
tional Controller to another Controller or additional Controller 
and the Controller or additional Controller to whom the proceed-
ing is so transferred. may, subject to any special directions in the 
order of transfer, dispose of the proceeding. 
30 (5) A person shall not be qualified for appointment to the 
Tribunal, unless he is or has been, a district judge or has for at 
least ten years held a judicial office in India. 
38. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), an appeal Second 
shall lie to the High Court from an order made by the Tribunal appeal. 
35 within sixty days from the date of such order: 
Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after 
the expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that 
the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the 
appeal in time. 

, .::.. ~' .. \.;' ". .,( . . ...... . 
~~.-tll ... ___ , ... tt"'="""'.t"'ce, ...................... ""'''';;';;';' ...... ;.;; •. ~!:.;;.~.;;:,~.;.i.;.;.:.,. ·;.i;;:';·:'~';ih·:;':;;~·;'::;'''l·r~·~';;';:';':~'::'';''·~·'-;;'''',::-~,,;,~~2,-~~~~~~,~:,:.4,,·;g;J.¢r;'~~tii;'~;.~~·:'~!J'~4t:~;\::L~.:;~;.::~ .. ':l::!~:'.,:(."',':"~~:.\),.,:l;tf~.~ 
Amendment 
of orders. 
24 
(2) No appeal shall lie under sub-section (1) unless the appeal 
involves some substantial qwstion of law. 
39. Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any order passed by a 
Controller or the Tribunal or errors arising therein from any acci-
dental slip or omission may, at any time, be corrected by the 5 
Controller or the Tribunal on an application received in tr.is bp.half 
from any of the parties or otherwise. 
Controller to 40. Any fine imposed by a Controller under this Act shall be 
exercise f paid by the person fined within such time as may be allowed by powers 0 10 a magistrate the Controller and the Controller may, for good and sufficient 
~fr fut~~very reason, extend the time, and in default of such payment, the 
amount shall be recoverable as a fine under the provisions of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, and the Controller shall be 5 of I!!98. 
deemed to be a magistrate under the said Code for the purposes 15 
of such recovery. 
Controlle,r 41. Saw as otherwise provided in section 40, an order made by 
~w::rC1s~f the Controller or an order passed on appeal under this Act shall 
civil court be executable by the Controller as a decree of a civil court and 
~fr ~te~tion for this purpose, the Controller shall have all th~ powers of a civil 
orders. court. 20 
Finality of 
order. 
42. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every 
order made by the Controller or an order passed on appeal under 
this Act shall be final and shall not be called in question in any 
original suit, application or execution proceeding. 
CHAPTER VII 
PROVISIONS REGARDING SPECIAL OBLIGATIONS OF LANDLORDS AND 
PENALTIES 
jandlorf8 43. (I) Every landlord shall be bound to keep the premises in 
tt::yp~m!~ good and tenantable repairs, except in cases where the tenant has 
in "ood undertaken by agreement to keep the premises in repairs. 30 
repaIr. 
(2) If the landlord neglects or fa\ls to make, within a reasonable 
time after notice in writing, any repairs which he is bound to make 
under sub-section (1), the tenant may make the same himself and 
deduct the expenses of such repairs from the rent or otherWIse 
recover th~m from the landlord: 35 

~ 
Provided that the amount so deducted or recoverable in any 
year shall not exceed one-twelfth of the rent payable by the 
tenant for that year. 
(3) Where any repairs without which the premises are not 
5 habitable or useable except with undue inconvenience are to be 
made and the landlord neglects or fails to make them after notice 
in writing, the tenant may apply to the Controller for permission 
to make such repairs himself provided that the cost of such repairs 
does not exceed rent for a period of two years payable by that 
10 tenant and where such repairs are made with the permission of the 
Controller, the limitation as to the amount deductable or recover-
able as provided in sub-section (2) shall not apply. 
44. (1) No landlord either himself or through any person pur- Cutti~g off 
porting to act on his behalf shall without just or sufficient cause h~IJi~~-
15 cut off or withhold any essential supply or service enjoyed by the essential 
" ~~ ~ tenant m respect of the premises let to him. service. 
(2) If a landlord contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1), 
the tenant may make an application to the Controller complaining 
of such contravention. 
20 (3) If the Controller is satisfied that the essential supply or 
service was cut off or withheld by the landlord with a view to 
compel the tenant to vacate the premises or to pay an enhanced 
rent, the Controller may pass an order directing the landlord to 
restore the amenities immediately, pending the inquiry referred to 
25 in sub-section (4). 
Explanation.-An interim order may be passed under this sub-
section without giving notice to the landlord. 
(4) If the Controller on inquiry finds that the essential supply 
or service enjoyed by the tenant ~n respect of the premises was 
30 cut off or withheld by the landlord without just or sufficient cause, 
he shall make an order directing the landlord to restore such 
supply or service. 
(5) The Controller may in his discretion direct that compensa-
tion not exceeding fifty rupees-
35 (a) be paid to the landlord by the tenant, if the applica-
tion under SUb-section (2) was made frivolously or vexatiously; 
(b) be paid to the tenant by the landlord, if the !anrlJord 
had cut off or withheld the supply or soervice without just or 
sufftcient cau.. 

Explanation.-In this section, "essential supply or service" in-
cludes supply of water, electricity, lights in passsages and on stair-
cases, conservancy and sanitary services. 
Landlord's 45. Whenever, after the commencement of this Act, any pre-' 
d~ty t.o mises are constructed, the landlord shall, within thirty days of the 5 
give notice f ___ I.. tru ti . in . . h fin' . of new completion 0 .w.;u cons con, glve tunatlon t ereo wntmg 
construction to the Estate Officer to the Government of India or to such other to Gm'crn-
men!. officer as may be specified in this behalf by the Government. 
Leases of 46. (J) The provisions of this section shall apply only in relation 
~::i~es to premises in the areas which, immediately before the 7th day of 10 
to Govern- April, 1958, were included in the New Delhi Municipal Cummittee 
memo and which are, or are intended to be, let for use as a residence. 
(2) Whenever any premises the standard rent of which is not 
less than two thousand and four hundred rupees per year becomes 
vacant either by the landlord ceasing to occupy the premises or by 15 
the termination of a tenancy or by the eviction of 8 tenant or by 
the release of the premises from requisition or otherwise,-
(a) the landlord shall, within seven days of the premises 
becoming vacant, give intimation thereof in writing to the 
Estate Officer to the Government of India; 20 
. (b) whether or not such intimation is given, the Estate 
Officer may serve on the landlord by post or otherwise a 
notice-
(i) informing him that the premises are required by 
the Governm~nt for such period as may be specified in the 25 
notice; and 
(ii) requiring him, and every person claiming under 
him, to deliver possession of the premises forthwith to such 
. officer or person as may be specified in the notice: 
Provided that where the landlord has given the intimation 30 
required by clause (a), no notice shall be issued by the Estate 
Officer under clause (b) more than seven days after the delivery 
to him of the intimation: 
Provided further that nothing, in this sub-section shall apply in 
respect of any premlses the possession of which has been obtained 35 
by the landlord on the basis of any order made on the ground set 
forth in clause (e) of the proviso to sub-section (/) of section 14 
or in respect of any premises which have been released from reqUI-
sition for the use and occupation of the landlord himself. 

27 
(3) Upon the service of a notice under clause (b) of sub-
Fection (2), the premises shall be deemed to have been leased to 
the Government for the period specified in the notice, as from the 
date of the delivery of the intimation under clause (a) of sub-
S section (2) or in a case where no such intimation has been given, 
as from the date on which possession of the premises is delivered 
in pursuance of the notice, and the other terms of the lease shall 
be such as may be agreed upon between the Government and the 
landlord or in default of agreement, as may be determined by the 
10 Controller, in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
(4) In every case where the landlord has in accordance with the 
provisions of sub-section (2) given intimation of any premises be-
coming vacant and the premises are not taken on lease by the 
Government under this section, the Government shall pay to the 
IS landlord a sum equal to one-fifty-second of the standard rent per 
year of the premises. 
(5) Any premises taken on lease by the Government under this 
section may be put to any such use as the Government thinks fit, 
and in particular, the Government may permit the use of the pre-
20 mises for the purposes of any public institution or any foreign 
embassy, legation or consulate or any High Commissioner or Trade 
Commissioner, or as a residence by any officer in the service of the 
Government or of a foreign embassy, legation or consulate or of a 
High Commissioner or Trade Commissioner. 
2S 47. (1) If any person contravenes any of the provisions of section Penalties. 
35 
5, he shall be punishable-
(a) in the case of a contravention of the provisions of sub-
section (1) of section 5, with simple imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three Ironths, or with fine which may 
extend to a sum which exceeds the unlawful charge claimed 
or received under that sub-section by one thousand rupees, or 
with both; 
(b) in the case of a contravention of the provisions of sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 5, with simple imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine 
which may extend to a sum which exceeds the amount or value 
of unlawful charge claimed or received under the said sub-section 
(2) or sub-section (3), as the case may be, by five thousand 
rupees, or with both. 

23 
(2) If any tenant fails to comply with the provisions of clause (c) 
01 sub-section (3) of section 7, or supplies under that clause, a state-
ment which is false in any material particular, he shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to one thousana rupees. 
(3) If any tenant sub-lets the whole or part of any premises in 5 
centravention of the provisions of clause (b) of the proviso to sub-
section (1) of section 14, he shall be punishable with fine which may 
mend to one thousand rupees. 
(4) If any landlord re-Iets the whole or any part of any premises 
in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section IO 
(2) of section 18, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months, or with fine, or with both. 
(5) If any landlord contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) 
of section 44, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months, or with fine, or with both. IS 
(6) If any landlord fails to comply with the provisions of section 
45, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred 
rupees. 
(1) If any person contravenes the provisions of clause (a) of sub-
section (2) of section 46, or fails to comply with a requirement under ~ 
clause (b) thereof, he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment 
for a tenn which may extend to three months, or with fine which 
may ~tend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
arCop!!'BC.I 48. (1) No court inferior to that of a magistrate of the first class OueDCee. 
shall try any offence punishable under this Act. 25 
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under 
section 47, unless the complaint in respect of the offence has been 
made within three months from the date of the commission of the 
offence. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 of the Code 30 
of C~minal Procedure, 1898, it shall be lawful for any magistrate of 5 of 1191. 
the first class to pass a sentence of fine exceeding two thousand 
rupees on 8 person convicted of an offence punishable under section 
47. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCKLLAlfIlOus 35 
!r1di:;U 41. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provUled in this Act, no clvU 
mtuU barred court shall entertain any suit or proeeeciing in so far as It relates to 
=- == the fixation of standard rent in relation to 8ay premises to which 
mattera. 

lhis Act applies or to eviction of any tenant therefrom or to any othel-
matter which the Controller is empowered by or under this Act to 
decide, and no injunction ill respect of any action taken or to be ta.keD 
by the Controller under this Act shall be granted by any civil court 
5 or other authority. 
(2) If, immediately before the commencement of this Act, there is 
Bny suit or proceedmg pending in any civil court for the eviction of 
any tenant from any premises to which this Act applies and the con-
struction of which has been completed after the 1st day of June, 1951, 
10 but before the 9th day oi June, 1955, such suit or proceeding shall, on 
su('..h commencement, abate. 
(J) If, in pursuance of any decree or order made by a court, any 
tenant has been evicted after the 16th day of August, 1958, from any 
premiM!S to which this Act applies and the construction of which baa 
15 been completed after the 1st day of June, 1951, but before the 9th day 
of June, 1955, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law, the Controller may, on an application made to him in this behalf 
by such evicted tenant within six months from the date of eviction, 
direct the landlord to put the tenant in possession of the premises 
~ or to pay him such compensation as the Controller thinks fit. 
(4) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be construed as preventing a 
civil l.'Ourt from entertaining any suit or proceeding for the decision 
of any question of title to any premises to which this Act applies or 
any question as to the person or persons who are entitled to receive 
25 the rent of such premises. 
5 •. All Controllers and additional Controllers appointed under this ~~ 
Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaniDg of sec- public: 
tion 21 ·of the Indian Penal Code. lerVlDtI • 
.. ~ of J8~. 51. No suit, prOSE'CUtton or other legal proceeding shall lie against Pr~tectiora of 
30 any Controller or additional Contr('ller in respect of anything which =':~:. 
i~ in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act. 
31 of 19~O. 52. Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of the Adminis- Saving of 
96 or J9S6. tration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950, or the Slum Areas (Improve- operadoo or 
97 0( 1956. ment and Clearance) Act, 1956, or the Delhi Tenants (Temporary ~ ~ta. 
35 tection) Act, 1956. 
53. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Power to 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. mUe rules. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
40 ing matters, namely:-
(a) the form and manner tn which, and the period within 

30 
which, an application may be made to the Controller; 
(b) the form and manner in which an application f~ 
deposit of rent may be made and the particulars which it may 
contain; 
(c) the manner in which a Controller may hold an inquiry 5 
under this Act; 
(d) the powers of the civil court which may be vested in a 
Controller; 
(e) the form and manner in which an application for appeal 
or transfer of proceeding may be made to the Tribunal; 10 
(f) the manner of service of notices under this Act; 
(g) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid for not less than 
thirt~· days before each House of Parliament as soon as possible after 
they arE' made and shall be subject to such modifications as Parlia- 15 
ment may make during the session in which they are so laid or the 
session immediately following. 
54. (1) The Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952, in so far as it 38 of 1952. 
Repeal and is applicable to the Union territory of Delhi, is hereby repealed. savings. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all suits and other proceedings 
under the said Act pending, at the commencement of this Act, before 20 
any court or other authority shall be continued and disposed of in 
accordanCe with the provisions of the said Act, as if the said Act had 
continued in force and this Act had not been passed: 
Provided that in any such suit or proceeding for the fixation of 25 
standard rent or for the eviction of a tenant from any premises to 
which section 52 does not apply, the court or other authority shall 
have regard to the provisions of this Act: 
Provided further that the provisions for appeal under the said Act 
shall continue in force in respect of suits and proceedings disposed of 30 
tht!reunder. 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 1 (2)] 
THE URBAN AREAS WITHIN THE LIMITS OF THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or 
DELHI TO WHICH THE ACT EXTENDS 
5 The areas which, immediately before the 7th April, 1958, were 
lncluded 1n-
1. The Municipality of New Delhi excluding the area specified 
in the First Schedule to the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 
11157; 66 of 1957 
10 2. The Municipal Committee, Delhi; 
15 
3. Tbe Notified Area Committee, Civil Station, Delhi; 
4. The Municipal Committee, Delhi-Shahdara; 
5. The Notified Area Committee, Red Fort; 
6. The Municipal Committee, West Delhi. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See sections 2 (a) and 6 (a)] 
BASIC RENT 
1. In this Schedule, "basic rent" in relation to any premises let out 
before the 2nd June, 1944, means the original rent of such premises 
referred to in paragraph 2 increased by such percentage of the origi-
20 nal rent as is specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 4 or paragraph 5, 
as the case may be. 
2S 
2. "Original rent", in relation to premises referred to in paragraph 
I, means-
(a) where the rent of such premises has been fixed under the 
New Delhi House Rent Control Order, 1939, or the Delhi Rent 
Control Ordinance, 1944, the rent so fixed; or 25 of 19«. 
(b) in any other case,-
(i) the rent at which the premises were let on the 1st 
November, 1939, or 
30 (ii) if the premises were not let on that date, the rent 
at which they were first let out at any time after that date 
but before the 2nd June, 1944. 
31 . 

~. Where the ~ to which paragraph 2 applies are let out 
for the purpose of being used as a residence or for any of the purposes 
of a public hospital. an educational institution, a public library or 
reading room or an orphanage, the basic rent of the premises shall 
be the original rent increased by-
(0) 121 per cent. thereof, if the original rent per annum is 
not more than Rs. 300; 
(b) 151 per cent. thereof, if the original rent per annum 
is more than Rs. 300 but not more than Rs. 600; 
5 
(c) IS! per cent. thereof, if the original rent per annum is 10 
more than Rs. 600 but not more than Rs. 1,200; 
(d) 25 per cent. thereof, if the original rent for annum is 
more than Rs. 1,200. 
4. Whether the premises to which paragraph 2 applies are let out 
for any purpose other than those mentioned in paragraph 3, the IS 
basic rent. of the premises shall be the original rent increased by 
twice the amount by which it would be increased under paragraph 
3, if the premises were let for a purpose mentioned in that para-
graph. 
5. 'N'"here the premises to which paragraph 2 applies are used main- 20· 
1y 8!1 a Iesidence and incidentally for business or profeulon, the basic 
rent of t.he premises shall be the mean of the rent as calculated under 
paragraphs 3 and 4. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Delhi Ajmer Rent Control Act of 1952 at present governs the 
:ftlations between the landlords and tenants in Delhi. In 1956, the 
.Delhi Tenants (Temporary Protection) Act was enacted in order to 
provide temporary protection against eviction to tenants paying less 
than Rs. 100 per month as rent. 'This Act will continue to be in 
force up to February, 1959. 
2. The Delhi Rent Control Bill, which seeks to replace the Delhi 
.Ajmer Rent Control Act of 1952, is intended-
(4) to devise a suitable machinery for expeditious adjudica-
tion of proceedings between landlords and tenants; 
(b) to provide for the determination of the standard rent 
payable by tenants of the various categories of premises which 
should be fair to the tenants, and at the same time, provide 
incentive for keeping the existing houses in good repairs, and 
for further investment in house construction; and 
(c) to give tenants a larger measure of protection against 
eviction. 
3. The notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain its important 
·provisions. 
GOVIND BA.LL.A!5H PANT. 
N.w Da.m; 
The 23rd At£gUst, 1958. 
33 

Notes on some of the clauses of the Bill 
Clause 1 and the First Schedule.-The propoaed eanctment will 
apply, in the first instance, only to those areas in Delhi to which the 
Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952, is at present applicable. 
Provision has, however, been made empowering the Central Govern-
ment to extend the Act to other areas and also to exclude any area 
from the operation of the Act. 
Clauses 3 to 5.-These clauses follow broadly the earlier Act of 
1952. I" . ~ .... ; 
Clause 5 prohibits a person to claim or receive any rent in excess 
of the standard rent or any sum or other consideration, whether in 
cash or in kind, in addition to the rent. When any such sum or 
consideration is paid by the tenant to the landlord, the tenant would 
be entitled 1.0 get a refund of the amount so paid on an application 
made to the Controller under clause 13 of the Bill. The contraven-
tion of the provisions of clauses 5 (1) and 5 (2) has also been made 
a penal offence under clause 47. 
Clause 6 and the Second Schedule.-Rent control was introduced 
in 1939 in New Delhi by the New Delhi House Rent Control Order of 
1~. It was made applicable to old Delhi by the Delhi Rent Control 
Ordinance of 1944. The Delhi and Ajmer-Merwara Rent Control 
Act of 1947 replaced the earlier laws on the subject and allowed a 
graded increase in respect of premises which were let out before 2nd 
June, 1944. The effect of the increases given in the Act of 1947 was 
to bring the rent level of pre-1944 premises generally to 7l per cent. 
of the cost of construction. 
By the Act of 1952, which is currently in force, no changes were 
made in the rent structure. The court was, however, empowered to 
nx the standard rent of houses let out afrer 2nd June, 1944, so as not 
to exceed 71 per cent. of the reasonable cost of construction including 
the market value of the land. The Act also exempted all new 
houses which were completed between 2nd June, 1951, and 8th June, 
1955, for a period of seven years from the date of their completion. 
The Act was, however, applicable to the premises constructed and 
let out after 8th June, 1955. 
In view of the increase in the cost of building materials and 
labour, and the need to keep the buildings in the state of repair, the 
present Bill seeks to provide for an increase of 10 per cent. of the 
34 

35 
standard rent in respect of residential and non-residential premises 
constructed before 2nd June, 1951. For the purpose of fixing stand-
ard rent, the premises have been divided broadly into two categories 
-the premises constructed before the 2nd June, 1951, and those con-
structed after that date. 
In the pre-1951 premises, if they were let before 2nd June, 1944, 
rent has to be determined in accordance with the provisions of the 
Second Schedule of the Act of 1952 and an increase of 10 per cent. 
over such basic rent will be the standard rent. If the premises were 
let after 2nd June, 1944, and if their rent has already been fixed 
under any of the earlier Acts, an increase of 10 per cent. over the 
rent so fixed will be the standard rent. If, however, rent has not 
been fixed under any of the earlier Acts, standard rent will be 
determined with reference to 81th per cent. of the cost of construc-
tion of the premises and the price of the land. So long as the stand-
ard rent is not so fixed, the rent at which they were first let out 
together with 10 per cent. of such rent will continue to be the stand-
ard rent. 
In the case of post-1951 premises, those which were constructed 
between the 2nd June, 1951, and 8th June, 1955, were exempt from 
the operation of the existing Act. It is proposed that the rent of 
such premises should be frozen at the existing level and 
rent will be payable by the tenants at that rate for the period of 
seven years for which the premises were exempted under that Act, 
and as and when the period of exemption expires in respect of any 
premises, the rent will be revisable on an application to the Control-
ler so as not to exceed 81th per cent. of the reasonable cost of cons-
truction including the market price of the land. 
In the case of premises constructed after the 8th June, 1955, it 
is proposed that the rent at which the premises are first let out shall 
be deemed to be the standard rent for a period of five years from 
the date of such letting out and on the expiry of that period 
rent would be revisable on application to the Controller, having 
regard to the cost of construction and the price of the land. 
Clause 9.-All suits and proceedings arising out of the existing 
Act of 1952 are adjudicated by civil courts. In order that there may 
be a more expeditious disposal of such proceedings, it has been provid-
ed that such proceedings will be adjudicated by specially appointed 
Rent Controllers. 
Clauses 12 and 13.-The Act of 1952 prescribed that the period of 
limitation for the filing of an application for the fixation of standard 
rent or for the refund of any unlawful payment made to the landlord 

36 
would be six months. These clauses enhance the period of limitation 
from six months to one year. 
Clause 14.-'I'his clause specifies the grounds on which a tenant 
may be evicted. 
Default in the payment of rent is one of such grounds. It has 
been dealt with in proviso (a) to clause 14 (1) and clauses 14 (2) and 
15. In every proceeding for the eviction of a tenant on such a ground, 
the Controller should make an order directing the tenant to 
payor deposit the rent due within one month from the date of the 
order. If there is any dispute about the rate of rent, the Controller 
should, within 15 days of the date of the first hearing, fix an interim 
rent and direct the tenant to pay the amount. He should then fix the 
standard rent and the arrears should be cleared within one month 
of the date of the order fixing the standard rent. If there is any dis-
pute as to the person or persons who are entitled to the rent, the 
Controller should direct the tenant to deposit the rent due and decide 
the dispute and until the dispute is so decided, no person would be 
allowed to withdraw the amount of rent in deposit. If a tenant 
raises a false or frivolous dispute regarding the landlord's title, his 
defence may be struck off. Provision has been made that no tenant 
would be liable to eviction on the ground of default in the payment 
of rent, if the arrears of rent are paid or deposited in accordance 
with -the directions of the Contrpller. The tenant would not, how-
ever, be entitled to any such relief in the event of any subsequent 
default on his part. 
Sub-letting by a tenant is another ground for his eviction. For 
the purpose of creating a valid sub-tenancy, it is necessary, under 
the Act of 1952, to obtain a written consent of the landlord but no 
such written consent was n'ecessary under the Act of 1947. This 
problem of sub-tenancy has been dealt with in the proviso (b) to 
clause 14 (1), clauses 14(1), 14(4), 16 and 17. 
The existing provisions have been retained but it has also been 
provided that in the case of non-residential premises, sub-letting 
will be prohibited even in the fonn of partnership without the 
written consent of the landlord. 
As it is often difficult to ascertain whether a sub-tenancy was 
lawfully created, clause 16 provides that every tenant and sub-
tenant may give notice of the creation of sub-tenancy and if there 
is any dispute over the matter, the Controller would settle it. Such 
a sub-tenant who has given notice of his sub-tenancy cannot be 
evicted unless the order of eviction is made binding on him. Clause 

37 
17 further provides for the circumstances in which a sub-tenant can 
become a tenant holding directly under the landlord. 
Using premises for a purpose other than that for which it is let 
is also a ground for eviction under the existing law. It has been 
provided in clause 14 (5) that no proceeding for the eviction of a 
tenant on such a ground would lie unless the landlord has given 
notice to stop the misuse and the tenant has failed to comply with 
the requirement. It is further provided that no order shall be 
made for eviction on such a ground, unless the misuse is of a nature 
detrimental to the interest of the landlord. 
Under the. existing law, a landlord can recover possession of any 
premises let for residential purposes, if they are required bona fide 
by the landlord or his family. Under the Bill, bona fide require-
ment of the premises for the family of the landlord will not be a 
ground for the eviction of the tenant. It is also provided that an 
order for eviction on such a ground will not be executed within six 
months from the date of the order and the landlord has further 
been prohibited under clause 18 from re-Ietting the premises for a 
period of three years except with the prior approval of the 
Controller. Infringement of this provision has been made a penal 
offence under clause 47. 
Clause 14 (7) further provides that when a landlord wants to re-
cover possession of any premises for the purpose of building or re-
building or making substantial alterations to any premises, the 
Controller shall not pass the order of eviction, unless he is satisfied 
that such reconstruction will not alter the purpose for which the 
premises were originally let and that the landlord has necessary 
funds to carry out the reconstruction. . 
Under the existing law, a tenant can be evicted, if his conduct is 
a nuisance or causes annoyance to others. This provision has been 
omitted from the Bill. 
Clause 20.-ln order to ensure that tenancies for limited periods 
are created only in genuine cases, this clause provides that an agree-
ment for the creation of such a tenancy must be made with the 
approval of the Controller. 
Clauses 25 to 28.-These clauses deal with the provisions relating 
to deposit of rent. They impose an obligation on the landlord to 
issue a receipt for the amount of rent paid. They deal with the 
circumstances in which rent may be deposited with the Controller 
and certain incidental matter!!, 

38 
Clauses 29 to 33.-These clauses correspond to sections 22 to 28 
of the existing Act of 1952 with suitable modifications. 
Clause 34-Under the existing law, all proceedings relating to 
the fixation of standard rent or the eviction of tenants are adjudi-
cated by civil courts. This clause contemplates appointment of 
Controllers and additional Controllers for the disposal of such 
proceedings. 
Clauses 35 to 42.-These clauses deal with the powers of Cont-
rollers, procedure to be followed by them, the appointment of a 
Rent Control Tribunal to hear appeals against the orders of Cont-
rollers and additional Controllers and other incidental matters. 
Clause 49.-Sub-clause (1) bars the jurisdiction of civil courts in 
respect of all matters which the Controller is competent to decide. 
The premises constructed between 2nd June, 1951, and 8th .Tune, 
1955, were exempt from the Act of 1952. It is now proposed to 
'extend the provisions relating to protection against eviction to such 
premises also. Sub-clauses (2) and (n seek to give some reli'ef to 
the tenants of such premises in respect of eviction proceedings insti-
tuted before the commencement of the Act. 
Clause 52.-The Delhi Tenants (Temporary Protection) Act, 1952, 
will continue to be in force till February, 1959. It is proposed that 
the operation of that Act should not be affected by the provisions of 
this Bill. 
Provisions of the Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 
1956, will also not be affected by the present Bill. Under that Act, a 
tenant living in a declared slum area cannot be evicted in pursuance 
of any decree or order except with the previous permission in 
writing of the competent al1thority. The protection given to the 
tenants in slum areas would not be affected by this Bill. 
Existing provisions in the Administration of Evacuee Property 
Act, 1950, would also remain undisturbed by this Bill. 
Clause 54.-This Bill, when enacted, would replace the earlier Act 
of 1952. But a large number of suits and proceedings under that Act 
are pending before various civil courtl';. It is proposed not to transfer 
them to Controllers but to anow the civil COl1rtr; to dispose them of. 
The civil courts, however, should have regard to the provisions of 
the Bill in disposing of such proceedings. 
• 

fINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 34 of the Bill contemplates the appointment of Controllers 
and addItional Controllers for the expeditious adjudication of pro-
ceedings which may arI~e out of the provisions of the Bill when 
enacted. For this purpose, it is proposed to divide Delhi into a num-
ber of zones, with a Rent Controller for each such zone. Under sec-
tion 37, appeals from the orders of Controllers will lie to the Rent 
Control Tribunal. It is proposed to appoint six Controllers with 
their complement of subordinate staff. The Appellate Tribunal 
will consist of a district judge. The total cost on the officers and 
staff is ~xpected to be about Rs. 89,900 per annum. During the first 
year the expenditure will not exceed half the amount. 

MEMORANDUM REOARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 53 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules in respect of matters specified therein. They relate, inter alia, 
to the l'orm and manner in which applications lllay be mati.e to Con-
trollers or for deposit of rent, the manner in which inquiries may be 
held by Controllers, the form and manner in which appeals and appli-
cations for transfer may be made and the manner of service of notice 
req uir~d to be served. The matters in respect of which rules may be 
made are of a routine and administrative character. Moreover, the 
-rules shall be subject to the scrutiny of Parliament. The delegation 
of legislative power is thus of a normal character. 
40 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the control of rents and evictions, and for the 
lease of vacant premises to Govenunent, in certain areas in 
the Union territory of Delhi. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
. the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shr£ Govind Ballabh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 