THE CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT 
BILL, 1960 . 
• 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

5 
Btu No. " or 1-.. 
THE CIUMINAL LAW AMENDMENT BILL. 19OO 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABRA) 
A 
BILL ' 
to lupplement the criminal ltIw. 
BE it ena.;:ted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India a& follows:-· 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 
1960. 
(2) It extendc; to the whole of India except the State of Jamm1l 
and Kashmir. 
2. Whoever by words either spoken or written, or by signs, or OacttioDifti 
b . 'bl t t' th' 'th . at die terri-y VISI e represen a Ion or 0 erWlse, questIons e terrI tori tori" in-
integrit~ o~ frontiers o~ India in a manner which is, o~ is likelY ,to ~~~n ~i 
10 be, prejudIcial to the mterests of the safety or 3ecurlty of IndIa, India in a 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term whirh may extend ;:!d:i Pr:; 
to three years, or with fine. or with both, the inter-ests of 
wcry and 
security of 
India. 
3. (1) If the Central Government considers that in the interests Stat~ents, 
of the sarety or security of India or in the public interest, it is ~~·lft~ arc! 
15 necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the prejudi~1 
d ' " th f' to ma'Dte~ Official Gazette, declare any area a Jommg e rontlers of India nance of 
to be a notified ar!:':.,,; and thereupon, for so long as the notification PUdbliC etc. . , . or cr, • 
IS m force, such area shall be a notIfied area for the purposes of thilt therein or , ro ~ty 
section, or aec:urity 
2.0 (2) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates in any notified area of India and 
t h' h ' . l'k I t b . d' rcauJatton any statement, rumour or repor W IC IS, or IS 1 e y 0 e, preJu 1- of entry of 
cial to the maintenance of public order or essential supplies or~' ba 
!;ervices in the said area or to the interests of, the safety or security such area. 

2 
of India, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
(3) On and after such day as may be specified in. and subject to 
any exemptions for which provision may be lllade by, a notification 
issued under sub-~ection (1), no person who was not immediately S 
before the said day a resident in the area declared to be a notified 
area by the notification shall enter or attemp~ tc enter that area or 
be therein except in accordance with the terms of a pe:rmit in writing 
granted to him by a person, not below the rank of a magistrate of 
the first class, specified in the said notification. 10 
,(4) Any police officer, not below the rank of a sub-inspector of 
police, may search any person entering 'or attempting to enter, or 
b~ng in, or leaving, a notified area and any vehicle, vessel, animal 
or article brought in by such person, and may, for the purpose of the 
search, detain such person, vehicle, vessel, animal or article: IS 
Provided that no woman shall be searched in pursuance (If this 
sub-section except by a woman authorised in this behalf by the 
police officer. 
(5) If any person is in a notified area in ('ontravention of the 
provisions of sub-section (3), then, without prejudice to any other 20 
proceedings which may be taken against him, he may be removed 
therefrom by or under the direction of any police officer on duty 
in the notified area, not below the rank of sub-inspector of· police. 
(6) If any person enters or attempts to ~nter a notified area or 
is therein in contravention of any of the provisions of sub-section 25 
(3). he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
Power to 4. (1) Where any newspaper or book as defined in the Press and 
!~~u~: Registration of Books A('t, 1867, or any other document, wherever 2S of 
cati0!18 printed, appears to the State Government to contain any matter the 30 
!':t1~~4ssue pUblication of which is punishable under section 2 or f:ub-section (2) 
IICBl'clt war- ot c;ection 3, the State Government may, by notification in the 
::. for the Ofhcial Gazette, stating the grounds of its opinion, declare every 
copy of the issue of the newspaper containing such matter and 
every copy of such book or other document to be forfeited to the 35 
Government, and thereupon any police officer may seize the same 
wherever found and any magistrate may by warunt authorise any 
police officer not below the rank of sub-inspector to enter upon and 
search for the same in any premises where any copy of such issue 
or any copy of such book or other document may be or may be 40 
reasonably suspected to be. 
(2) The powers conferred by sub-section' (1) on the State Govern-
ment may also be exercised by the Central Government. 

a 
(3) In sub-section (1) "document" includes also any painting, 
drawing or photograph, or other visible representation. 
5 .• ( 1) Any person having any interest in any newspaper, book Applicati~n 
or other document in respect of which an order of forfeiture has ~oUrt t~l~ 
5 been made under section 4 may within two months from the date aSridfierfi ~rde 
. ' . 0 0 eltUre 
of such order, apply to the HIgh Court to set aSIde such order on 
the ground that the issue of the newspaper, or the book or other 
document in respect of which the order was made did not contain 
any matter of such a nature as is referred to;n sub-section (1) of 
10 section 4. 
(2) The provisions of sections 99C to 99F of the Code of Criminal 
5 of 1898. Procedure. 1898, shall apply in relation to an application under sub-
section (1) as they apply in relation to an application under section 
99B of that Code and the reference in sectien 99D to seditious o.r 
15 other matter of such a nature as is referred to in sub-section (1) of 
section 99A of that code shall be construed as a reference to any 
matter of such a nature- as is referred to in sub-section (1) of section 
4 of this Act. 
(3) No order passed or action taken under section 4 shall be 
called in question in any court otherwise than in accordance with the 20 
provisions of this section. 
. ; 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Certain recent developments in the regions adjoining the borders 
of India and in other parts of the country likely to jeopardise the 
security of the country and its frontiers point to the necessity of 
placing curbs on such activities. The Criminal Law Amendment 
Bill, 1960, accordingly seeks to provide for punishment to person 
who may question the territorial integrity or frontiers of India in 
a manner prejudicial to the safety and security of the country, and 
for other cogna~e matters. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DJ:Lm; 
The 17th Decemb,27', 1960. 
4 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
There is no provision in the Criminal Law Amendment Bill, 1960, 
'Which would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is, however, likely that the administration of the differ-
ent provisions of the Bill, when enacted, may involve expenditure 
indirectly in the employment of police, Magistrates and in the care 
and maintenance of persons convicted. The expenditure is not ex-
pected to be large and is not likely to exceed Rs. 5,000 annually. 

LOK SABH1' 
A 
BU.!. 
[0 supplement the criminal laW. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India, reconunendcd to Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary 
(Shri GOf)ind Ballabh Pa"t, 
Minister of Home Affairs) 