1
Short title.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMATI MEENAKASHI LEKHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
2. In article 51A of the Constitution, after clause (k), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(l) who is eligible to vote, to cast his vote at elections to the House of the people,
Legislative Assemblies of States and institutions of local self-Government.”.
Bill No. 96 of  2017
Amendment
of article
51A.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the largest democracy in the world. It has a strong parliamentary system. Since
1951, free and fair elections to the Houses of Parliament, State Legislatures and Local bodies
have been held at regular intervals. Indian elections are benchmark for many other countries.
At present a candidate is declared as elected even if he secures seventeen per cent. of
the votes polled. Though he has won the seat, yet he may not have the support of even half
of the electors. In the true sense, he is not representing the majority of voters in the
constituency from which he has been elected.
The percentage of votes polled at every elections is very less which shows that
people are not willing to participate in the election process. Sometimes in some of the
constituencies, as low as thirty per cent. of the total votes are polled. This is not a healthy
sign for democracy. Casting a vote at an election is one of the duty of community service
mentioned in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Introducing an obligation to vote
will help in strengthening the democracy and, electing a government with more stability,
legitimacy and genuine mandate. Compulsory voting system can confer a high degree of
political legitimacy because it results in high voter turnout. High level of participation
decreases the risk of political instability.
The compulsory voting is a system in which electors are obliged to cast their votes in
elections.
Therefore, it is proposed to make it a fundamental duty of every eligible citizen to cast
vote at elections to the House of the people, Legislative Assemblies and Institutions of
local self-Government.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MEENAKASHI  LEKHI
November 18, 2016.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
PART IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
51A. It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
(a)* * * * *
* * * * *
(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his child or, as
the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.
* * * * *
Fundamental
duties.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4153LS(S3)—05-07-2017.