1
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
PART  I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment) Act,
2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title and
commencement.
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA ON 22.12.2008
Bill No. 96-C of 2006

2
PART II
AMENDMENTS TO THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000
2. In the Information Technology Act, 2000 (hereinafter in this Part referred to as the
principal Act), for the words “digital signature” occurring in the Chapter, section, sub-
section and clause referred to in the Table below, the words “electronic signature” shall be
substituted.
T
ABLE
S.No. Chapter/section/sub-section/clause
(1) clauses ( d), (g), (h) and ( zg) of section 2;
(2) section 5 and its marginal heading;
(3) marginal heading of section 6;
(4) clauses ( a), (b), (c) and (e) of section 10 and its marginal heading;
(5) heading of Chapter V;
(6) clauses ( f) and (g) of section 18;
(7) sub-section ( 2) of section 19;
(8) sub-sections ( 1) and (2) of section 21 and its marginal heading;
(9) sub-section ( 3) of section 25;
(10) clause (c) of section 30;
(11) clauses (a) and (d) of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of section 34;
(12) heading of Chapter VII;
(13) section 35 and its marginal heading;
(14) section 64;
(15) section 71;
(16) sub-section (1) of section 73 and its marginal heading;
(17) section 74; and
(18) clauses (d), (n) and (o) of sub-section (2) of section 87.
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, for sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(4) Nothing in this Act shall apply to documents or transactions specified in
the First Schedule:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
amend the First Schedule by way of addition or deletion of entries thereto.
(5) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 4) shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.”.
4. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(A) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ha) “communication device” means cell phones, personal digital
assistance or combination of both or any otehr device used to communicate,
send or transmit any text, video, audio or image;’;
(B) for clause (j), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(j) “computer network” means the inter-connection of one or more
computers or computer systems or communication device through—
(i) the use of satellite, microwave, terrestrial line, wire, wireless or
other communication media; and
(ii) terminals or a complex consisting of two or more inter-connected
computers or communication device whether or not the inter-connection
is continuously maintained;’;
Substitution of
words “digital
signature” by
words
“electronic
signature”.
21 of 2000.
Amendment
of section 1.
Amendment
of section 2.

3
(C) in clause (n), the word “Regulations” shall be omitted;
(D) after clause (n), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(na) “cyber cafe” means any facility from where access to the internet is
offered by any person in the ordinary course of business to the members of the
public;
(nb) “cyber security” means protecting information, equipment, devices
computer, computer resource, communication device and information stroed
therein from unauthorised access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification or
destruction;’.
(E) after clause (t), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ta) “electronic signature” means authentication of any electronic record
by a subscriber by means of the electronic technique specified in the Second
Schedule and includes digital signature;
(tb) “Electronic Signature Certificate” means an Electronic Signature
Certificate issued under section 35 and includes Digital Signature Certificate;’;
(F) after clause (u), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
’(ua) “Indian Computer Emergency Response Team” means an agency
established under sub-section (1) of section 70B;’;
(G) in clause (v), for the words “data, text”, the words “data, message, text” shall
be substituted;
(H) for clause (w), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(w) “intermediary”, with respect to any particular electronic records, means
any person who on behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that
record or provides any service with respect to that record and includes telecom
service providers, network service providers, internet service providers, web-
hosting service providers, search engines, online payment sites, online-auction
sites, online-market places and cyber cafes;’.
5. In Chapter II of the principal Act, for the heading, the heading “D
IGITAL SIGNATURE
AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE’’ shall be substituted.
6. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“3A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, but subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2), a subscriber may authenticate any electronic record by
such electronic signature or electronic authentication technique which—
(a) is considered reliable; and
(b) may be specified in the Second Schedule.
(2) For the purposes of this section any electronic signature or electronic
authentication technique shall be considered reliable if—
(a) the signature creation data or the authentication data are, within the
context in which they are used, linked to the signatory or, as the case may be, the
authenticator and to no other person;
(b) the signature creation data or the authentication data were, at the time
of signing, under the control of the signatory or, as the case may be, the
authenticator and of no other person;
(c) any alteration to the electronic signature made after affixing such
signature is detectable;
(d) any alteration to the information made after its authentication by
electronic signature is detectable; and
(e) it fulfils such other conditions which may be prescribed.
Insertion of
new section
3A.
Amendment of
heading of
Chapter II.
Electronic
signature.

4
(3) The Central Government may prescribe the procedure for the purpose of
ascertaining whether electronic signature is that of the person by whom it is purported
to have been affixed or authenticated.
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to or
omit any electronic signature or electronic authentication technique and the procedure
for affixing such signature from the Second Schedule:
Provided that no electronic signature or authentication technique shall be
specified in the Second Schedule unless such signature or technique is reliable.
(5) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 4) shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.”.
7. After section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
'6A. (1) The appropriate Government may, for the purposes of this Chapter and
for efficient delivery of services to the public through electronic means authorise, by
order, any service provider to set up, maintain and upgrade the computerised facilities
and perform such other services as it may specify, by notification in the Official
Gazette.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, service provider so authorised
includes any individual, private agency, private company, partnership firm, sole
proprietor firm or any such other body or agency which has been granted permission
by the appropriate Government to offer services through electronic means in
accordance with the policy governing such service sector.
(2) The appropriate Government may also authorise any service provider
authorised under sub-section (1) to collect, retain and appropriate such service charges,
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government for the purpose of providing
such services, from the person availing such service.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), the appropriate Government
may authorise the service providers to collect, retain and appropriate service charges
under this section notwithstanding the fact that there is no express provision under
the Act, rule, regulation or notification under which the service is provided to collect,
retain and appropriate e-service charges by the service providers.
(4) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify the scale of service charges which may be charged and collected by the
service providers under this section:
Provided that the appropriate Government may specify different scale of service
charges for different types of services.'.
8. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“7A. Where in any law for the time being in force, there is a provision for audit of
documents, records or information, that provision shall also be applicable for audit of
documents, records or information processed and maintanined in the electronic form.”.
9. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“10A. Where in a contract formation, the communication of proposals, the
acceptance of proposals, the revocation of proposals and acceptances, as the case
may be, are expressed in electronic form or by means of an electronic record, such
contract shall not be deemed to be unenforceable solely on the ground that such
electronic form or means was used for that purpose.”.
Insertion of
new section
6A.
Delivery of
services by
service
provider.
Insertion of
new section
10A.
Audit or
documents,
etc.,
maintained in
electronic
form.
Validity of
contracts
formed
through
electronic
means.
Insertion of
new section
7A.

5
10. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “agreed with the
addressee”, the word “stipulated” shall be substituted.
11. For sections 15 and 16 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘15. An electronic signature shall be deemed to be a secure electronic signature
if—
(i) the signature creation data, at the time of affixing signature, was under
the exclusive control of signatory and no other person; and
(ii) the signature creation data was stored and affixed in such exclusive
manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—In case of digital signature, the “signature creation data” means
the private key of the subscriber.
16. The Central Government may, for the purposes of sections 14 and 15,
prescribe the security procedures and practices:
Provided that in prescribing such security procedures and practices, the Central
Government shall have regard to the commercial circumstances, nature of transactions
and such other related factors as it may consider appropriate.'.
12. In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “and Assistant Controllers”, the words
“,Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees” shall be substiuted; and
(b) in sub-section ( 4), for the words “and Assistant Controllers”, the words
“,Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees” shall be substituted.”.
13. Section 20 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
14. In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words “any
contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations made thereunder", the
words “any contravention of the provisions of this Chapter” shall be substituted.
15. In section 30 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause (c), after the word “assured”, the word “and” shall be omitted;
(ii) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ca) be the repository of all Electronic Signature Certificates issued under
this Act;
(cb) publish information regarding its practices, Electronic Signature
Certificates and current status of such certificates; and”.
16. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (a), the words “which
contains the public key corresponding to the private key used by that Certifying Authority
to digitally sign another Digital Signature Certificate” shall be omitted.
17. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), —
(a) the first proviso shall be omitted;
(b) in the second proviso, for the words "Provided further", the word "Provided"
shall be substituted.
18. In section 36 of the principal Act, after clause (c), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(ca) the subscriber holds a private key which is capable of creating a digital
signature;
(
cb) the public key to be listed in the certificate can be used to verify a digital
signature affixed by the private key held by the subscriber;”.
Security
procedures and
practices.
Amendment of
section 29.
Amendment of
section 30.
Amendment of
section 34.
Amendment of
section 35.
Amendment of
section 36.
Omission of
section 20.
Amendment
of section 12.
Substitution of
new sections
for sections
15 and 16.
Secure
electronic
signature.
Amendment of
section 17.

6
19. After section 40 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
 namely:—
“40A. In respect of Electronic Signature Certificate the subscriber shall perform
such duties as may be prescribed.’’.
20. In Chapter IX of the principal Act, in the heading, for the words “P ENALTIES AND
ADJUDICATION ”, the words “PENALTIES, COMPENSATION AND ADJUDICATION” shall be substituted.
 21. In section 43 of the principal Act,—
(a)  in the marginal heading, for the word “Penalty”, the  words “Penalty and
Compensation” shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (a), after the words “computer network”, the words “or computer
resoruce” shall be inserted;
(c) after clause (h), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(i) destroys, deletes or alters any information residing in a computer
resource or diminishes its value or utility or affects it injuriously by any means;
(j) steel, conceals, destroys or alters or causes any person to steal, conceal,
destroy or alter any computer source code used for a computer resource with an
intention to cause damage;”;
(d) for the portion begining with the words “he shall be liable to pay damages”
and ending with the words “persons so affected” the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
“he shall be liable to pay damages by way of compensation to the person
so affected”;
(e) in the Explanation, after clause (iv), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(v) “computer source code” means the listing of programmes, computer
commands, design and layout and programme analysis of computer resource in any
form.”.
22.  After section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘43A. Where a body corporate, possessing, dealing or handling any sensitive
personal data or information in a computer resource which it owns, controls or operates,
is negligent in implementing and maintaining reasonable security practices and
procedures and thereby causes wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person, such
body corporate shall be liable to pay damages by way of compensation to the person
so affected.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) “body corporate” means any company and includes a firm, sole
proprietorship or other association of individuals engaged in commercial or
professional activities;
(ii) “reasonable security practices and procedures” means security
practices and procedures designed to protect such information from unauthorised
access, damage, use, modification, disclosure or impairment, as may be specified
in an agreement between the parties or as may be specified in any law for the time
being in force and in the absence of such agreement or any law, such reasonable
security practices and procedures, as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with such professional bodies or associations as it
may deem fit;
Insertion of
new section
43A.
Compensation
for failure to
protect data.
Insertion of
new section
40A.
Duties of
subscriber of
Electronic
Signature
Certificate.
Amendment of
heading of
Chapter IX.
Amendment of
section 43.

7
(iii) “sensitive personal data or information” means such personal
information as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation
with such professional bodies or associations as it may deem fit.’.
23.  In section 46 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “direction or order made thereunder”, the
words “direction or order made thereunder which renders him liable to pay penalty or
compensation,” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, nanmely:—
“(1A). The adjudicating officer appointed under sub-section ( 1) shall
exercise jurisdiction to adjudicate matters in which the claim for injury or damage
does not exceed rupees five crore:
Provided that the jurisdiction in respect of the claim for injury or damage
exceeding rupees five crore shall vest with the competent court.”;
(c) in sub-section ( 5), after clause ( b) the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(c) shall be deemed to be a civil court for purposes of Order XXI of the
Civil Procedure Code, 1908.”.
24. In Chapter X of the principal Act, in the heading, the word “R
EGULATIONS” shall be
omitted.
25. In section 48 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the word “Regulations” shall
be omitted.
26. For sections 49 to 52 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“49. (1) The Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and such
number of other Members, as the Ce ntral Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that the person appointed as the Presiding Officer of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal under the provisions of this Act immediately before the commencement of the
Information  Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 shall be deemed to have been
appointed as the Chairperson of the said Cyber Appellate Tribunal under the provisions
of this Act as amended by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) The selection of Chairperson and Members of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal
shall be made by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of
India.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act—
(a) the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal
may be exercised by the Benches thereof;
(b) a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal with one or two Members of such Tribunal as the Chairperson may
deem fit:
(c) the Benches of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall sit at New Delhi and
at such other places as the Central Government may, in consultation with the
Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify;
5 of 1908.
Amendment of
section 46.
Amendment of
heading of
Chapter X.
Amendment of
section 48.
Substitution of
new sections
for sections 49
to 52.
Composition
of Cyber
Appellate
Tribunal.

8
(d) the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify the areas in relation to which each Bench of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal
may exercise its jurisdiction.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the Chairperson of
the Cyber Appellate Tribunal may transfer a Member of such Tribunal from one Bench
to another Bench.
(5) If at any stage of the hearing of any case or matter it appears to the Chairperson
or a Member of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal that the case or matter is of such a nature
that it ought to be heard by a Bench consisting of more Members, the case or matter
may be transferred by the Chairperson to such Bench as the Chairperson may deem fit.
50. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Chairperson of the
Cyber Appellate Tribunal unless he is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of a
High Court.
(2) The Members of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal, except the Judicial Member to
be appointed under sub-section ( 3), shall be appointed by the Central Government
from amongst persons, having special knowledge of, and professional experience in,
information technology, telecommunication, industry, management or consumer affairs:
Provided that a person shall not be appointed as a Member, unless he is, or has
been, in the service of the Central Government or a State Government, and has held the
post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the
Central Government or State Government for a period of not less than one years or
Joint Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the Central
Government or State Government for a period of not less than seven years.
(3) The Judicial Members of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by
the Central Government from amongst persons who is or has been a member of the
Indian Legal Service and has held the post of Additional Secretary for a period of not
less than one year or Grade I post of that Service for a period of not less than five years.
51. (1) The Chairperson or Member of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall hold
office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until
he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.
(2) Before appointing any person as the Chairperson or Member of the Cyber
Appellate Tribunal, the Central Government shall satisfy itself that the person does
not have any such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his
functions as such Chairperson or Member.
(3) An officer of the Central Government or State Government on his selection as
the Chairperson or Member of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, shall
have to retire from service before joining as such Chairperson or Member.
52. The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits of, the Chairperson
or a Member of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.
52A. The Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall have powers of
general superintendence and directions in the conduct of the affairs of that Tribunal
and he shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Tribunal, exercise and
discharge such powers and functions of the Tribunal as may be prescribed.
Qualifications
for appoint-
ment as
Chairperson
and Members
of Cyber
Appellate
Tribunal.
Term of
office,
conditions of
service, etc.,
of Chairperson
and Members.
Salary,
allowances and
other terms
and conditions
of service of
Chairperson
and Members.
Powers of
superintendence,
direction, etc.

9
52B. Where Benches are constituted, the Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal may, by order, distribute the business of that Tribunal amongst the Benches
and also the matters to be dealt with by each Bench.
52C. On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the parties, and
after hearing such of them as he may deem proper to be heard, or suo motu without
such notice, the Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal may transfer any case
pending before one Bench, for disposal to any other Bench.
52D. If the Members of a Bench consisting of two Members differ in opinion on
any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference
to the Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal who shall hear the point or points
himself and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the
majority of the Members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.”.
27. In section 53 of the principal Act, for the words “Presiding Officer”, the words
“Chairperson or Member, as the case may be,” shall be substituted.
28. In section 54 of the principal Act, for the words “Presiding Officer” wherever they
occur, the words “Chairperson or the Member” shall be substituted.
29. In section 55 of the principal Act, for the words “Presiding Officer”, the words
“Chairperson or the Member” shall be substituted.
30. In section 56 of the Principal Act, for the words “Presiding Officer”, the word
“Chairperson” shall be substituted.
31. In section 64 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words “penalty imposed”, the words “penalty imposed or compensation
awarded” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the marginal heading, for the word “penalty”, the words “penalty or
compensation” shall be substituted.
32. For sections 66 and 67 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
 ‘66. If any person, dishonestly or fraudulently, does any act referred to in section
43, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) the word “dishonestly” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section
24 of the Indian Penal Code;
(b) the word “fraudulently” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section
25 of the Indian Penal Code.
66A. Any person who sends, by means of a computer resource or a
communication device,—
(a) any information that is grossly offensive or has menacing character; or
(b) any information which he knows to be false, but for the purpose of
causing annoyance, inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult, injury, criminal
intimidation, enmity, hatred or ill will, persistently by making  use of such computer
resource or a communication device,
(c) any electronic mail or electronic mail message for the purpose of causing
annoyance or inconvenience or to deceive or to mislead the addressee or recipient
about the origin of such messages,
Distribution
of business
among
Benches.
Power of
Chairperson
to transfer
cases.
Decision by
majority.
Amendment
of section 53.
Amendment
of section 54.
Amendment
of section 55.
Amendment
of section 56.
Amendment
of section 64.
Substitution of
new sections
for sections 66
and 67.
Computer
related
offences.
Punishment
for sending
offensive
messages
through
communication
service, etc.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.

10
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and
with fine.
‘Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, terms “electronic mail” and
“electronic mail message” means a message or information created or transmitted or
received on a computer, computer system, computer resource or communication device
including  attachments in text, images, audio, video and any other electronic record,
which may be transmitted with the message.
66B. Whoever dishonestly received or retains any stolen computer resource or
communication device knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen computer
resource or communication device, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to rupees one lakh
or with both.
66C. Whoever, fraudulently or dishonestly make use of the electronic signature,
password or any other unique identification feature of any other person, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall
also be liable to fine with may extend to rupees one lakh.
66D. Whoever, by means for any communication device or computer resource cheats
by personating, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupee.
66E. Whoever, intentionally or knowingly captures, publishes or transmits the image
of a private area of any person without his or her consent, under circumstances violating the
privacy of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years
or with fine not exceeding two lakh rupees, or with both.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section—
(a) “transmit” means to electronically send a visual image with the intent that it
be viewed by a person or persons;
(b) “capture”, with respect to an image, means to videotape, photograph, film or
record by any means;
(c) “private area” means the naked or undergarment clad genitals, public area,
buttocks or female breast:
(d) “publishes” means reproduction in the printed or electronic form and making
it available for public;
(e) “under circumstances violating privacy” means circumstances in which a
person can have a reasonable expectation that—
(i) he or she could disrobe in privacy, without being concerned that an
image of his private area was being captured; or
(ii) any part of his or her private area would not be visible to the public,
regardless of whether that person is in a public or private place.
66F. (1) Whoever,—
(A) with intent to threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or
to strike terror in the people or any section of the people by—
(i) denying or cause the denial of access to any person authorized to
access computer resource; or
Punishment
for
dishonestly
receiving
stolen
computer
resource or
communication
device
Punishment
for identity
theft.
Punishment
for cheating
by
personation
by using
computer
resource.
Punishment
for cyber
terrorism.
Punishment
for violation
of privacy.

11
(ii) attempting to penetrate or access a computer resource without
authorisation or exceeding authorised access; or
(iii) introducing or causing to introduce any computer contaminant;
and by means of such conduct causes or is likely to cause death or injuries to persons
or damage to or destruction of property or disrupts or knowing that it is likely to cause
damage or discruption of supplies or services essential to the life of the community or
adversely affect the critical information infrastructure specified under section 70, or
(B) knowingly or intentionally penetrates or accesses a computer resource without
authorisation or exceeding authorised access, and by means of such conduct btains
access to information, data or computer database that is restriced for reasons for the
security of the State or foreign relations, or any restrictued information, data or computer
database, with reasons to believe that such information, data or computer database so
obtained may be used to cause or likely to cause injury to the interests of the sovereignty
and integrity of India, the secrity of the State, friendly relations with foreign States,
public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or
incitement to an offence, or to the advantage of any foreign nation, group of individuals
or otherwise,
commits the offence of cyber terrorism.
(2) Whoever commits or conspires to commit cyber terrorism shall be punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to imprisonment for life.’.
67. Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in
the electronic form, any material which is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest
or if its effect is such as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely, having
regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied
in it, shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to five lakh
rupees and in the event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine which
may extend to ten lakh rupees.
 67A. Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted
in the electronic form any material which contains sexually explicit act or conduct shall
be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and
in the event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years and also with fine which may extend to ten
lakh rupees.
67B. Whoever,—
(a) publishes or transmites or causes to be published or transmitted material in
any electronic form which depiets children engaged in sexually esplicit act or conduct;
or
(b) creates text or digital images, collects, seeks, browses, downloads, advertises,
promotes, exchanges or distributes material in any electronic form depicting children
in obscene or indecent or sexually explicit manner; or
(c) cultivates, entices or induces children to online relationship with one or more
children for and on sexually explicit act or in a manner that may offend a reasonable
adult on the computer resource; or
(d) facilitates abusing children online, or
(e) records in any electronic form own abuse or that of others pertaining to
sexually explicit act with children,
Punishment for
publishing or
transmitting
obscene
material  in
electronic form.
Punishment  for
publishing or
transmitting of
material
containing
sexually
explicit act,
etc., in
electronic  form.
Punishment
for publishing
or transmitting
of material
depicting
childern in
sexually
explicit act,
etc., in
electronic
form.

12
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event
of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either discription for a term which
may extend to seven years and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees:
Provided that provisions of section 67, section 67A and this section does not
extend to any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting representation or
figure in electronic form—
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public
good on the ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing drawing, painting
representation or figure is the interest of science, literature, art or learning or
other objects of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used for bonafide hertiage or religious purposes.
Explanation- For the purposes of this section “children” means a persons who
has not completed the age of 18 years.
67C (1) Intermediary shall preserve and retain such information as may be specified
for such duration and in such manner and format as the Central Government may
prescribe.
(2) any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravences the provisions
of sub-section (1) shall be punished with an inprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years and also be liable to fine.
 33. In section 68 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) Any person who intentionally or knowingly fails to comply with any order
under sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not exceeding one lakh
rupees or both.”.
34. For section 69 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“69. (1) Where the Central Government or a State Government or any of its officer
specially authorised by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be,
in this behalf may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the interest of the
sovereignty or integrity of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations
with foreign States or public order or for preventing incitement to the commission of any
cognizable offence relating to above or for investigation of any offence, it may subject to the
provisions of sub-section ( 2), for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, direct any
agency of the appropriate Government to intercept, monitor or decrypt or cause to be
intercepted or monitored or decrypted any information generated, transmitted, received or
stored in any computer resource.
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which such interception or monitoring or
decryption may be carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The subscriber or intermediary or any person in-charge of the computer resource
shall, when called upon by any agency referred to in sub-section (1),  extend all facilities and
technical assistance to—
(a) provide access to or secure access to the computer resource generating
transmitting, receiving or storing such information; or
(b) intercept, monitor, or decrypt the information, as the case may be; or
(c) provide information stored in computer resource.
Preservation
and retention
of information
by
intermediaries.
Amendment of
section 68.
Substitution of
new section
for section 69.
Power to
issue
directions for
interception
or monitoring
or decryption
of any
information
through any
computer
resource.

13
(4) The subscriber or intermediary or any person who fails to assist the agency referred
to in sub-section (3) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
69A. (1) Where the Central Government or any of its officer specially authorised by it
in this behalf is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the interest of sovereignty
and integrity of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign
States or public order or for preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable
offence relating to above, it may subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), for reasons to
be recorded in writing, by order, direct any agency of the Government or intermediary to
block for access by the public or cause to be blocked for access by the public any information
generated, transmitted, received, stored or hosted in any computer resource.
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which such blocking for access by the
public may be carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The intermediary who fails to comply with the direction issued under sub-section
(1) shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and
also be liable to fine.
69B. (1) The Central Government may, to enhance cyber security and for identification,
analysis and prevention of intrusion or spread of computer contaminant in the country, by
notification in the Official Gazette, authorise any agency of the Government to monitor and
collect traffic data or information generated, transmitted, received or stored in any computer
resource.
(2) The intermediary or any person in-charge or the computer resource shall, when
called upon by the agency which has been authorised under sub-section (1), provide technical
assistance and extend all facilities to such agency to enable online access or to secure and
provide online access to the computer resource generating, transmitting, receiving or storing
such traffic data or information.
(3) The procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting traffic data or
information, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) Any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the provisions of
sub-section (2) shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which any extend to three
years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) “computer contaminant” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 43;
(ii) “traffic data” means any data identifying or purporting to identify any person,
computer system or computer network or location to or from which the communication
is or may be transmitted and includes communications origin, destination, route, time,
data, size, duration or type of underlying service and any other information.’.
35. In section 70 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare any computer resource which directly or indirectly affects the facility of
Critical Information Infrastructure, to be a protected system.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “Critical Information
Infrastructure” means the computer resource, the incapacitation or destruction
of which, shall have debilitating impact on national security, economy, public
health or safety.’;
Power to issue
directions for
blocking for
public access
of any
information
through any
computer
resource.
Power to
authorise  to
monitor and
collect traffic
data or
information
through any
computer
resource for
cyber security.
Amendment of
section 70.

14
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) The Central Government shall prescribe the information security
practices and procedures for such protected system.”.
36.  After section 70 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘70A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification published in the Official
Gazette, designae any organisation of the Government as the national nodal agency
in respect of Critical Information Infrastructure Protection.
(2) The national nodal agency designated under sub-section ( 1) shall be
responsible for all measures including Research and Development relating to
protection of Critical Information Infrastructure.
(3) The manner of performing functions and duties of the agency referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
70B. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint an agency of the Government to be called the Indian Computter Emergency
Response Team.
(2) The Central Government shall provide the agency referred to in sub-section
(1) with a Director General and such other officers and employees as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances and terms and conditions of the Director General
and other officers and employees shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team shall serve as the national
agency for performing the following functions in the area of cyber security,—
(a) collection, analysis and dissemination of information on cyber
incidents;
(b) forecast and alerts of cyber security incidents;
(c) emergency measures for handling cyber security incidents;
(d) coordination of cyber incidents response activities;
(e) issue guidelines, advisories, vulnerability notes and whitepapers
relating to information security practices, procedures, preventation, response
and reporting of cyber incidents;
(f) such other functions relating to cyber security as may be prescribed.
(5) The manner of performing functions and duties of the agency referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) For carrying out the provisions of sub-section (4), the agency referred to in
sub-section (1) may call for information and give direction to the service provides,
intermediaries, data centres, body corporate and any other person.
(7) Any service provider, intermediaries, data centres, body corporate or person
who fails to provide the information called for or comply with the direction under sub-
section (6), shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
(8) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this section, except on
a complaint made by an officer authorised in this behalf by the agency referred to in
sub-section ( 1).”.
Insertion of
new sections
70A and 70B.
National nodal
agency.
Indian
Computer
Emergency
Response
Team to
serve as
national
agency for
incident
response.

15
37. After section 72 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“72A. Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any other law for the time being
in force, any person including an intermediary who, while providing services under the
terms of lawful contract, has secured access to any material containing personal
information about another person, with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely
to cause wrongful loss or wrongful gain discloses, without the consent of the person
concerned, or in breach of a lawful contract,  such material to any other person,  shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.’’.
38. For section 77 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“77. No compensation awarded, penalty imposed or confiscation made under
this Act shall prevent the award of compensation or imposition of any other penalty or
punishment under any other law for the time being in force.
77A. A court of competent jurisdiction may compound offences, other than
offences for which the punishment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding three
years has been provided, under this Act:
Provided that the court shall not compound such offence where the accused is,
by reason of his previous conviction, liable to either enhanced punishment or to a
punishment of a different kind:
Provided further that the court shall not compound any offence where such
offence affects the socio economic conditions of the country or has been committed
against a child below the age of 18 years or a woman.
(2) The person accused of an offence under this Act may file an application for
compounding in the court in which offence is pending for trial and the provisions of
sections 265B and 265C of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply.
77B. (l) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of  Criminal Procedure,
1973, the offence punishable with imprisonment of three years and above shall be
cognizable and the offence punishable with imprisonment of three years shall be bailable.
39. In section 78 of the principal Act, for the words “Deputy Superintendent of
Police” the word “Inspector” shall be substituted.
40. For Chapter XII of the principal Act, the following Chapters shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘CHAPTER XII
I
NTERMEDIARIES NOT TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES
79. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force
but subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3), an intermediary
shall not be liable for any third party information, data, or communication link made
available or hasted by him.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply if—
(a) the function of the intermediary is limited to providing access to a
communication system over which information made available by third parties is
transmitted or temporarily stored or hasted; or
Insertion of
new section
72A.
Punishment
for disclosure
of information
in breach
of lawful
contract.
Substitution of
new sections
for section 77.
Compensation,
penalties or
confiscation
not to interfere
with other
punishment.
Compounding
of offences.
Offences with
three years
imprisonment
to be bailable.
2 of 1974.
Substitution of
new Chapters
for Chapter XII.
Exemption
from liability of
intermediary in
certain cases.
Amendment of
section 78.

16
(b) the intermediary does not—
(i) initiate the transmission,
(ii) select the receiver of the transmission, and
(iii) select or modify the information contained in the transmission;
(c) the intermediary observes due diligence while discharging his duties
under this Act and also observes such other guidelines as the Cetral Government
may prescribe in this behalf.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply if—
(a) the intermediary has conspired or abetted or aided or induced, whether
by threats or promise or othorise in the commission of the unlawful act;
(b) upon receiving actual knowledge, or on being notified by the
appropriate Government or its agency that any information, data or
communication link residing in or connected to a computer resource controlled
by the intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act, the intermediary
fails to expeditiously remove or disable access to that material on that resource
without vitiating the evidence in any manner.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “third party
information” means any information dealt with by an intermediary in his capacity as an
intermediary.
CHAPTER XIIA
E
XAMINER OF ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE
79A. The Central Government may, for the purposes of providing expert opinion
on electronic form evidence before any court or other authority specify, by notification
in the Official Gazette, any Department, body or agency of the Central Government or
a State Government as an Examiner of Electronic Evidence.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “electronic form evidence”
means any information of probative value that is either stored or transmitted in electronic
form and includes computer evidence, digital audio, digital video, cell phones, digital
fax machines.'.
41. In section 80 of the principal act, in sub-section (l), for the words “Deputy
Superintendent of Police”, the word “Inspector” shall be substituted.
42. In section 81 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
“Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall restrict any person from
exercising any right conferred under the Copyright Act, 1957 or the Patents Act, 1970.”.
43. In section 82 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Chairperson, Members, officers and employees to be public servants.”;
(b) for the words “Presiding Officer”, the words “Chairperson, Members” shall
be substituted.
44. In section 84 of the principal Act, for the words “Presiding Officer”, the words
“Chairperson, Members” shall be substituted.
45. After section 84 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
Central
Government
to notify
Examiner of
Electronic
Evidence.
Amentment
of section 80.
Amendment
of section 81.
14 of 1957.
39 of 1970.Amendment
of section 82.
Amendment
of section 84.
Insertion of
new sections
84A, 84B and
84C.

17
“84A. The Central Government may, for secure use of the electronic medium and
for promotion of e-governance and e-commerce, prescribe the modes or methods for
encryption.
84B. Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is committed in
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the
punishment of such abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the
offence under this Act.
Explanation.—An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of
abetment, when it is committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of
the conspiracy, or with the aid which constitutes the abetment.
84C. Whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable by this Act or causes
such an offence to be committed, and in such an attempt does any act towards the
commission of the offence, shall, where no express provision is made for the punishment
of such attempt, be punished with imprisonment of any description provided for the
offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term of imprisonment
provided for that offence, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.”.
46. In section 87 of the principal Act,—
(A) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(a) the conditions for considering reliability of electronic signature
or electronic authentication technique under sub-section ( 2) of section
3A;
(aa) the procedure for ascertaining electronic signature or
authentication under sub-section (3) of section 3A;
(ab) the manner in which any information or matter may be
authenticated by means of electronic signature under section 5;”;
(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ca) the manner in which the authorised service provider may collect,
retain and appropriate service charges under sub-section ( 2) of section
6A;”;
(iii) for clause (e), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(e) the manner of storing and affixing  electronic signature creation
data under section 15;
(ea) the security procedures and practices under section 16;”;
(iv) in clause ( f), for the words “and Assistant Controllers”, the words
“, Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees” shall be substituted;
(v) clause (g) shall be omitted;
(vi) after clause (m), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ma) the form of application and fee for issue of Electronic Signature
Certificate  under section 35;”;
(vii) after clause (o), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(oa) the duties of subscribers under section 40A;
(ob) the reasonable security practices and procedures and sensitive
personal data or information under section 43A;”;
(viii) in clause (r), for the words “Presiding Officer”, the words “Chairperson
and Members” shall be substituted;
(viii) in clause (s), for the words “Presiding Officer”, the words “Chairperson
and Members” shall be substituted;
(ix) for clause (w), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(w) the powers and functions of the Chairperson of the Cyber
Appellate Tribunal under section 52A;
Modes or
methods for
encryption.
Punishment
for abetment
of offences.
Punishment
for attempt
to commit
offences.
Amendment
of section 87.

18
(wa) the information, duration, manner and form of such informationto
be retained and preserved under section 67 C;
(x) the procedures and safeguards for interception, monitoring, or
decryption under sub-section (2) of section 69;
(xa) the procedure and safeguards for blocking for access by the
public under sub-section (2) of section 69A;
(xb) the procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting
traffic data or information under sub-section (3) of section 69B;
(y) the information security practices and procedures for protected
system under section 70;
(ya) manner of performing functions and duties of the agency under
sub-section (3) of section 70A;
(yb) the officers and employees under sub-section ( 2) of section
70B;
(yc) salaries and allowances and terms and conditions of service of
the Director General and other officers and employees under sub-section
(3) of section 70B;
(yd) the manner in whcih the functions and duties of agency shall be
performed under sub-section (5) of section 70B;
(z) the guidelines to be observed by the intermediaries under sub-
section (4) of section 79;
(za) the modes or methods for encryption under section 84A;”;
(B) in sub-section (3),—
(i) for the words, brackets, letter and figures “Every notification made by
the Central Government under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 4) of section 1 and
every rule made by it”, the words “Every notification made by the Central
Government” under sub-section (1) of section 70A and every rule made by’’
it shall be substituted;
(ii) the words “the notification or” wherever they occur, shall be omitted.
47. In section 90 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (c) shall be omitted .
48. Sections 91, 92, 93 and 94 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
49. For the First Schedule and the Second Schedule to the principal Act, the following
Schedules shall be substituted, namely:—
“FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sub-section (4) of section 1]
DOCUMENTS OR TRANSACTIONS TO WHICH THE ACT SHALL NOT APPLY
Sl. No. Description of documents or transactions
1. A negotiable instrument (other than a cheque) as defined in section 13 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881.
2. A power-of-attorney as defined in section 1A of the Powers-of-Attorney Act, 1882.
3. A trust as defined in section 3 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882.
4. A will as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925,
including any other testamentary disposition by whatever name called.
5. Any contract for the sale or conveyance of immovable property or any interest in
such property.
Omission of
sections 91,
92, 93 and 94.
26 of 1881.
7 of 1882.
2 of 1882.
39 of 1925.
Substitution
of new
Schedules for
First Schedule
and Second
Schedule.
Amendment
of section 90.

19
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sub-section (1) of section 3A]
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE OR ELECTRONIC AUTHENTICATION TECHNIQUE AND PROCEDURE
Sl. No. Description Procedure
(1) (2) (3)
.”.
50. The Third Schedule and the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted.
PART III
AMENDMENT OF THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
51. In the Indian Penal Code—
(a) in section 4,—
(i) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) any person in any place without and beyond India committing
offence targeting a computer resource located in India.”;
(ii) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘Explanation.—In this section—
(a) the word “offence” includes every act committed outside
India which, if committed in India, would be punishable under this
Code;
(b) the expression “computer resource” shall have the meaning
assigned to it in clause ( k) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the
Information Technology Act, 2000.’;
(b) in section 40, in clause (2), after the figure “117”, the figures and word “118,
119 and 120” shall be inserted;
(c) in section 118, for the words “voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal
omission, the existence of a design”, the words “voluntarily conceals by any act or
omission or by the use of encryption or any other information hiding tool, the existence
of a design” shall be substituted;
(d) in section 119, for the words “voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal
omission, the existence of a design”, the words “voluntarily conceals by any act or
omission or by the use of encryption or any other information hiding tool, the existence
of a design” shall be substituted;
(e) in section 464 , for the words “digital signature” wherever they occur, the
words “electronic signature” shall be substituted;
Omission of
Third Schedule
and Fourth
Schedule.
Amendment
of  Indian
Penal Code.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment of
section 40.
Amendment of
section 118.
Amendment of
section 119.
Amendment of
section 464.
21 of 2000.

20
PART IV
AMENDMENT OF THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872
52. In the Indian Evidence Act, 1872,—
(a) in section 3 relating to interpretation clause, in the paragraph appearing at
the end, for the words “digital signature” and “Digital Signature Certificate”, the words
“electronic signature” and “Electronic Signature Certificate” shall respectively be
substituted;
(b) after section 45, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
 “45A. When in a proceeding, the court has to form an opinion on any
matter relating to any information transmitted or stored in any computer resource
or any other electronic or digital form,  the opinion of the Examiner of Electronic
Evidence referred to in section 79A of the Information Technology Act, 2000, is
a relevant fact.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, an Examiner of Electronic
Evidence shall be an expert.”;
(c) in section 47A,—
(i) for the words “digital signature”, the words “electronic signature” shall
be substituted;
(ii) for the words “Digital Signature Certificate”, the words “Electronic
Signature Certificate” shall be substituted;
(d) in section 67A, for the words “digital signature” wherever they occur, the
words “electronic signature” shall be substituted;
(e) in section 85A, for the words “digital signature” at both the places where
they occur, the words “electronic signature” shall be substituted;
(f) in section 85B, for the words “digital signature” wherever they occur, the
words “electronic signature” shall be substituted;
(g) in section 85C, for the words “Digital Signature Certificate”, the words
“Electronic Signature Certificate” shall be substituted;
(h) in section 90A, for the words “digital signature” at both the places where
they occur, the words “electronic signature” shall be substituted;
Amendment
of  Indian
Evidence Act.
Insertion of
new section
45A.
Opinion of
Examiner of
Electronic
Evidence.
1 of 1872.
Amendment of
section 47A.
Amendment of
section 67A.
Amendment of
section 85A.
Amendment of
section 85B.
Amendment of
section 85C.
Amendment of
section 90A.
Amendment of
section 3.
21 of 2000.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
————
(As passed by the Lok Sabha)
GMGIPMRND—4619LS(S5)—22-12-2008.