1
THE DROUGHT AFFECTED AND DROUGHT PRONE AREAS
(SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI NISHIKANT  DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the special provisions such as compulsory maintenance of food and
potable water supplies for human consumption and fodder for livestock of the farmers,
financial assistance for lost crops to farmers in drought affected areas of the country;
creation of water bodies like lakes, ponds, wells, rainwater harvesting, diversification
of water intensive crops to low water intensive requirement crops; community
afforestation programmes and other action plan for the drought prone areas
of the country and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Drought Affected and Drought Prone Areas (Special
Provisions)  Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole India.
Bill No. 96 of  2015
Short title and
extent.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “drought affected area” means any area receiving below normal rainfall in
any season of a calendar year and declared by Central Government, by notification in
the Official Gazette, to be a drought affected area for such period as may be specified
in the notification;
(c) “drought prone areas” means the areas consistently receiving below normal
rainfall and includes such areas which in the opinion of the Central Government are
drought prone and declared as such, by notification in the Official Gazette, in
consultation with the Governments of the States concerned;
(d) “fodder” includes dry and green fodder generally fed to the livestock;
(e) “food” includes cereals such as wheat, barely, maize, jowar, bajra, rice, pulses,
edible oils and fuel for cooking;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  The appropriate Government shall maintain uninterrupted food supplies in drought
affected and drought prone areas for the inhabitants of such areas in such manner as may be
prescribed.
4.  The appropriate Government shall maintain adequate supply of potable water
through tankers and other means as it may deem necessary and appropriate, in the areas
covered under this Act for such period as may be prescribed.
5.  The appropriate Govenment shall maintain adequate supply of fodder in the area
covered under this Act by procuring fodder from other areas or States, as the case may be, in
such manner and for such period as may be prescribed.
6. The appropriate Government shall provide ex-gratia and adequate financial
assistance to farmers of the areas covered under this Act according to the estimated losses
caused by withered crops and for revival of agricultural activities in such manner as may be
prescribed.
7.  The Central Government shall, with the help of Krishi Vikas Kendras and other
such organisations and research centres working for the diversification of cropping system,
take steps for diversification of crops from water intensive crops to low water requirement
crops in areas covered under this Act to save the ground water and reduce the dependence
on rains.
8.  The appropriate Government shall promote the creation of traditional and other
water bodies like lakes, ponds, wells, ditches, etc. for the collection of rainwater in order to
recharge the ground water in the areas covered under this Act.
9.  The appropriate Government shall promote rainwater harvesting in the areas covered
under this Act, by providing the necessary technique and equipments free of cost through
the village panchayat in such manner as may be prescribed.
10.  The appropriate Government shall promote community afforestation programmes,
from time to time, in the areas covered under this Act, as long term action plan of such areas
in such manner as may be prescribed.
11.  The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
Definitions.
Compulsory
maintenance of
food supplies in
drought affected
and drought
prone areas.
Maintenance
of potable
water.
Maintenance
of fodder
supplies.
Ex-gratia and
financial
assistance to
farmers.
Diversification
of cropping
pattern.
Creation of
water bodies.
Promotion of
rainwater
harvesting.
Afforestation
programme.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
12.  The Central Government may give such directions to the Government of any State
having areas covered under this Act within its territorial jurisdiction, as may appear it to be
necessary for carrying out in the State any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made
there under.
13.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
14.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to give
directions.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Of  late Santhal Pargana and other regions of the State of Jharkhand and their adjoining
areas are slowly turning into drought prone areas where truant monsoons are playing havoc
very frequently. Normal rainfall has become rare in these regions of the State. Similarly, large
number of areas in various parts of our vast country have either turned drought prone or
have been affected by drought some time or the other playing havoc and bringing miseries
to the people and their livestock in such areas. When drought conditions engulf any area,
the worst sufferers are the farmers and other inhabitants, having no food to eat and water to
drink for their survival, resulting in their exodus. In such areas, starvation deaths are very
common. The worst sufferers are the mute livestock. Their owners leave them stray and
without fodder and water ultimately resulting in their death. The farmers lose their crops and
hopes. The indebted farmers do not have money to restart agricultural operations even if
they want. Frustrated with dashing hopes, many of them take extreme step of committing
suicides. Santhal Pargana region of Jharkhand has become synonymous with suicides of
farmers.
It has been observed that in Jharkhand and other parts of the country, the farmers have
started growing water intensive cash crops to earn more money, resulting in decline of
ground water levels to dangerous levels which makes such areas drought prone. Hence,
diversification of crops from water intensive ones to crops needing very less water has
become necessity of the day. Promotion of water bodies like lakes, ponds, wells, ditches etc.,
rainwater harvesting and community afforestation programmes have become necessary for
the drought affected and drought prone areas.
At the same time, it is necessary that the supply of food, potable water and fodder is
maintained uninterrupted or priority so that people do not have to leave their places and their
livestock is not left to die. The farmers need to be given ex-gratia and financial assistance so
that they do not take extreme steps of committing suicide.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT  DUBEY
March 24, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the ex-gratia and financial assistance to farmers.
Clause 11 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds for the purposes
of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to estimate the amount likely to be incurred.
However, it is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees thirty thousand crore
will be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty thousand crore is also likely to
be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—71LS(S-3)—16.04.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the special provisions such as compulsory maintenance of food and
potable water supplies for human consumption and fodder for livestock of the farmers,
financial assistance for lost crops to farmers in drought affected areas of the country;
creation of water bodies like lakes, ponds, wells, rainwater harvesting, diversification
of water intensive crops to low water intensive requirement crops; community
afforestation programmes and other action plan for the drought prone areas
of the country and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)