 
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 96 of 2025
THE NATIONAL BLOOD TRANSFUSION BILL, 2025
By
Sඁඋං Pൺඋඌඁඈඍඍൺආൻඁൺං Rඎඉൺඅൺ, M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to regulate collection, testing, processing, storage, distribution, issuance, transfusion of 
human blood, blood components, ensuring health protection and prevention of 
transfusion transmissible diseases and establishing national standards for 
safe blood collection, transfusion and management, and imposing 
penalties for non-compliance and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Blood Transfusion Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the National Blood Transfusion Authority established under 
section 3;
Short title,extent and commencement.
5
Definitions.

(b) “blood” means human blood collected from a donor and intended for transfusion;
(c) “blood centre” means any facility engaged in collection, testing, processing, 
storage, or distribution of blood or blood components;
(d) “blood component” means any therapeutic constituent of blood including red 
cells, white cells, platelets and plasma, separated by physical or mechanical means;
(e) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority;
(f) “haemovigilance” means surveillance of adverse effects associated with transfusion 
of blood and blood products;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(h) “transfusion-transmissible disease” means a disease that may be transmitted from 
donor to recipient through transfusion of blood or blood components.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, with effect from such date as it may by 
notification in the Official Gazette appoint, constitute an Authority to be known as 
National Blood Transfusion Authority to exercise the powers conferred on, and to 
perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
4. (1) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Additional Secretary or Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare—
Chairperson;
(b) the Director General of Health Services—President;
(c) the Deputy Director General, Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare—
Director;
(d) the National Mission Director, National Health Mission—Member;
(e) the Additional Director General, Union Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare—Secretary;
(f) the Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser, Union Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare—Member;
(g) the Drugs Controller General of India—Member;
(h) the Joint Secretary, Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare—Member;
(i) the Secretary, Indian Red Cross Society—Member;
(j) the Director, National Institute of Biologicals—Member;
(k) two Transfusion Medicine Experts from Government Blood Centres, to be 
appointed by the Central Government—Members;
(l) one Transfusion Medicine Expert from a private Blood Centre, to be 
appointed by the Central Government—Member;
(m) one Transfusion Medicine Expert from the Armed Forces Blood Centre;
(n) one representative from the National Medical Commission, to be appointed by 
the Central Government—Member;
(o) two representatives from National-Level Voluntary Blood Donor 
Organisations—Members;
(p) one representative from a State Blood Transfusion Council, by rotation—
Member; and
(q) such other members, not exceeding three, as may be nominated by the 
Central Government, having expertise in the field of blood transfusion or public 
health.
Establishment of the National Blood Transfusion Authority.
10
5
25
20
30
15
35
40
2
Composition of 
the Authority.
45

(2) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi:
     Provided that the Authority may establish its offices at such other places within 
the country, as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service 
of the Chairperson, Members, officers, staff and experts of the Authority shall be such 
as may be prescribed.
5. The Authority shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) to lay down policies and national standards for collection, testing, processing, 
storage, distribution and transfusion of blood and blood components;
(b) to regulate and monitor the activities of blood centres and ensure compliance with 
safety norms;
(c) to prescribe protocols for quality assurance and internal audits;
(d) to establish a national haemovigilance programme;
(e) to promote voluntary blood donation through coordinated national campaigns;
(f) to oversee research and training in transfusion medicine;
(g) to advise the Central Government in matters relating to blood transfusion services;
(h) to investigate into the complaints regarding non-compliance of the provisions under 
this Act; and
(i) to perform such other functions as may be assigned by the Central Government.
6. No person shall establish or operate any blood centre after the commencement of this 
Act unless such centre is registered under the provisions of this Act.
7. (1) Every person intending to establish or operate a blood centre shall make an 
application to the Authority in such form and manner and accompanied by such fee as may 
be prescribed.
(2) The Authority shall, on receipt of an application under sub-section (1), cause such 
enquiry to be made and if satisfied that the applicant fulfills the prescribed standards and 
norms, register the blood centre and issue a certificate of registration in such form as may 
be prescribed.
(3) The certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of five years and may be 
renewed subject to compliance with conditions prescribed.
8. (1) The Authority may suspend or cancel the registration of any blood centre if it is 
satisfied, after giving an opportunity of being heard, that—
(a) the centre has violated any provision of this Act or the rules made thereunder; or
(b) the centre is being operated in a manner prejudicial to the health and safety of 
donors or recipients.
(2) The manner of suspension, cancellation and appeal shall be such as may be prescribed.
9. Whoever operates a blood centre without registration shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to 
ten lakh rupees, or with both. 
10. Whoever knowingly collects, processes, or transfuses contaminated or unsafe blood 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not less than two years but which may 
extend to five years and with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees.
11. Any blood centre or person who contravenes any provision of this Act or rules made 
thereunder shall be liable to a punishment which shall not be less than rupees ten thousand 
which may extend upto rupees two thousand.
Functions of the 
Authority.
Prohibition on 
operation of 
blood centres.
Application for 
registration.
Suspension and 
cancellation of 
registration.
Prohibition of 
unregistered 
operations.
Adulteration or 
unsafe practices.
Penalty for 
non-compliance.
   5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law on this behalf, grant such sums of money to the Authority, as it may think fit, for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
13. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed, in consultation 
with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Authority as audited and certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit 
report thereon, shall be forwarded annually by the Authority to the Central Government 
which shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each 
House of the Parliament. 
14. (1) The Authority shall prepare every year, in such form and within such time as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report giving a true and full account 
of its activities during the previous year and forward the same to the Central Government, 
which shall cause it to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of 
the Parliament. 
(2) Where the report or any of its part is related to any of the issues connected with the 
State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of that State, 
who shall in turn, cause to be laid before the State legislature concerned, such report along 
with an explanatory memorandum concerned with the action taken or proposed to be taken 
on the recommendations related to the State, if any, and reasons for not accepting any of 
the recommendations made therein, within a period of one year from the date of receipt of 
such report.
15. All blood centres operating under valid licence on the date of commencement of 
this Act shall be deemed to be registered for a period of one year and shall obtain fresh 
registration under this Act within such period as may be prescribed.
16. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing such difficulty.
17. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of the Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
Account and 
Audit.
Annual Report.
Continuance of 
existing blood 
centres.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The availability of safe and adequate blood is an essential requirement of any modern 
health system. At present, regulation of blood transfusion services is governed by dispersed 
provisions under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules made thereunder. In view of 
the growing needs for quality control, standardisation, voluntary donation, and oversight, it 
is necessary to enact a dedicated legislation on blood transfusion services.
The Bill seeks to establish a National Blood Transfusion Authority with statutory powers 
to prescribe national standards for blood collection, processing, storage and transfusion; to 
ensure quality assurance through inspections and audits; to promote voluntary donation; and 
to provide for penalties for unsafe practices. It also mandates the registration of all blood 
centres and provides for coordinated responsibilities of the Central and State Governments.
Hence this Bill.
      Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                               PARSHOTTAMBHAI RUPALA
8, 2025

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Blood Transfusion 
Authority. Clause 4 provides for appointment of members of the authority. Clause 5 
provides for establishment of a national hemovigilance programme. Clause 12 provides for 
the Central Government to grant such sums of money to the authority as it may think fit. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
It is estimated that a sum of about rupees one hundred crore will be involved as recurring 
expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A sum of about rupees fifty crore will also be involved as non-recurring expenditure.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
ൺ
BILL
to regulate collection, testing, processing, storage, distribution, issuance, transfusion of 
human blood, blood components, ensuring health protection and prevention of 
transfusion transmissible diseases and establishing national standards for 
safe blood collection, transfusion and management, and imposing
 penalties for non-compliance and for matters connected
 therewith or incidental thereto.
_______
(Shri Parshottambhai Rupala, MP)