Bill No. 96 of 2019
THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RAHUL SHEWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 184 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
"184. Whoever drives a motor vehicle at a speed or in a manner which is dangerous
to the public or which causes a sense of distress or threat of  physical injury to the
occupants of the vehicle, other road users and pedestrians, having regard to all the
Short title and
commencement.
5
Substitution of
new section
for section
184.
10
Driving
dangerously.
59 of 1988.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
circumstances of the case including the nature, condition and use of the place where
the vehicle is driven and the amount of traffic which actually is at the time or which
might reasonably be expected to be in the place, shall be punishable for the first
offence with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which
may extend upto three years or with fine which shall not be less than five thousand
rupees but which may extend upto ten thousand rupees, or with both, and for any
second or subsequent offence if committed within three years of the commission of a
previous similar offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto five
years, or with fine which may extend upto twenty thousand rupees, or with both.".
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the recent times, the number of cases of road accidents in India have increased
manifold. The increase in the number of motor vehicles along with dangerous driving of the
motor vehicles is the major root cause of increasing road accidents. The existing punishment
for dangerous driving as provided under section 184 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 is
inadequate and does not act as the deterrent to the offenders thereby causing harm to the
general public.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend section 184 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 with a
view to enhance the punishment for driving dangerously to act as deterrent to the repetitive
offenders.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; RAHUL SHEWALE
June 6 , 2019.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MOTOR VEHICLE ACT, 1988
NO. 59 OF 1988
* * * * *
184. Whoever drives a motor vehicle at a speed or in a manner which is dangerous to
the public, having regard to all the circumstances of the case including the nature, condition
and use of the place where the vehicle is driven and the amount of traffic which actually is at
the time or which might reasonably be expected to be in the place, shall be punishable for the
first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, and for any second or subsequent offence if committed
within three years of the commission of a previous similar offence with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees,
or with both.
* * * * *
Driving
dangerously.
4

MGIPMRND—576LS(S3)—20-06-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
————
(Shri Rahul Shewale , M.P.)