1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 96 of  2016
THE PORT TRUSTS (RESERV ATION IN EMPLOYMENT TO
LOCAL PERSONS) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for reservation in employment by port trusts to local persons.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Port Trusts (Reservation in Employment to Local
Persons) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘port’ means the following ports, namely:—
(i) Jawahar Lal Nehru Port Trust (Nhava Sheva) Mumbai
(ii) Chennai Port
(iii) Tuticorin Port
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(iv) Coachin Port
(v) Mangalore Port
(vi) Vizagpattinam Port
(vii) Porbandar Port
(viii) Paradip Port
(ix) Kolkatta Port
and shall include such other ports, as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify; and
(b) "prescribed"means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
fifty per cent of the total number of vacancies to fill a post notified by a port trust shall be
reserved in favour of local persons in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Act, the expression "local persons", in reference
to a port trust, shall mean such persons who are residing in district in which the port trust is
situated.
4.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Reservation in
posts in
favour of local
persons.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Local population would be suitable for employment in any organisation owing to their
better understanding of the geography, history, tradition and culture of the area in which the
organisation is located. As such they would be in a better position to perform their duty well.
This is required to be applied to organisations which are still localised and engaged in
commercial activities. It would, therefore, be appropriate and wise to employ local population
in port trusts to increase its efficiency and generate employment opportunities for them.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIRANG  APPA  BARNE
March 10, 2016.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation in employment by port trusts to local persons.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—30LS(S3)—25-04-2016.