Bill No. 96 of 2018
THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE PRICE FIXATION
TRIBUNAL BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TRIBUNAL
3. Establishment of National Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Tribunal.
4. Composition of Tribunal and Benches thereof.
5. Qualifications for appointment and selection as Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Judicial
Member.
6. Vice-Chairperson to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in certain
circumstances.
7. Term of Office.
8. Resignation and Removal.
9. Salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson and other Members.
10. Provision as to the holding of offices by Chairperson on ceasing to be such
Chairperson.
11. Financial and administrative powers of the Chairperson.
12. Staff of the Tribunal.
CHAPTER III
J
URISDICTION, POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF PROCEEDINGS OF TRIBUNAL
13. Jurisdiction, powers and proceedings of the National Agriculture Price Confirmation
Tribunal.
14. Tribunal to settle disputes.
15. Relief, compensation and restitution.
16. Liability to pay relief or compensation in certain cases.
17. Petition to Tribunal.
18. Procedure and powers of Tribunal.
19. Tribunal to apply certain principles.
20. Decision to be taken by majority.
21. Appeal.
22. Imposition of Cost.
23. Right of petitioner to take assistance of legal practitioner.
24. Execution of orders of a Tribunal.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CLAUSES
CHAPTER IV
MISCELLANEOUS
25. Bar on Jurisdiction of Civil Court.
26. Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants.
27. Protection of action taken in good faith.
28. Application of other laws not barred.
29. Act to have overriding effect.
30. Power to remove difficulties.
31. Power to make rules.
(ii)

1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE PRICE FIXATION
TRIBUNAL BILL, 2018
By
SHRI RAJEEV SATAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a National Agricultural Produce Price Fixation
Tribunal in pursuance of article 323B(2) (g) of the Constitution to uphold the
livelihood rights of farmers, agriculturists and the general public, in matters
relating to price fixation of agricultural produce considered as essential
commodities and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called as the National Agricultural Produce Price Fixation
Tribunal Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Bill No.  96 of  2018
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agriculture" with all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions,
includes floriculture, horticulture, sericulture, the raising of crops, grass or garden
produce, dairy farming, poultry farming, stock breeding, cutting of wood or grass,
gathering of fruit, raising of man-made forest or rearing of seedlings or plants;
(b) "appointed day" in relation to National Tribunal means the date with effect
from which it is established, by notification under section 3;
(c) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Principle Bench of the Tribunal;
(d) "Commission" means the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices
(CACP) constituted under the Union Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare;
(e) "crop" includes crop of wheat, rice, jawar, bajra, toor, ground nut, cotton,
sugarcane or any other crop notified in the Official Gazette, from time to time;
(f) "essential commodities" means the agricultural produce as notified under
the Essential Commodities Act, 1955;
(g) "Expert Member" means a member of the Tribunal who, is appointed as
such, and holds qualifications specified in sub-section ( 4) of section 5, and, is not a
Judicial Member;
(h) "fair price" means the fair and reasonable price of agricultural produce (food
crops and food stuffs, edible oilseeds and other crops) as recommended by the
Commission to the Government of India and verified by the Tribunal and agreeable to
both the parties involved in the transaction;
(i) "farmer" means any person who—
(i) cultivates crops by cultivating the land himself; or
(ii) cultivates crops by directly supervising the cultivation of land through
any other person; or
(iii) conserves and preserves, severally or jointly, with any person or
traditional varieties or adds value to such traditional varieties through selection
and identification of their useful properties;
(j) "goods" include such items which have been declared as essential goods in
the Official Gazette for the purpose of article 323(B) (g) of the Constitution of  India
and control of the prices of such goods;
(k) "human rights" shall have the same meaning as defined under clause (d) of
section 2 of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993;
(l) "Judicial Member" means a member of the Tribunal appointed as such under
this Act, and includes the Chairperson or a Vice-Chairperson who possesses any of
the qualifications specified under section 5;
(m) "minimum support price" means the minimum support price of agriculture
produce as declared by the Union Government;
(n) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(o) "order" means an order notified in the Official Gazette;
(p) "petition" means an application made under sections 14, 15 and 16;
(q) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
Definitions.
10 of 1955.
10 of 1994.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(r) "victim" means any person who has suffered any loss or injury due to the
act or omission for which the Government machinery deciding the prize for agricultural
produce is responsible and expression includes his guardian or legal heir and any
such group of persons or family members facing financial loss and issues related to
livelihood;
(s) "substantial question related to agricultural produce price fixation" include
issues relating to direct violation of farmers rights by denial of fair market price for
their agricultural produce and the financial losses due to lower price prescribed to
agricultural produce; and
(t) "Tribunal" means the National Agricultural Produce Price Fixation Tribunal
established under section 3.
CHAPTER II
E
STABLISHMENT OF THE TRIBUNAL
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish, with effect from such
date as may be specified therein, a Tribunal to be known as the National Agricultural
Produce Price Fixation Tribunal to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority
conferred on such Tribunal by or under this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, on receipt of a request in this behalf from any State
Government, establish by notification, a Regional Bench of the Tribunal for that State
which shall be established as per States Zones to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and
authority conferred on the Tribunal for the State under this Act.
4. (1) The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson, such number of Vice-Chairperson
as Judicial Member and a minimum of two Expert Members to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist of one Judicial
Member and one Expert Member to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) the Chairperson
may,—
(a) in addition to discharge the functions of the Judicial Member or the Member
of the Regional Bench of the Tribunal to which he is appointed, discharge the
functions of the Members of the Tribunal, the Member of any other Bench, as the
case may be;
(b) transfer the Vice-Chairperson or other Member from one Bench to another
Bench;
(c) authorize the Vice-Chairperson or the Judicial Member or the Member
appointed to one Bench, to discharge additionally the functions of the Vice-
Chairperson or, as the case may be, the Judicial Member or the Member of another
Bench as the case may be; and
(d) for the purpose of securing that any case or cases which having regard to
the nature of the question involved, requires, in his opinion or under the rules made
by Central Government in this behalf, to be decided by Bench composed of more than
two Members, issue such general or special Orders, as he may deem fit;
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Benches of the Tribunal shall ordinarily
sit at New Delhi which shall be known as Principal Bench and at other Zonal Benches as
Central Government may, by notification, specify.
Establishment
of National
Agricultural
Produce Price
Confirmation
Tribunal.
Composition
of Tribunal
and Benches
thereof.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
5. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment and selection as Chairperson
unless he —
(a) is, or has been a retired Judge of Supreme Court or retired Chief Justice of
any High Court; and
(b) has at least two years held the office of Vice-Chairperson.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Vice-Chairperson unless
he—
(a) is, or has been, or is qualified to be a Judge of High Court; and
(b) has for a period not less than three years, held office as Judicial Member.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment and selection as Judicial Member
unless he—
(a) is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of High Court; or
(b) is retired as Principle District Judge or is qualified to be appointed as Principal
District Judge.
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as an Expert Member unless he—
(a) is having minimum qualification of post graduation in agriculture, economics
and relevant field, or
(b) has experience of at least five years work in the field of agriculture, economics
or any other related fields like Agronomy, Animal Science and Dairy Science,
Agricultural Botany, Soil Science and Agriculture Chemistry, Agricultural Economics,
Agriculture Entomology, Agricultural Extension, Bio-Chemistry, Food Science and
Technology, Horticulture, Inter Faculty IWM, Statistics, Plant Pathology and
Agriculture Micro Biology, Bio Technology.
(5) The Chairperson, Vice- Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member of the
Tribunal and its Benches shall be appointed by the President of India under his warrant and
seal.
(6) No appointment of a person possessing qualifications specified in this section as
the Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson or a Member shall be made without consultation with
the Selection Committee headed by the Chief Justice of India and comprising of two sitting
Judges of the Supreme Court or High Court, one representative of the Indian Council for
Agricultural Research and one Vice-Chancellor of any Agricultural University to be
nominated by the Central Government.
6. (1) In the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson by
reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, such Central Vice-Chairperson as the
Government may, by notification, authorize in this behalf, shall act as the Chairperson until
the date on which a new Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this
Act to fill such a vacancy enters upon his office.
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence,
illness or any other cause, such Vice-Chairperson as the Central Government may, by
notification, authorize in this behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until
the date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
7. The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Member shall hold office as such for a
term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office, but shall be eligible for
re-appointment for another term of three years.
8. (1) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member by
notice in writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign from his office:
Qualifications
for
appointment
and selection
as
Chairperson,
Vice-
Chairperson,
Judicial
Member.
Vice-
Chairperson
to act as
Chairperson
or to
discharge his
functions in
certain
circumstances.
Term of
Office.
Resignation
and Removal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
Provided that the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member
shall, unless he is permitted by the President to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such a notice or until a
person duly appointed in his place enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of
office, whichever is earliest.
(2) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member shall not
be removed from their office except by an order made by the President on the ground of
proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a judge of the Supreme Court in
which such Chairperson, Vice- Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member had been
informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
respect of those charges.
9. The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
10. On ceasing to hold office the Chairperson of the Tribunal shall be ineligible for
further employment either under the Government of India or under Government of a State for
a period of three years.
11. The Chairperson shall exercise such financial and administrative powers over the
Benches as may be vested in him under the rules made by the Central Government:
Provided that the Chairperson may delegate such of his financial and
administrative powers as he may deem fit to the Vice-Chairperson or any officer of the
Tribunal, subject to the condition that the Vice-Chairperson or such officer shall, while
exercising such delegated powers, continue to act under the direction, control and
supervision of the Chairperson.
12. (1) The Central Government shall appoint such number of the officers and other
employees required to assist a Tribunal in the discharge of its functions as it may think fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of a Tribunal shall discharge their functions
under the general superintendence of the Chairperson.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the officers and employees of the Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
J
URISDICTION, POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF PROCEEDINGS OF TRIBUNAL
13. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Tribunal shall exercise on
and from the appointed date, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately
before that day by all courts (except the Supreme Court) in relation to—
(a) fixation of price of agricultural produce declared by the Central Government
in pursuance of the recommendations made by the Commission;
(b) the confirmation of principles and methodologies used by the Commission
for determination of minimum support price;
Salaries and
allowances
and other
terms and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson,
Vice-
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Provision as
to the holding
of offices by
Chairperson
on ceasing to
be such
Chairperson.
Financial and
administrative
powers of the
Chairperson.
Staff of the
Tribunal.
Jurisdiction,
Powers and
Proceedings
of the
National
Agriculture
Price
Confirmation
Tribunal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

6
(c) the factors which are to be considered for determination of cost of agriculture
produce include bank interest and wages of the labour;
(d) the factors which determine the quantum of subsidy to be given by the
Central Government to reduce the cost of agriculture produce;
(e) the factors relating to dearness allowance, profit, escalation of the prices in
global market and all other factors incidental thereto;
(f) the factors safeguarding the interest of the agriculturists and consumer; and
(g) the factors affecting the agricultural produce and its price including low
standard and defective chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers resulting environmental impact
on the agricultural produce.
(2) The Tribunal shall have the powers to direct the Central Government to control the
import and export of the agriculture produce, by considering the prices of the particular
agricultural produce fixed or determined by the Tribunal.
(3) The Tribunal shall have power to direct the Central Government to reimburse the
agriculturist for the short fall between the price declared by the Tribunal.
14. (1) The Tribunal shall have the jurisdiction over all civil cases where substantial
question related to agricultural produce price fixation is involved. (including enforcement of
any legal right of farmer related to livelihood and fixation of price of agricultural produce) or
for instance where there is direct violation of farmers in getting good market price for their
agricultural produce and the lower price prescribed to agricultural produce affect the farmer
communities and the gravity of such damage to margin of profit is broadly measurable and
which can be shown comparatively in reference to previous years price fixation as well as by
producing actual information related to sell of such agricultural produce in price higher than
prescribed by the Commission or the concern Government Authority.
(2) The Tribunal shall hear the disputes arising from questions referred to in
sub-section (1) above and settle some dispute arising and pass order thereon.
(3) No application for adjudication of dispute under this section shall be entertained
by the Tribunal unless it is made within a period of six months from the date on which the
cause of action for such dispute first arose:
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the application within the said period, allow it to be filed within a
further period not exceeding sixty days.
15. (1) The Tribunal may, by an order, provide,—
(a) relief and compensation to the victims of irrational, arbitrary, unfair fixation of
price for agricultural produce and other damages arising as mention in section 13;
(b) for restitution of agricultural land damaged,
(2) The relief and compensation and restitution of farm land, agricultural produce and
other economical damage referred to in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section ( 1) shall be in
addition to the relief paid to farmer.
(3) No application for grant of any compensation or relief or restitution of agricultural
property or loss to livelihood under this section shall be entertained by the Tribunal unless
it is made within a period of five years from the date on which the cause for such compensation
or relief first arose:
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the application within the said period, allow it to be filed within a
further period not exceeding sixty days.
Tribunal to
settle
disputes.
Relief,
compensation
and
restitution.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(4) The Tribunal may, having regard to the damage to public health, agricultural property,
divide the compensation or relief payable under separate heads so as to provide compensation
or relief to the claimant victims, as it may deem fit.
(5) Every claimant of the compensation or relief under this Act shall intimate to the
Tribunal about the application filed to, or, as the case may be, compensation or relief received
from, any other court or authority.
16. Where loss to agricultural produce of any farmer, or damage to crops or damage to
any agricultural property has resulted from an irrational, arbitrary and unfair process of
fixation of price for agricultural produce, the Government or its concerned authorities shall
be responsible to pay such relief or compensation for any such damage to crops or damage
to any agricultural property.
17. (1) Each petition under sections 14, 15 and 16 shall be made to the Tribunal in such
form, contain such particulars, and, be accompanied by such documents and such fees as
may be prescribed by Central Government after consultation with the Chairperson of the
Tribunal.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions mentioned in this law, a petition for grant of
relief or compensation or settlement of dispute may be made to the Tribunal by—
(a) farmer, who has sustained economic damage to agricultural produce and
livelihood;
(b) any farmer or registered organisation of an agriculturist at State or National
level or the legal representatives of farmer, as the case may be, may file petition to the
National Agricultural Produce Price Confirmation Tribunal for cost verification of
minimum support price declared by the Central Government.
(3) The petition filed before the Tribunal under this Act shall be dealt as expeditiously
as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the petition, or, as the case may
be, finally within six months from the date of filing of the petition, or as the case may be, after
providing the parties concerned an opportunity to be heard.
18. (1) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its
own procedure.
(3) The Tribunal shall also not be bound by the rules of evidence contained in the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
(4) The Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this
Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or
document from any office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(f) reviewing its decision;
(g) dismissing a petition for default or deciding it ex parte;
Liability to
pay relief or
compensation
in certain
cases.
Petition to
Tribunal.
Procedure and
powers of
Tribunal.
5 of 1908.
1 of 1872.
5 of 1908.
1 of 1872.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any petition for default or any order
passed by it ex parte;
(i) pass an interim order (including granting an injunction or stay) after providing
the parties concerned an opportunity to be heard, on any petition filed under this Act;
(j) pass an order requiring any person to cease and desist from committing or
causing any violation to any farmer;
(k) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(5) All proceedings before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be the judicial proceedings
within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
19. The Tribunal shall, while passing any order or decision or award, apply the principles
of sustainable development, the precautionary principle and the polluter pays principle.
20. The decision of Tribunal shall be taken by majority of Members and shall be
binding:
Provided that if there is a difference of opinion amongst the Members hearing
any petition and the opinion is equally divided, the Chairperson shall hear (if he has
not heard earlier) such petition and decide:
Provided further that where the Chairperson himself has heard such petition or
appeal along with other Members of the Tribunal, and if there is a difference of
opinion among the Members in such cases and the opinion is equally divided, he
shall refer the matter to other Members of the Tribunal who shall hear such petition
and decide.
21. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Tribunal, may, file an appeal
to the Supreme Court, within ninety days from the date of communication of the award,
decision or order of the Tribunal, to him, on any one or more of the grounds specified in
section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908:
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain any appeal after the expiry of
ninety days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from
preferring the appeal.
22. (1) While disposing of a petition under this Act, the Tribunal shall have power to
make such order as to costs, as it may consider necessary.
(2) Where the Tribunal holds that a claim is not maintainable, or is false or vexatious,
and such claim is disallowed, in whole or in part, the Tribunal may, if it so thinks fit, after
recording its reasons for holding such claim to be false or vexatious, make an order to award
costs, including lost benefits due to any interim injunction.
23. A person making an application to a Tribunal under this Act may either appear in
person or take the assistance of a legal practitioner of his choice to present his case before
the Tribunal.
24. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, the order of a Tribunal finally
disposing of petition shall be agitated in execution before the Tribunal.
CHAPTER  IV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
25. No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect
of any matter which may be adjudicated by Agriculture Price Tribunal under this Act and no
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Tribunal to
apply certain
principles.
Decision to be
taken by
majority.
Appeal.
5 of 1908.
Imposition of
cost.
Right of
petitioner to
take assistance
of legal
practitioner.
Execution of
orders of a
Tribunal.
Bar on
Jurisdiction of
Civil Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
order shall be granted by any Court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be
taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.
26. The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, the Judicial and Expert Members, officers and
other employees of the Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
27. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central or
State Government or against the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other person authorized
by such Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Member for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Actor any rule or order made there
under.
28. The provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder shall be in addition to, and not
in derogation of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the
Essential Commodities Act, 1955, the Agricultural Procedure Marketing (Development and
Regulation) Act of the State Government concerned.
29. The provisions of this Act, shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by
virtue of any law other than this Act.
30. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the transfer of cases by the Chairperson from one place of sitting (including
the ordinary place of sitting) to other place of sitting;
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the Chairperson,
Judicial Member and Expert Member of the Tribunal under section 9;
(c) the recruitment of officers and other employees of the Tribunal under
sub-section (2) of section 12; and the salaries and allowances and other conditions of
service of the officers and other employees of the Tribunal under sub-section ( 3) of
that section;
(d) the financial and administrative powers to be exercised by the Chairperson of
the Tribunal under section 11;
(e) the format for petition to be filed before the Tribunal under sections 14, 15
and fees.
Members and
staff of
Tribunal to be
public
servants.
15 of 1860.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Application
of other laws
not barred.
10 of 1949.
11 of 1948.
10 of 1955.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The National Farmers Commission under the Chairmanship of Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
in its report had pointed out that "Success in agricultural progress should be measured by
the growth of farmers' incomes and not just by production figures". As echoed by the
Commission, for sustainability of agriculture, farmers’ income and livelihood must be the
focal point of policy framing in agriculture. The Minimum Support Price (MSP) of the crops
does not cover the cost of production of the agriculture produce to the full extent and,
therefore, it does not do full justice to the farmers. Even though the prices declared by the
CACP are not remunerative, they are not up to the cost of cultivation.
The need is to establish a Tribunal under constitutional provision of article 323B (2) (g)
for adjudicating disputes relating to agricultural produce. Our country is an agrarian economy
and a sizeable population is involved in the agriculture sector. There has been an alarming
increase in farmer suicides due to factors such as debt, loss of productivity and denial of
actual cost. The creation of such a Tribunal will be a right step in providing an autonomous
body which shall adjudicate disputes and address the issues faced by the farmers on issues
relating to appropriate price for their produce.
The Tribunal also required to be mandated to uphold the fundamental right of livelihood
for farmers, who form the backbone of the country. The absence of any dedicated and
impartial Tribunal to ascertain fair price and provide relief in the form of compensation or
restitution to farmers on account of denial of the mandated cost, resulted in causing financial
losses to the farmers. The need is further to study and scrutinize the factors that which
would safeguard farmers’ interest.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for establishment of a National Agricultural Produce
Price Fixation Tribunal in pursuance of article 323B(2) (g) of the Constitution to which
uphold the livelihood rights of farmers, agriculturist and the general public, in matters relating
to price fixation of agricultural produce considered as essential commodities and for matters
connected therewith.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJEEV SATA V
February 22, 2018.
11

12
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Agricultural Produce
Price Fixation Tribunal. Clause 9 provides for the salary and allowances of the Chairperson
and Members of the Tribunal. Clause 12 provides for appointment of officers and staff of the
Tribunal. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees forty crore per annum
would be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.

13
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make, by notification in the
Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause
(2) enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters,
inter alia, include matters relating to—
(a) the transfer of cases by the Chairperson from one place of sitting (including
the ordinary place of sitting) to other place of sitting;
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the Chairperson,
Judicial Member and Expert Member of the Tribunal under section 9;
(c) the recruitment of officers and other employees of the Tribunal under
sub-section (2) of section 12; and the salaries and allowances and other conditions of
service of the officers and other employees of the Tribunal under sub-section (3) of
that section;
(d) the financial and administrative powers to be exercised by the Chairperson of
the Tribunal under section 11;
(e) the format for petition to be filed before the tribunal under sections 14, 15 and
fees.
As the matters in respect of which rules may be made are matter of procedure and
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself, the delegation
of legislative powers, therefore, is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a National Agricultural Produce Price Fixation
Tribunal in pursuance of article 323B(2) (g) of the Constitution to uphold the
livelihood rights of farmers, agriculturists and the general public, in
matters relating to price fixation of agricultural produce considered
as essential commodities and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Rajeev Satav, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4485LS(S3)—16.03.2018.