As nivropucep in Lox SabHA ON ye

2.2 HAY 1990

I. | ; a सा ७१५७)

THE ADVOCATES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990 4
A
BILL
further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic
of India as follows: — q

1, This Act may be called the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 1990. Short
title,
5... 2. In section 6 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to 88. Amend_
the principal Act), — mentof -
section 6,

(6) in sub-section (1), —

(a) after clause (१), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:— 3

४ “(dd) to promote the growth of Bar’Associations for the

10 purposes of effective implementation of the welfare schemes
yeferréd to in Clause (a) of sub-section (2) and clause (a)
of sub-section (2) of section 7;”;

(b) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely: —

25 (gg) ‘to visit and inspect Universities in accordance with
the directions given under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of
section 7;”;


bl 2

(ii) in sub-section (2), after clause (b), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:— \

“(c) establishing law libraries.”

Amend. 3. In section 7 of the principal Act,—
ment of = . .
section 7. (®) in sub-section (1), in clause (i), after the words “inspect Uni- 5

versities”, the words “or cause the State Bar Councils to visit and
inspect Universities in accordance with such directions as it may give
in this behalf” shall be added;

(ii) in sub-section (2), after clause (०), the following clause shal]
be inserted, namely: —

10
“(¢) establishing law libraries,”,
Amend. 4. In section 8 of the principal Act, sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
ment of
Section 8.
Insertion 5. Afler section 8 of ‘he principal Act, the following section shall
of new be inserted, namely:—
section ,
8A,
Constitu- “BA. (1) Where a State Bar Council tails to provide for the elec- 15
tion of tion of its members before the expiry of the period of five years re-
uated ferred to in section 8, the Bar Council of India shall, on and from the
tnittes day immediately following the day of such expiry, constitute a
in the Special Committee consisting of — |
२" #अ किया (i) the ea officio member of “he State Bar Council referred 20 |
ton, to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 3, to be the Chairman: |
Provided that where there are more than one ex officio mem-
bers, the senior-most amongst them shall be the Chairman; and
(४) two members to be nominated by the Bar Council of India |
from amongst advocates on the electoral roll of the State Bar 25
Council,
to discharge the functions of the State Bar Council until the Bar
Council is constituted under this Act.
(2) On ‘he constitution of the Special Committee and until the
State Bar Council is constituted— 30

(०) all properties and assets vesting in the State Bar Council
shall vest in the Special Committee;

(०) all rights, liabilities ang obligations of the State Bar
Council, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall
be the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Special Committee; 38

(c) all proceedings pending before the State Bar Council in
tespect of any disciplinary matter or otherwise shall stand trans-
ferred to the Special Committee.


‘ 3

(3) The Special Committee constituted under sub-section (1)
shall, in accordance with such directions as the Bar Council of India
may give to it in this behalf, hold election to the State Bar Council
within a period of six months from the date of its constitution ‘under

5 sub-section (1), and where, for any reason the Special Committee is
not in a position to conduct election within the said period of six
months, the Bar Council of India may, for reasons to he recorded by
it in writing, extend the said period.”.

6. In section 10A of the principal Act, for sub-sections (1) and (2),
10 the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—

“(1) The Bar Council of India shall mee? at New Delhi or at
such other place as it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, de-
termine.

(2) A State Bar Council shall meet at its headquarters or at such
15 other place as it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, deter-
mine.”.

7. In section 24 of the principal Act, in clause (f) of sub-section

(0),--

(i) in the opening portion, for the words “two hundred and fifty
20 rupees”, the words “six hundred rupees and to the Bar Council of
India, one hundred and fifty rupees by way of a bank draft drawn

in favour of that Council:” shall be substituted;

(i) in the proviso, for the words “one hundred and twenty-five
rupees”, the words “one hundred rupees and to the Bar Council of
| India, twenty-five rupees.” shal] be substituted.

8. In section 24A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) —

(i) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely: —

*(c) if he is dismissed or removed from employment or
30 office under the State on any charge involving moral turpitude.

Explanation. — In this clause, the expression “State” shall have
the meaning assigned to it under article 12 of the Constitution:’s

(ii) in the proviso, for the word “release”, ‘he words “release or
dismissal or, as the case may be, removal” shall be substituted.

9. Section 46 of the principal Act shall be omitted.

40. In section 52 of the principal Act, in clause (b), for the word “act”,
‘the words “act or plead” shall be substituted,

Amend.
ment of
section
108.

Amend-
ment of
section 24,

Amend
ment of
section
248.

Omission
of sec.
tion 46,

Amend.
ment of
section
52,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND: REASONS

On. the basis of various proposals made by the Bar Council of India
and certain other bodies and the experience gained in the administration
of the Advocates Act, 1961, it is found necessary to amend the Act with
4 view 40 enabling the Bari Council of India and the State Bar Councils
to function more effectively for the betterment of the legal profession.

The Bill proposes, inter alia, to

(i) empower the State Bar Councils to promote the growth of
Bar .Associations for purposes of implementing the welfare schemes
for advocates and to visit and inspect Universities on the directions
of the Bar Council of India, and to constitute funds for establishing

law libraries; ,

(ii) provide for automatic cessation of membership of members
of the State Bar Councils in the event of non-holding of elections
within the stipulated period and for making consequential arrange-
ments;

@ii) enable the Bar ‘Council of India ang the State Bar Councils
to meet at places other than their respective headquarters;

(iv) increase the enrolment fee from two hundred and fifty rupe-
es to seven hundred and fifty rupees without disturbing the fee pay-
able at present by persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes; i .

(v) empower the State Bar Councils not to admit a person as
an advocate on a State roll if he has been dismissed or removed from
any employment or office under the State on a charge involving
moral turpitude; |

(vi) empower the Supreme Court of India to make rules for
determining the persons who shall be entitled to plead before that
Court. | : | i 8

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Dens;
The 15th May, 1990, DINESH GOSWAMI.


ANNEXURE
Extracts rRoM,.tup Apyocares Acr, 1961
, (25 or 1961)

* * + + *

6. (1) The functions of a State-Bar Couneil shall be—

* * * * *

(2) A State Bar Council May constitute one or more funds in the
prescribed manner for the purpose of— *

+ * * *® *

7. (1) The functions of the, Bar Council. of: India shall be—

* % * * *

(i) to recognise Universities whose degree in law shall be a
qualification for enrolment as an. advocate and for that. purpose. to
visit and inspect. Universities:

* * * * रू
(2) The Bar Council of India may constitute one or more funds in the
prescribed manner for the purpose of—
* “oe * 1, *
8. 0) The term of office of an elected member of a State Bar..Couneil

{other than an elected member thereof referred to in. section 54). shall -
“be five years from the date of publication of the result of his election.

(2) An outgoing member shall continue in office until the publication
of the result of the election of his successor.

* * * * *

108. (1) The Bar Council of India shall meet at New Delhi.
(2), A State Bar Council. shall meet atits headquarters,

* * * ee *

24. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and the rules made
thereunder, a person shall be qualified to be admitted as an advocate on
8 State roll, if he fulfils the following conditions, namely; —

* * * * ¥

5 :


2 of 1899,

22 of
1955.

6 ‘

(0) he has paid, in respect of the enrolment, stamp duty, if any,
chargeable under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, and an enrolment fee
payable to the State Bar Council of two hundred and fifty rupees:

Provided that where such person is a member of the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and produces a certificate to that
effect from such authority as may be prescribed, the enrolment fee
payable by him to the State Bar Council shall be one hundred and
twenty-five rupees, ! |

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, a person shall be
deemed to have obtained a degree in law from a University in India on
the date on which the results of the examination for that degree are
published by the University on its notice board or otherwise declaring
him to have passed that examination.

* * * * *

248. (1) No person shall be admitted as an advocate on a State rojl—
(०) if he is convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude;

(b) if he is convicted of an offence under the provisions of the
Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955:

Provided that the disqualification for enrolment as aforesaid shall
cease to have effect after a period of two years has elapsed since his
release. |

* * * * *

46. Every State Bar Council shall, for each financial year commencing
on or after the Ist day of April, 1976, pay to the Bar Council of India a
sum equivalent to twenty per cent, of the total of the enrolment fees

realised by it under this Act during that year, before the thirtieth day
of April of the succeeding financial year.

* * * eo *

52. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect the power of the
Supreme Court to make rules under article 145 of the Constitution—

* * * * *

(8) for determining the persons who shall be entitled to act in
that Court. |

* rs * * *



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961.

(Shri Dinesh Goswami, Minister of Law and Justice)