As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABH.A ON 
sm No. 17 of 1986 
THE TAMIL NADU LBGISLATIVE COUNCIL (ABOLITION) BILL. 
1986 
A 
Bll..L 
to provide for the abolition of the Legislative Cou.ncil of the State of 
Tamil Nadu and JOT matteI'S su.pplemental, incidentat and ~naequ~n­
tial thereto, 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the 
Rep'lblic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Legislative Council Short 
(Abolition) Act, 1986. title aDd 
• 
commence-
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(4) "appropriate Government" means, as respects a law relating 
to a matter enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule to the 
10 Constitutlon, the Central Government, and as respects any other 
law, the State Government; 
(b) "article" means an article of the Constitution; 
(c) "Council" means the Leiislative Council of the State of 
Tamil Nadu; 
mente 
Defini. 
tions. 

Abolition 
of the 
Council. 
Amend-
ment of 
articlo 168. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 43 'of 
1950. 
Repeal of 
tbe Delimi-
tation of 
Counell 
Conatitucn-
dOl 
(Madru) 
Order, 
1"1. 
Provisioll 
uto 
pending 
BUI •• 
2 
(d) "law" includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, 
bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having the 
force of law in the whole or any part of the State of Tamil Nadu; 
(e) "Legislative Assembly" means the Legislative Assembly of 
the State of Tamil N adu. 5 
3. (1) The Legislative Council of the State of Tamil Nadu is hereby 
abolished. '! 
(2) On the abolition of the Council, every member thereof shall cease 
to be such member. 
4. In sub-clause (a) of clause ,(1) of article 168, the worda "Tamil 10 
Nadu," shall be omitted. 
5. In the Representation of the People Act, 1950,-
(a) in the Third Schedule, entry No.4 relating to Tamil Nadu 
ihall be omitted; 
(b) in the Fourth Schedule, the heading "Tamil Nadu" and the 15 
entries thereun,der shall be omitted. 
6. The Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Madras) Order, 1951, 
is hereby repealed. 
7. (1) A Bill pending in the Council immediately before the com-
mencement of this Act which has not been passed by the Legislative 20 
Assembly shall lapse on the abolition of the Council. 
(2) A Bill pending in the Council immediately before the commence-
ment of this Act which has been passed by the Legislative Assembly 
shall not lapse on the abolition of the Council, but on such abolition 
shall be deemed to have been passed before such commencement by lZ5 
both Houses of the Legislature of the State of Tamil Nadu in the form 
in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly. 
(3) If a Bill which having been passed by the Legislative Assemb17 
is, before the commencement of this Act, either rejected by the Councll 
or passed by the Council, with amendments, the Legislative Assembly 30 
may, after such commencement, pass the Bill again with or without such 
amendments, if any, as have been made by the Counell and the Bill 80 
passed shall be deemed to be a Bill introduced in and puaed by the 
Legislative Assembly after the commencement of this Act. 
Power to 8. The appropriate Government may, before the expiration of one year S5 
adapt laws. from the commencement of this Act, by order, published in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, make such adaptations end modifications of any law made before 
&'Uch commencement whether by 'Yay of repeal or amendment as may 
be neCeS8ary or expedient in consequence of the aboUtlon of the COUDcdl 

3 
undw section 3, and thereupon every such law .hall have dad subject 
to the adaptations and modifications so made. 
9. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has 
been made under section 8 for the adaptation or modification of a law 
5 made before the commencement of this Act, any court, tribunal or 
authority required or empowered to enforce such law may construe the 
law in such manner, without aff~cting the substance, as may be neces- . 
sary or proper on account of the abolition of the Council, in regard to 
the matter before the court, tribunal or authority. 
Power to 
CODStrue 
laws. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under article 169 of the Constitution, Parliament may, by law, 
provide for the abolition of the Legislative Council of a State having 
~uch a Council, if the Legislative Assembly of the State passes a reso-
lution to that effect by a majority of the total membership of the 
Assembly and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of 
the Assembly prest'nt and voting. On the 14th May, 1986, the Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu passed a resolution in terms of 
article 169 of the Constitution for the abolition of the Legislative 
Council of that State. It is accordingly proposed to abolish the Legis-
lative Council of the State of Tamil Nadu. 
2. The Bill seeks to give effect to this object and also provides for 
matters supplemental, incidental and consequential to such abolition. 
H. R. BHARDWAJ. 
Nzw Dam; 
The 4th August, 1986. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make 
such adaptations and modifications of any law ~ade before the com-
mencement of the proposed legislation as may be necessary or expedient 
in consequence of the abolition Of the Legislative Council of the State 
of Tamil Nadu. This power will be available only for a period of one 
year from the commencement of the proposed legislation. The adapta-
tions and modifications can be only such as are necessary Or expedient 
in consequence of the abolition of the Council and cannot affect the 
substance of the laws adapted or modified. 
2. The dele~ation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 

ANNEXUKIl 
EXTRACTS FROM: THE CONS'l'lTUTION 01' .hmIA 
• .. • • • 
CUAP'IER Ill. TIn; STATE LBmsuTUD 
186. (1) ... .. ... .' 
(4) in the States of Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Karnataka 
and Uttar Pradesh. two Houses; 
.. .. ... .. .. 
EXTRACTs FROM "THE RmPDsJ:NTATlON OF TIDl PlilOPLI AcT, 1950 
(43 OF 1950) 
• ... ... ... 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 10) 
Alluca.tion of seats in the Legislative Councils 
Name of State Total Number to be elected or nominated under article 171(3) 
+. 
... 
TamilN.du 
• 
number 
ofaeata Sub- Sub- Sub-
clause clalllO clause 
(0) (6) (e) 
2 3 4- 5 
• ... ... 
&3 21 6 6 
... ... ... 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 27 (2) ] 
Sub- Sub-
claUlle c1auIe 
(4) (,) 
6 7 
• 
21 9 
.. 
Local authorities fen' purposes of elections to Legis14tive Council8 
... .. • • 
TAMIL NADU 
1. Municipalities. 
2. Panchayat Union CouncUs. 
3. Omtmunent Boards. 

, 
4. Town Panchayats notified under the Tamil Nadu Panchlyats Act, 
1958 (Tamil Nadu Act XXXV of 1958), that is to say, PanchayatB 
having a ,population estimated at not less than fivethoUlalld and. 
an annual income e1tima~ at not less than ten thOWland rupees . 
• • •• • • 
'THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES '(MADRAS) 
ORDER, 1951 
In pursuance of section 11 of the Representation of the People Act, 
1950 (43 of 1950), the President is pleased to make the following Order, 
namely:-
1. This Order may be caned the Delimitation of Councll Constituencies 
(Madras) Order, 1951. 
2. 'l'he constituencies into which the State of Tamil Nadu Ihall be 
divided for the purpose of elections to the Legislative Councll of the 
State from: (4) the graduates' constituencies, (b) the teachers' cowl-
tuencies, and (c) the local authorities' constituencies in the said State, 
the extent of each such constituency and the number of Beata allotted to 
each such constituency shall be as shown in the following Table:-
TABLE 
Name of Conatituency 
.. 
Extent of Collltituency Number 
of Sea til 
:1 
---------------------------------------------------------
I. Madra, District Gradultes 
3. Tamil Nadu But CcntralGraduates 
4. Tamil Nadu Welt Central Graduatc5 
5. Tamil Nadu South Graduatel 
6. Madl'III Chenplpattu Teachen 
7. North Atcot, South Areat Teachen 
Graduatls' Constilrl",cils 
Madras district 
Ch'mtalpsttu, Notth Arc,,'t and South Areal 
districts. 
Thanjavur, Thiruchitapalli and Puduk-
kottai districts. 
Salem, Dharmapuri, Coimbatore, Periyar 
and Nilgiria districlI. 
Madurai. Anna, Ramanathapuram. 
Kamarajar, Paaumpon Muthura-
malin$am, TiruDeiveU and Kannlya-
kuman Qtrietl. 
T,od!Irs' Gmmlfllneils 
Maciru and Chenplpattu districts 
North Areat and South Arcot diltrlcta 

g ........ DbaraatpurI, OoImhaecn, 
Periyu-, Nu,iril TeIabert. 
10. M,:llItai~U!D'A!lQ ."OWJl· Rami"." 
tQpuraDa.C\UD·lt.&Ja ,r..j if"OUID' 
P4I&IDpDD M,atlwr;aaaallDpID Tacher. 
8 
Tlaaqjawr, 'ftdrw:bInpaUI and Pull .... 
bUll diltricu. 
Salem, DhannapurI, Colmbalore, PerIyar 
and NUpiI diatricII 
Maclurai. AlIQ",. Ramallatbaplll'aas, ~ 
uid P-,'UlUpon !4Iathur..lUalIng .. m dillrkx •• 
14. Narda Aroot Local Autharldel Narth Arcot dIItdct \I 
15. South Arcot Local Authoridal South Arcot diItrict i 
16. Thl'ljavW' Local Authorities 'l'banjavur diltrict q 
17. ThiI'IIClait"P1W, PlIriUk\uttll Lx,1 All' l'bitllChlrapo\Ui and Pildukkottal districts \I 
tborideI. 
Ig. Colmb,liCH'e, Pcrlyar, Nllgiris Local Au· Ooimbatore, Per\yar and Nil,lril diatrictl q 
thoridea 
qo. Madurai-oum-AnIla'LoeaI Authoritiel Madurai and diatrlctl 
IU. Ramao thapuram·eum·K Lm Irajar-
cum·P LSumpClD Mlithuram~Ul\lam 
Local Authorltlel. 
!Ill. TiranelnU Local Authorl_ 
as. Kauaiyakumarl Local Authorltlcs 
Ramaoathapuram, K .~lr and Pa'UlDpon II 
Muthur .. malllllaID diltrIcts. 
s. Ally reference ill thia Order to a diltrict aball be collltrued AI a reference to the area compo 
tiled within that diltrict OIl the 15th day of September, 198s. 

LOKSABHA 
BILL 
to provide for the aboUtion of the Legislative Council of the State of Tamil 
Nadu and for matters supplemental, incidental and consequential 
thereto. 
(Shri H. R. Bhardwaj, 
Minister 01 Sttlle ill 'he 
Mlni3try of lAw and Iustf£e.)' 