As IN'l'RODUCBJ) IN LOK SABRA ~ 
Z 9 DEC I~H!i 
THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 19. 
, 
BILL 
/unher to amend the CommiBBior&s of Inqu.iry Act, 1952. 
B. it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republie et 
India as :tollows:- " 
I. Thi. Ad may be called the Commissions of Inquiry (Amendment) 
Act, 1988. : 
5 I. In section 3 of the Commiuions t>f Inquiry Act, 1952, sub-sectJttn, 
(5) and (6) .hall be omitted. ; 
Amencl~ 
ment 6f 
eedlon 
3 til Ad 
.,. of 
tfdt. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Sub-section (4) of section 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1962 
casts an obligation on the appropriate Government to lay the report of 
the Commission of Inquiry appointed under SUb-sectiOD (1) thereof be-
fore the House of the People or, as the case may be. the Legislative As-
sembly concerned. to'gether with a memorandum of action taken f.lere-
on. withi.n a period of six months of the submission of the report. How-
ever, in 1986, section 3 had been amended so as to provide therein that 
under certain circumstances the report of the Commission of Inquiry 
may not be so laid, 
2. A Commission of Inquiry is always set up for the purpose of 
making an inquiry into any definite matter of public importance, A~ 
!"uch, the report submitted by such a Commission should not be with-
held from the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly under 
any circum<:tances and the public should h~ve access to infonnation 
which is of vital importance and interest to them. It is felt that the 
:.:Imendments made in 1986 should be done away with. 
3, The Bill seeks to achieve the above obiect. 
NEW D&LHI; MUFTI MOHD. SA YEED. 
The 21st December, 1989 . 
.c>:£' .. :, '. 
r-," .. ' • 
'j" 
.O' , .... 
\:4.\" .1 
A 
" Io-"l 
'" 
(".' .. " • ,.' ... .L 
k· 
.r . ( .. ,~ .. " ." 
. '(; , 
2 

! ANNEXURE 
EX'fRACT FROM THE COM:MISSIONS OF INQUIRY AI::r, 1952 
(60 OF 1952) 
• • • • • 
3. (1) It' • • • • 
(5) The provisions of sub-section (4) shall not apply if the appro-
priate Government is satisfied that in the interest of the sovereignty 
and integrity of India, the security af the State, friendly relations with 
foreign States or in the pubHc interest, it is not expedient to lay before 
the House of the People or, as the case may be, the Legislative As-
sembly of the State, the report, 'Or any part thereof, of the Commjssion 
on the inquiry made by the Commission under sub-section (1), 
and issues a notification to that effect in the Official Gazette. 
Explanation.-For the purpose 'Of sub-section (5), "report" includes 
an interilb·;repbrt aDd all "proceedings ot II COmmission:-Y " • 
(6) Every notification issued under sub-section (5) shall be laid 
before th\" House of the People or, as the case may be, the Legislative 
Assembly of the State, if it is sitting. as soon as may be after the issue 
of the notification, and if it is not sitting, within seven days of its re-
assembly, and the appropriate Government shall seek the approval 
of the House of the People 'Or, as the case may be. the Legislative As-
sembly of the State, to the notificatio~ by a resolution moved within a 
period of fifteen days beginning with the day on which the not;fication 
is so laid before the House of the People or, as the case may be, the 
Legislative Assembly of the State and if the House of the People or, 
as the case may be, the Legislative Assembly of the State makes any 
modification in the notittcation' or directs that the notification should 
cease to have effect, the notification shall thereafter have effe~ onlv in 
such modified fom} or be of no effect, as the case may be. 
'. • • • • 
Appoint-
ment of 
Commis-
sion. 

LOK SABRA 
BILL 
further to amacl the Commillion. at Ihqwl'J An. 1_ 