• f 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
slir No.!i or I~ 
TIlE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY (AMENDMENT) Bill, 1969 
A 
BILL 
h,: .-' to amend the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952. 
:Bt: it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the ftepublic 
of India as follows:-
L This Act may be called the Commissions of Inquiry (Amendment) Short 
~1~ ~ 
80 of 191.2, S Z. In section 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry Ad, 1952 (hereinafter Amend-
referred to as the principal Act), after sub-sedion (2), the following sub- ment of 
leetion shall be inserted, namely:- section 
"f3~ The appropriate Government may, at any s~e of an in-
quiry by the Commislrion,-
10 <a) fill any vacancy whiC'h may have arisen in the office of a 
member of the Commission (whether consistin, of one or more 
than one member): or 
(b) increase the number of members of the Commission.". 
S. 
3. In section" of the principal Act, in clause (a), for the words "sum- Amend-
Is" iiidDmg .'iiB eIiI~rcln, the attendarice of rdiY p~on". (h'e wotas "iulllinon- me'rtt ot 
~'del emoreing the adt,liIclance ofatit ~D from ally iUlri' O'f' the section •. 
territories to which this A~t extends'" shall tie itihSfiiUted. . 

Amend-
ment of 
section 5. 
Inser-
tion of 
new sec-
tion 5A. 
Power 
of Com-
mission to 
utilise 
the ser-
vices of 
certain 
officers 
and inves-
tigation 
agencies 
for con-
ductinJ 
inveati-
eation 
pertain-
tng to 
inquiry, 
Inser-
tion of 
new .ee-
tion 
SA. 
PerllODB 
not ob-
Hged to 
dis-
close .ee-
ret pro-
cen of 
mllllutac-
ture bt 
good •. 
Amend-
ment 
of sec-
tion 8. 
2 
4. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words and 
figures "and any person so required shaH be deemed to be legally bound 
to furnish such information within the meaning of section 176 of the 
Indian Penal Code" shall be inserted at the end. 
5. After section 5 of the prinripal Ad, the following seetion shall be S 
inserted, namely:-
"SA. (1) The Commission may, for the purpose of conduding any 
inverstigation pertaining to the inquiry, utilise the services of any 
oftlcer or investigation agency,-
(a) in the ease of a Commission appointed by the Central 10 
Government, of the Central Government, or 
(b) in the ease of a Commission appointed by the State Go,,-
emment, of the State Government, 
with the concurrence of the Central Government or the State Govern-
ment, as the ease may, be. 1$ 
(%) The omcer or agency whose services are utilised under sub-
sedion (1) shall investigate into any matter pertaining to the inquiry 
and submit a report thereon (hereafter in this section referred to 
as the investigation report) to the Commiuion within such period as 
may be speeified by the Commission in this behalf. 20 
(3) The Commission shan satisfy itself about the correctness of 
the fads stated and the conclusions, if any, arrived at in the investi-
gation report tmbmitted to it under sub-section (2) and for this pur-
pose the ColDJllission may make such inquiry (including the examl-
Dation of the penon or persons who conducted, or assisted ba the 2' 
investiption) as it deems ftt.". 
6. After section 6 of the prinCipal Act, the following section shall ~e 
inserted, namely:-
U6A. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to compel any person 
giving evidence before the Commission to disclose any secret process 30 
of manufacture of any goods.". 
7. In section 80f the principal Act, the words "and may act potwith. 
standing the temporary absence of any member or the existence Qt.· a 
vacancy among its members" shall be omitted. 

LGK 2.ABriA 
CCRRIGEj'~Dt~ 
to 
TH& C or·mISS IONd OF Ii'TQUIRY (AMENDlvJENT) BILL, 1 91 
1T 0 belAs .in trodll.Ced in Lok Sabha) 
. 1. Page 1, 1 ine 1 2 , -
before "or" iJ2.!. ": 11 ~ 11.11 
• 
2. .Page 2, aga.inst line Ir ~ert in the margin.-
"45 of 1860." 
3. .Page 2, line 8,-
i:2I "inve rs t ica t ion" read --- " investigation" 
4. .Page 2, line 15,-
afte r II may" omit -
5. Page 3, line 17,-
~rter II in3erted" 
6. £age 3, line 25 r -
II II 
I 
.~sert " " , 
.!.<l£ "affence" read "offence" 
7. Page 3, line 31,'; 
.Qefgre " or" 
8. Fage" line 15 ..... 
-
" . " • 
!2! "1 962" ~ "1952" 
9. Page 6, 1 ine 37,-
~ "Th.is" ~ "The" 
10. Oorrect line numbers on page 3. 
,., tuab __ 
" . I' • 

a of 1818. 
5 
10 
IS 
20 
3 
8. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following section &hall be Iu.ser-
inserted, namely: - tion of 
new sec-
tion BA. 
"8A. (1) Where the Commission consists of two or more mem-
. bers, it may act notwithstanding the absence of the Chah'man Ol' any 
other member or any vacancy among its members: 
Provided that if the appropriate Government notifies the Com-
mission that the services of the Chairman have ceased to be avail-
able, the Commission shall not act until a new Chairman is appointed. 
(2) ~here during the course of an inquiry before a Commission, 
a change has taken place in the constitution of the Commission by 
reason of any wcancy having been filled or by an increase in the 
number of members of the Commission or by any other reason, it 
shall not be necessary for the Commission to commence the inquiry 
afresh and the inquiry may be ~ontinued from the stage at which the 
change took place.". 
Inquiry 
not to 
be inter-
rupted 
by rea-
BOn at 
vacancy 
or change 
in the 
consti-
tution 
at Com-
mission. 
8. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Inser-
inserted namely:- tion ot 
new lec-
tion lOA. 
"lOA. (1) If any person, by words either spoken or intended to be 
read, makes or publishes any s1Jatement or does any other act, which 
is calculated to bring the Commission Or any member thereof iuto 
disrepute, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
(2) The prOvisions of section 198B of the Code of Criminal Pro.-
cedure, 1898 shall apply in relation to an offence under sub-section 
(1) as they apply in relation to an affence referred to in sub-section 
(1) of the said section 198B, subject to the modification that no com-
plaint in respect of such offence shall be made by the Public Pro-
secutor except with the previous sanction,-
(a) in the case of a CommisSion, or member of a Commis-
Penalty 
tor acts 
calcula-
ted to 
bring 
the Com-
mission 
or any 
member 
thereot 
into dis-
repute. 
30 sion, appointed by the Central Government, of the Central Gov-
ernment: or 
(b) in the case of a Commission, or member of a Commis-
Sion, appointed by the State Government, of the State Govern-
ment.". 
10. In section 12 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the follow- Amend-35 ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely: - ment of 
"(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this 
section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive 
sessions and if before the expiry of the session in which it is fKJ laid 
or the session immediately following both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both HClUSes agree that the rule should 
sec-
tion 12. 

Exten-
sion of 
Act 60. of 
1952 to 
Kohima 
and 
Mokok-
chung 
districts 
in Nasa-
land. 
.. 
~t .be .~~~, :~e rule s~l ~~re~~ h~v~ ~ o~lx .~ ~~ Jn~pi .. 
fied form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so JiQw:~v.er,·fijat .~,. 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice'to tli~ vali-
dity of anything previously done under that rule.". 
11. The principaJ Act shall, as from the commencement of this Act, S 
extend to, and come into force in, the Kohima and Mokokehung di"strict& 
in the State (If Nagaland. . 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS NND REASONS 
~~rt.a~ dtflicul~~es ~<;l 4eftcie.nc~~ experience~ ~ t11:e wor~~g of the 
Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1~2 were referred to the LawC9p1Jp.~ion 
for suggesting suitable amendments to the Act. Taking into account the 
impor~e of the Act and tb.eneeci f<1r a propersy~tetD of inquiziu, .the 
Law Commission undeRook a comprehensive ex.mination oftae enti1-e 
Act and made a number of recommendations ill .tb,eir ·Tw.eDty..j'~ ... 
port faT th~ revision of the Act in several respects. 
2. T~JP.8in )"ttC9mtr\~npatio~ o.f t1;l,e 4,,,, CD~~n ~\l'~.B~~ 
been accepted by Government after c~,,~ring ~ views ~~ .. ~ 
those recommendations:by the State Governments, Union territory Ad-
ministrations and the' Ministries of the Government of India. TIle Bill 
se'~ksto give effect to such recomme~ations of the Law cmnnfs,Sto.t1 ' as 
are acc~ptable. 
. . 
3. Though the Commissions of Inqu.iry Act, 1962 has been inbca in 
the Tuensang disirict in the State of N.agaland, it has not been ~teDfW 
to the otl)er two districts of Kobima and UokokehUDg in iIlat Staie. Ifhe 
Bill also leekato extend the Act to these two disttit:ts. 
4.T.nt! nQ~s on cla~~ ~plain in cie.tail the pr9~~1l$ at tb, aAl· 
NEW DELHI; 
The i4th O.ctob,er, 196~. 
Y. B. CH.~ VAN. 

.' . Note. on ClaUseS 
(in these notes, the expression "Report" means the Twemy-Fourth Re-
port C1J the Law Commission of India on the CommilBiOns of Inquiry 
Act, 1952). 
ClAUH 2.-Judging from the experience ga~ed in the working of the 
Commiuions of Inquiry Act, 1952, it is considered desirable to provide 
expressly for the fUling up of vacancies in the membership of the Com-
mission and for increase in the number of members thereof, whenever 
the Government thinks it necessary or expedient to do so. The clause 
seeks to insert a new sub-section to section 3 of the Act for. tbe purpose. 
(Vide paragrapb26 of the Report). 
\ 
ClaUle 3.-Section 4 of the Act au tborises the Commission to summon 
and enforce the attendance of any person. It does not, however, specify 
the territorial jurisdiction for the Commission in this behalf and, conse-
quentially, it may be argued that the restriction under Order XVI, rule 
19 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, would be attracted, since, under 
sectiUIl 4, a commiSSion, in summoning witnesses, has the same powers as 
• civil court. In view of the different nature of the work assigned to a 
commiSSKm. of inquiry, it is considered that this restriction should not 
apply to commissions appointed under tbe Act. The clause seeks to amend 
section 4 suitably so as to empower the Commission to summon ond en-
force the attendance of any person from any part of the territories to 
which the Act extends. (Vide paragraph 27 of the Report). 
Clause 4.-This clause seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 5 of 
the Act casting an obligation on the person, required by the Commission 
to furnish any information under that sub-section, to furnish such infor-
mation. (Vide paragraph 28 of the Report). 
Clause 5.-This clause seeks to insert a new section 5A in the Act. 
Under this new section, the Commission is empowered to utiliae the ser-
vices of any officer or investigation agency of the Central Government (in 
the case of a commission appointed by the Central Government) Or of 
the State Government (in the case of a commission appointed by the 
State Government). Provision has also been made to the effect that the 
officer or agency, whose services are utilised, shall investigate into any 
matter pertaining to an inquiry and submit a report thereon to the Com-
mission within such period as may be specified by the Commission in 
this behalf. This section further provides that the Commission shall 
satisfy itself about the correctness of the facts stated and the conclusions, 
if any. arrived at in the report and for this purpose the Commission may 
make such inquiry (including the examination of the person or persons 
who conducted, or assisted in, the investigation), as it deems fit. (Vide 
paragraph 17 of the Report). 
C1au.se 6.-It is considered deSirable to make it clear, in the interests 
of trade, that nothing in the Act shall render it compulsory for any per-
son giving evidence to disclose any secret process of manufacture of any 
J 

7 
goods. The clause seeks to insert a new section 6A in the Act for the 
purpose. (Vide paragraph 32 of the Report). 
Clauses 7 and a.-Clause 8 seeks to insert a new section SA in the Act 
providing that an inquiry shall not be interrupted by reason of vacancy 
or change in the constitution of the Commission. Provision has also been 
made to the effect that if the services of the Chairman have ceased to be 
available, the Commission shall not act until a new Chairman is appointed. 
(Vide parai!aph 34 of the Report). The amendment made to section 8 
of the Act by clause 7 is a consequential one. 
Clause 9.-This clause seeks to insert 'a new section lOA in the Act 
providing for a penalty for acts calculated to bring the Commi8l~ or 
any member thereof into disrepute. The penalty proposed is imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to two years or fine ar both. The pro-
visions of section 198B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 have been 
made applicable to en offence under this new section subject to the J1lodi-
fication that no complaint in respect of such offence shall be made by the 
Public Prosecutor except with the previous sanction of the appropriate 
Cktvernment. (Vide paragraph 31) of the Report). 
Clause IO.-This clause seeks to insert a new lub.-section to section 12 
of the Act making provision for the laying of rules made under the Act 
before ~r1iament. . 
Clause n.-The Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 does not extend to 
the districts of Kohima and Mokokchung in the State of Nagaland though 
it extends to the Tuensang district in that State. The clause seeks to ex-
tend the Act to the aforesaid Kohima and Mokokchung districts also. 

FINANCiAL MEMORANDUM 
, Claus, 2 tif ~~. ~11' 9ee~' to empower c;ovenirlie~~:, lit', any ,~, of 
Il1tt~ Hy a CdinnttsauStl, to Int!n!8~ the number ot nU!mbers Of tti~ earn-
uiiWtdi[ SUCh-irtcWtie as arid When made in reSpect of: a Cori'lIi1.i~dn 
appointed by the Central GOvernment will entaU extra expenditure from 
~be Consolidated Fund of India. Government would ordinarily determine 
the compo~iiion of a Commission well before the commencement ot tbp. 
inquiry ~ it may norma1Jy not be necessary for thehl to increase th'e 
numoer or members of a CcitniniSsion after the hitter lias commenced its 
b)4ui¥Y. The provi&ion is more in the nature of an ~iia'6llhg power which 
may h~ve to be used in exceptionaJ circumstances. The extra eXPerltHture 
iD.volVea will dbpeild oil tfle nlltUre and dltrati6f1 of' t1i@ iitqtiit1. the HUIl-
Vidl.t~l who may be selected tot apPointment as additional rlierli~r lirid tfie 
remuiieration to be ftle'ecl' fot hitn as a member of' die CofturtisSt'Ott of 
Inquiry. 
2. eJa~ 3 df th~ BiH' seeb m empower a ~ of IDqUiry to 
aumtilbrl' awl edlbrbe' tk~ atWDdaiiee of any ~' 88 • ~ ... , trGlll' .,. 
part or India. This may call for some extra expenditUre 011 the JI'WIit" of 
travelling and daily allowances to witnesses. 
3:' ~'5'6f the'Bill-Mks·to t!m~r a;CommtaattJri of'lnqlik'y to'uti-
B.(f~~ Of ~ili' dtIeetw and ihvMtlllltton .,eHcleIr for eondbetiDg 
in~gWtm pei"taiJihig to'iln Itfqutry. SUdh a_Ranee may posatbly be 
made a',ailable to the Commission without entailing any extra expenditure. 
Depending upon the nature and duration of the investigation required, 
occasions could, however, arise when it may become necessary to incur 
extra expenditure on the appointment of, or replacement for, the officers 
whose services are made available to the Commissions of InqUiry . 
. 4. No accurate estimate can be made of the extra expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India which may result from the proposed 
amendments. It is, in any case, not likely to exceed rupees one lakb a 
year. No non-recurring expenditure is involved, 
: ......... - 8 • I." 

5 of 1908. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY Act 1952 I 
(60 OF 1952) 
• • • • • • 
4. The Commission shall have the powers of a Civil Court, while try- Powera 
ing.a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the 101- of Com-
lOWIng matters, namely: - miaaion. 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any peraon and 
examiri.ing him on oath; 
• • • • • 
5. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The Commission shall have power to require any pe1'IOll, subject to 
any privilege which may be claimed by that person under any law for 
the time being in force, to furnish information on such points or matters 
as, in the opinion of the COmmission, may be useful for, or relevant to, 
the subject matter of the inquiry . 
• • • • • • 
Addi-
tioDal 
powera 
of Com-
m'.ioa 
8. The Commission shall, subject to any rules that may be made in thlI Proce-
behalf, have power to regulate its own procedure (including the 6ziDg ::efol~ 
of places and times of its sittings and deciding whether to lit in public lowed by 
or in private) and may act notwithltanding the tempora.ry absence of 8DJ the Com-
member or the existence of a vacancy among its memberL m'gloa 
• • • • • • 
9 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BUL 
1 . ..,.J 
to amend the Commissions of Inquiry Act, [952. 
( 
(S",., Y.B. Chauaft, 
M;,,;,u, of H"",. tJJ/tIIn) 