Bill No, t7 of 1957 
THE ESTATE DUTY AND TAX ON 
RAILWAY PASSENGER FARES 
(DISTRIBUTION) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 

BW No. 97 of 1'5'1 
THE ESTATE DUTY AND TAX ON RAILWAY PASSEN-
GER FARES (DISTRIBUTION) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the distribution. of the net proceeds of the estate duty 
and the tax on railway paBsenger fares among the StatJea. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Es1Bte Duty and Tax on Railway Short title. 
Passenger Fares (Distribution) Act, 1957. 
S 2. In this Act,-
(a) "estate duty" means the estate duty levied under the DefiDitiona. 
34 of 1953. Estate Duty Act, 1953, in respect of property other than agricul-
turalland; 
2S of 1957. 
10 
(b) "State" does not include a Union territoryj 
(c) "tax on railway passenger fares" means the tax levied 
under the Railway Passenger Fares Act, 1957. I 
3. (1) During each financial year commencing on and after the Distribution 
1st day of April, 1957, the net proceeds of the estate duty levied and ~~e~~~ro­
collected during that financie.l year shall, after deducting therefrom a e8t~te duty 
f th 'd eds b b bl assIgned to IS sum equal to one per cent. 0 e S8l proce as eing attri uta e the States. 
to Union territories, be distributed among the States in accordance 
with the provisions of sub-section (2). 
(2) Out of the total amount falling to be distributed in any 
financial yeer under sub-section (1) ,-
20 (a) the amount attributable to immovable property shall be 
distributed among the States in proportion to the gross value of 

2 
the immovable property situated in the respective States as 
determined in respect of that financial year; 
(b) the balance shall be distributed among the States as 
follows:-
State Pe-rcentage 5 
Andhra Pradesh 
Assam 
Bihar 
Bo~bay 
Kerala 
Madhya Pradesh 
Madras 
Mysore 
Orissa 
Punjab 
. Rajasthan 
8'76 
2'53 
10'86 
13'52 
3' 79 10 
7'30 
8'40 
5'43 
4~10 
4'52 IS 
4-47 
uttar PradeSh 17' 71 
, . West <Seftgal .... 7' 37 
Jammu and Kashmir ]. 24 
.. (3) For the purposes of this section,- :ao 
(a) "amount attributable to immowble property" means an,,) 
amount which bears to the total amount distributable in any, •• 
financial year under sub-section (1) the same proportion which· 
the gross·value of all immowble property situated in the States 
bears to the gross value of all property, movable and immovable, 25 . 
so situated, as determined in respect of that financial year; 
(b) "gross value", in relation to movable or immovable pro-
perty, means the total value of all movable property or, as the 
oase may be, of all immovable property, passing on the death of 
any person as determined by the Controller under' the Estate 30 . 
Duty Act; 1953; 34 of 1953 
(c) "immovable property" does not include agricultural 
land. 
Special pro- 4, (1) In respect of each of the financial years commencing OD 
d~s~~b~~ion the 1st day of April, 191>3, 1954 and 191>5, the net proceeds of the 35 
0?ne1t pro- estate duty levied and collected during that financial year shall, after 
~~~~~ 1uty deducting therefrom a sum equal to two and three quarter per cent. 
in respect of of the said proceeds as being attributable to Part C States, be dis-
~~~53- tributeci among the Part A States and Part B States in the same 
54 to 1956- manner as the percentage of the net proceeds of taxes on income' 4(! 
57. 

3 
falU,ng to be distributed under clause (2) of article 270 of the Consti-
~ution has been distributed among those States in respect ot that 
flu.anclal year. 
(2) ~Q. respect of the financial year commencing on the 1st day 
S of Apr~, 1956,-
(a) seven-twelfths of the net proceeds of the estate duty 
levied and collected during the said financial year shall, after 
deducting therefrom a sum equal to two and three quarter per 
cent. ~f the said proceeds as being attributable to Part C States, 
10 be distributed among the Part A States and Part B States in • 
respect of the first seven months of the said financial year in the 
same manner as the percentage of the net proceeds of taxes on 
income falling to be distributed under clause (2) of article 270 
of the Constitution has been distributed among those States in 
IS respect of the said seven months, and 
(b) five-twelfths of the net proceeds of the estate duty 
levied and collected during the said financial year shall, after 
deducting therefrom a sum equal to one per cent. of the said 
proceeds as being attributable to Union territories, be distributed 
20 in respect of the remaining five months of the said financial year, 
in the same manner as the percentage of the net proceeds of taxes 
on income falling to be distributed under clause (2) of article 270 
of the Constitution has been distributed among the States in 
respect of the said five months. 
2S (3) The provisions of this section shall be deemed to have had 
34 011953- effect from the date on which the Estate Duty Act, 1953, came 
into force. 
5. During each financial year commencing on and after the 1st DisuibutiOQ 
• of net pro-day of April, 1957, the net proceeds of the tax on railway passenger ceeds of the 
30 fares levied and collected during that financial year shall, after taxi10n .' ra way deductmg therefrom a sum equal to one quarter per cent. of the said passenger 
35 
proceeds es being attributable to Union territories, be distributed fareds asstbi-gne to e 
among the States as follows: - States. 
State Percentage 
Andhra Pradesh 8:86 
Assam "71 
Bihar 9'39 
Bombay 16'28 
Kerala 1'81 

Power to 
make rule .. 
State Percentage 
Madhya Pradesh 8'31 
Madras 6'46 
Mtsore 4'45 
Orissa 1'78 5 
Punjab 8'11 
Rajasthan ' 6~77 
Uttar Pradesh 18'76 
West Bengal. 6'31 
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 10 
Gazette, make rules providing for the manner in which the gross 
value of property is to be calculated, for the time at which and the 
-manner in which any payments under this Act are to be made, for 
the making of adjustments between one financial year and another 
and for any other incidental or ancillary matters. IS 
(2) All rules made under this section shall, as soon as may be 
after they are made, be laid for not less than thirty days before each 
House of Parliament and shall be subject to such modifications as 
Parliament may make during the session in which they are so laid 
or the session immediately following. 20 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to lay down the principles of the distri-
bution among the States of the net proceeds of the estate duty on 
property other than agricultural land and the tax on railway fares, 
except in so ~r as those proceeds represent proceeds attributable 
to Union territories. The principles of distribution embodied in the 
Bill are those recommended by the Second Finance Commission and 
accepted by Government. Under article 269(2) of 'the Constitution, 
the principles of distribution of these tax€'S have to be formulated 
by Parliament by law. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 28th Nooem.ber, 1957. 
• 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 3.-This provides for the distribution of the net proceeds 
of estate duty from the current financial year on the basis suggested 
by the Finance Commission.' . 
Clquse 4.-Estate duty was actually levied in 1953-54, but pending 
the formulation of the pinciples of distribution by law, the net pro-
ceecis have been proVisionally distributed in the manner prescribed 
for the distribution of the net proceeds of taxes on income assigned 
to the States under article 270 (2) of the Constitution. This clause 
formally ratifies the provisional distribution as recommended by the 
Finance CQmmiSliion.. 
Clause S.-This provides for the distribution of the tax on raUway 
passenger fares as suggested by the Finance Commission. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules in respect of certain matters specified therein. They relate 
to the manner in which the gross value of property is to be calculated, 
the time at which and the manner in which any payments under this 
Act are to be made, the making of adjustments between one financial 
year and another and other incidental and ancillary matters. The 
matters in respect of which rules may be made are of a routine and 
an administrative character. Moreover, the rules to be made shall 
be subject to the scrutiny of Parliament. The delegation of legisla-
tive powers is thus of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the distribution of the net proceeds of the estate 
duty and the tax on railway passenger fares among the States. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article 117 
and clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, recom-
mended to Lok Sabha the mtroduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri T. T. Knshnama&hari, 
. Mtmster of Finance.) 