1
THE  ERADICATION  OF  UNEMPLOYMENT  AMONGST THE
YOUTH BELONGING TO THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND
THE SCHEDULED TRIBES BILL, 2015
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the eradication of unemployment amongst youth belonging to the
Scheduled  Castes  and  the  Scheduled  Tribes by ensuring right to gainful
employment and payment of unemployment allowance to the unemployed
 amongst them and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Eradication of Unemployment amongst the Youth
Belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 97 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Fund” means the National Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Youth
Employment Assistance Fund constituted under section 7;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) “unemployed youth” means a person above the age of eighteen years belonging
to the Scheduled Caste or the Scheduled Tribe not engaged in any gainful employment.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every unemployed youth shall have the right to gainful employment.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide gainful employment to every
unemployed youth according to his age, educational qualifications and physical capabilities.
(2) Where an unemployed youth is not provided with employment or self-employment
opportunities under any scheme by the Government, he shall be given such monthly
unemployment allowance, being not less than rupees two thousand per month, in such
manner as may be prescribed, till the time he is provided with gainful employment:
Provided that the unemployment allowance shall not be paid to the unemployed
youth, if—
(i) his income from any source is equal to the amount of unemployment allowance
fixed under this Act; and
(ii) he is provided unemployment allowance under any scheme by the
State Government or Union territory Administration, as the case may be:
Provided further that if the income from any source of the unemployed youth is less
than the amount of unemployment allowance, the difference between his amount of income
and the amount of unemployment allowance may be provided to him.
5. The appropriate Government shall take immediate steps to fill up vacant posts
reserved for the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in
the Government establishments, Public Sector Undertakings and other such Organisations
in a time-bound manner.
6. The appropriate Government shall take steps to generate employment opportunities
in public and private sector enterprises or undertakings, small scale industries, cottage and
village industries, khadi and weaving industries, agriculture and food processing industries,
information technology industries and other self-employment opportunities.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette,  constitute a National Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes Youth
Employment Assistance Fund with an initial corpus of rupees fifty thousand crore and
thereafter shall contribute to the Fund from time to time alongwith the State Governments
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(2) Such other sums as may be received from individuals, corporate sector, financial
institutions and firms by way of donation or otherwise shall also be credited to the Fund.
(3) The Fund shall be utilized for payment of unemployment allowance to the
unemployed youth.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
Right to
gainful
employment.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
employment
to every
unemployed
youth.
Filling up of
vacant posts.
Generation of
employment
opportunities.
National
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes Youth
Employment
Assistance
Fund.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Definitions.

3
10. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country is the second most populous country in the world. The population
explosion has given rise to unprecedented unemployment problem in the country. According
to an estimate, there are more than five crore unemployed youth registered in the employment
exchanges of the country, while the number of unregistered unemployed youths is more than
the registered ones. Such youth are mostly in remote, rural and semi-urban areas and their
number is increasing by the day. The situation of unemployment in the country is so grim
that even highly qualified youth have failed to get employment. Millions who graduate every
year, especially the youth belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are
unemployed inspite of getting reservation benefits. Even after sixty-seven years of
independence, millions of youths belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the  Scheduled
Tribes are unemployed due to ineffective recruitment policy. This is leading to frustration
amongst the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes youth and they are being easily lured
away by anti-social and anti-national forces to further their nefarious and destructive activities
in various parts of the country. In fact, many of them get involved in criminal activities and
spoil their lives. Unemployment is also the reason for brain-drain and exodus of substantial
number of skilled and unskilled youth, doctors, engineers and scientists from the country. At
the same time opportunities of employment are shrinking and the Central Government is also
partially responsible for this. For instance, the ministries or departments of the Central
Government have to surrender ten per cent. of the total vacancies arising due to
superannuation of employees every year. Further, if any post remains vacant for over a year,
it automatically lapses.
The Agricultural sector has remained the largest employer in our country but due to
vagaries of nature and non-remunerative pricing policy, employment in this sector has become
less attractive. Same is the situation in the sector of small scale and village industries.
Modernisation and use of new technologies in industries is also reducing employment
opportunities.
Our Constitution confers on every citizen the right to life but this right remains only on
paper in the absence of decent and meaningful source of living. The Supreme Court has also
stressed the need for necessary means and employment to enjoy the right to life enshrined
in the Constitution. India is a welfare State and as such the onus is on the State to ensure the
welfare of the Scheduled Caste and the Scheduled Tribe youth by providing gainful
employment opportunities to them. If the State fails to provide them gainful employment
then they should be paid unemployment allowance on a monthly basis. This is the need of
the hour which will go a long way in ensuring a dignified life to the youth belonging to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
March 3, 2015.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every unemployed youth shall have the right to
gainful employment. Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government shall provide gainful
employment to every unemployed youth belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes according to one’s age, qualification and capability. It also provides for
unemployment allowance to every unemployed youth till they are provided with gainful
employment. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National Scheduled
Caste and Scheduled Tribe Youth Employment Assistance Fund with an initial corpus of
rupees fifty thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. At this stage, it is difficult to give an exact estimate of the expenditure likely to be
involved. However, it is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees sixty
thousand crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India, in addition to
the rupees fifty thousand crore as initial corpus.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—72LS(S3)—16-04-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the eradication of unemployment amongst youth belonging to the
Scheduled  Castes  and  the  Scheduled  Tribes by ensuring right to gainful
employment and payment of unemployment allowance to the unemployed
 amongst them and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)