1
THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2.  In the long title to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), the words “and for Companies” shall be omitted.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment of
long title.
1 of 1894.
Bill No. 97-C of 2007
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 25TH FEBRUARY, 2009

2
3.  In the principal Act, in the preamble, the words “and for Companies” shall be
omitted.
4. After section 1 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“1A. The provisions of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2009 shall apply
in respect of acquisition of land by the appropriate Government under this Act.”.
5.  In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(i) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely :—
‘(b) the expression “person interested” includes,—
(i) all persons claiming an interest in compensation to be made on
account of the acquisition of land under this Act;
(ii) tribals and other traditional forest dwellers, who have lost any
traditional rights recognised under the Scheduled Tribes and Other
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006;
(iii) a person interested in an easement affecting the land; and
(iv) persons having tenancy rights under the relevant State laws;’;
(ii) after clause (cc), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :—
‘(ccc) the expression “cost of acquisition” includes—
(i) compensation awarded including the solatium and other amount
and interest payable thereupon;
(ii) demurrage to be paid for damages caused to the land and standing
crops in the process of acquisition;
(iii) cost of acquisition of out-project land for settlement of displaced
or adversely affected families;
(iv) cost of development of infrastructure and amenities at
resettlement sites;
(v) additional cost of  resettlement as may be required after admissible
adjustment of rehabilitation and resettlement cost against compensation
awarded to affected persons or families;
(vi) administrative cost of acquisition of land including both in-
project and out-project areas lands; and
(vii) administrative cost involved in planning and implementation
of resettlement and rehabilitation packages for providing physical
rehabilitation and resettlement to the entitled and interested families,
displaced or adversely affected on account of in-project acquisition of
land;’;
(iii) clauses (d) and (e) shall be omitted;
(iv) for clause (ee), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(ee) the expression “appropriate Government” means,—
(i) in relation to acquisition of land for the purposes of the
Union, the Central  Government;
Insertion of
new section
1A.
Amendment
of preamble.
Application
of Rehabilita-
tion and
Resettlement
Act, 2007 to
persons
affected due
to land
acquisition.
Amendment
of section 3.
2 of 2007.

3
(ii) in relation to acquisition of land for the purposes of any
infrastructure project in more than one State, the Central Government;
and
(iii) in relation to acquisition of land for any other purpose,
the State Government;’;
(v) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(f) the expression “public purpose” includes,—
(i) the provision of land for strategic purposes relating to naval,
military, air force and armed forces of the Union or any work vital to national
security or defence of India or State police;
(ii) the provision of land for infrastructure projects of the appropriate
Government, where the benefits accrue to the general public; and
(iii) the provision of land for any other purpose useful to the general
public, for which land has been purchased by a person under lawful contract
or is having the land to the extent of seventy per cent. but the remaining
thirty per cent of the total area of land required for the project is yet to be
acquired.
Explanation. —The word “person” shall include any company or
association or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not.’;
(vi) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ff) the expression “infrastructure project” shall include,—
(i) any project relating to generation, transmission or supply of
electricity;
(ii) construction of roads, highways, bridges, airports, ports, rail
systems, mining activities, educational, sports, health care, tourism
transportation, space programme and housing for such income groups as
may be specified from time to time by the appropriate Government;
(iii) water supply project, irrigation project, sanitation and sewerage
system; or
(iv) any other public facility as may be notified in this regard by the
Central Government in the Official Gazette;’;
(vii) in clause (g), for the expression “court”, wherever it occurs, the expression
“the Authority for the Centre or, as the case may be, the Authority”  shall be substituted;
(viii) after clause (g), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(h) the expression “Authority” means the Land Acquisition Compensation
Disputes Settlement Authority established by the State Government under sub-
section (1) of section 17A;
(i) the expression “Authority for the Centre” means the Land Acquisition
Compensation Disputes Settlement Authority for the Centre established by the
Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 17L;
(j) the expression “Member” means a Member of the Authority for the
Centre or, as the case may be, the Authority, and includes the Chairperson.’.

4
6. Throughout the principal Act, the words “or for a company” along with their
grammatical variations, shall be omitted.
7. Throughout the principal Act except in Explanation  to sub-section (1A) of section
23, for the words “the Court”, along with their grammatical variations the words “the Authority
for the Centre or, as the case may be, the Authority” shall be substituted.
8. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“3A. Whenever the appropriate Government intends to acquire land for public
purpose involving physical displacement of—
(i) four hundred or more families en masse in plain area; or
(ii) two hundred or more families en masse in tribal or hilly areas or Desert
Development Programme blocks or areas specified in Fifth Schedule or Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution,
a social impact assessment study shall be carried out in the affected area for the
purpose of social impact appraisal, incorporation of Tribal Development Plan, plan for
giving emphasis for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other vulnerable
sections of the society, provision for infrastructural amenities and facilities in the
proposed resettlement area in terms of the provisions contained in Chapters II, IV, V
and VI of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2009, in such manner and within
such time as may be prescribed by rules made by the Central Government.
3B. (1)  The appropriate Government shall constitute a Committee under the
Chairmanship of the Cheif Secretary, consisting of the Secretaries of the Departments
of Finance, Rural Development and the concerned Department and not more than
three experts from the relevant fields, to examine proposals for land acquisition.
(2) The Committee shall ensure that—
(a) only the minimum area of land required for the project is proposed to
be acquired;
(b) the Collector of the district, where the acquisition of land is proposed,
has explored the possibilities of utilising waste, degraded, barren lands and that
the agricultural land especially land under assured irrigation and multi-cropped
land is acquired only as a last resort:
Provided that where the agricultural land is acquired, the requiring body shall compensate
the State for development of an equal area of earmarked wasteland elsewhere in that State for
agricultural purposes which shall form part of the project cost;
(c) a report is obtained from concerned Collector, regarding possible
resettlement areas for persons likely to be displaced due to land acquisition and
shall select a suitable area, which the appropriate Government may consider for
the purpose of declaring it as the resettlement area under section 25 of the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act 2009;
Omission of
the expression
“or for a
company”
throughout
the Act.
Substitution of
words
‘‘Authority
for the Centre
or the
Authority” in
place of words
“the Court”
throughout
the Act.
Insertion of
new section
3A.
Mandatory
social impact
assessment
prior to
acquisition of
land under this
Act.
Committee
for scrutiny of
acquisition
proposals.

5
(d) the updation of land and property records by the concerned Department
within a reasonable time, more particularly areas proposed to be acquired, is
undertaken;
(e) the record is kept of multiple displacements and that this data is fed to the
National Monitoring Committee created under the Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Act, 2009;
(f) before recommending acquisition of land for the requiring body,
necessary clearance for conversion of land use is obtained so that such land
use is in consonance with the state land use policy.
(3) The Committee shall consider all possible sites for the project, keeping in
view the principles of minimum displacement of people and minimum acquisition of
land before recommending a particular site for the project.
(4) The Committee shall obtain the Social Impact Assessment report as provided
in section 4 of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2009 for several possible land
acquisition sites and after considering all the reports, recommend such area for
acquisition which may follow the principle of minimum displacement of people, minimum
disturbance to the infrastructure, ecology and minimum adverse effect on them.
(5) The Chief Secretary of each State Government shall put in place a mechanism
for a Data bank in the State in the public domain which may list out lands acquired in
the past but lying unutilised.
(6) The Committee shall, before recommending any fresh acquisition of land,
also examine the data of the unutilised acquired land with the Data Bank maintained
under sub-section (5) and make a specific recommendation whether the land specified
under sub-section (5) may be utilised for the project".
9. In section 4 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Whenever, it appears to the appropriate Government that land in any
area is required or likely to be required for any public purpose or for a company,
a notification to that effect alongwith details of the land to be acquired in rural
and urban areas shall be published in the following manner, namely:—
(i) in the Official Gazette;
(ii) in three daily newspapers circulating in that locality of which
one each shall be in Hindi, English and a regional language;
(iii) in the website of the appropriate Government in public domain;
(iv) by making available for inspection by persons affected, at the
Tehsil or Gram Panchayat or Urban Local Body Office; and
(v) the Collector shall also cause public notice of the substance of
such notification to be put up at convenient places in the said locality:".
Provided that where no declaration is made consequent upon the issue of
a notification under sub-section (1) within the time limit specified in sub-section
(1) of section 6, no fresh notification under this sub-section shall, subsequent
to the expiry of the period aforesaid, be made for a period of one year in respect
of the same land:
Provided further that in case a notification issued under sub-section (1) in
respect of a particular land lapsed for the second time, no proceeding under sub-
section (1) shall be initiated at least for a period of five years from the date of
such notification.
Amendment
of section 4.

6
Explanation.—The last of the dates of such publication and the giving of
such public notice being hereinafter referred to as the date of publication of the
notification.";
(b) After sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) No person shall make any transaction or cause any transaction of
land specified in the notice of acquisition to create any encumbrances on such
land from the date of publication of such notice under this section  till the final
declaration under section 6, or the award made and paid under section 16 of the
Act, whichever is earlier:
Provided that the Collector may, on the application made by the land
owner in respect of the land so notified, exempt in special circumstances to be
recorded in writing, such owner from the operation of this sub-section:
Provided further that any loss or injury suffered by any person due to his
wilful violation of this provision shall not be made up by the Collector.
(1B) After issuance of notice under sub-section ( 1), the Collector shall,
before issue of declaration under section 6, undertake and complete the exercise
of updating of land records, classification of land and its tenure, survey and
standardisation of land and property values in respect of the land under
acquisition.”.
10. In section 5A of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words "within thirty days from the date of the
publication of the notification", the words "within sixty days from the date of the
publication of the notification" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), after the words "proceedings held by him" the words
"alongwith a separate report giving particulars as to the number of affected families
likely to be displaced in plain or hilly areas”.
11. In section 6 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) the words and figures “subject to the provisions of Part VII of this Act”
shall be omitted;
(ii) the Explanation 1 shall be omitted.
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words "and the Collector shall", the words "apart
from placing the public notice on the website of the district concerned in public domain"
shall be inserted.
12.  After section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“8A. The damages caused while carrying out works on land such as survey,
digging or boring sub-soil, marking boundaries or cutting trenches or clearing away
any standing crop, fence or forest or doing such other acts or things which may cause
damages while acting under section 4 particularly relating to land which is excluded
from acquisition proceeding, shall be evaluated and compensation shall be paid to the
persons having interest in that land, within six months from the completion of the said
works.”.
13. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) for the words "The Collector
shall than", the words "The Collector shall apart from placing the public notice on the
website of the district concerned in public domain" shall be substituted".
Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment
of section 5A.
Amendment
of section 6.
Insertion of
new section
8A.
Evaluation of
damages
during survey,
measurement,
etc.

7
14. For section 11A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“11A. The Collector shall make an award under section 11 within a period of one
year from the date of the publication of the declaration and if no award is made within
that period, the entire proceedings for the acquisition of the land shall lapse:
Provided that in a case where the said declaration has been published before the
commencement of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 2009, the award shall be
made within a period of one year from such commencement:
Provided further that the Collector may, after the expiry of the period of limitation,
if he is satisfied that the delay has been caused due to unavoidable circumstances,
and for the reasons to be recorded in writing, he may make the award within an extended
period of six months:
Provided also that where an award is made within the extended period, the
entitled person shall, in the interest of justice, be paid an additional compensation for
the delay in making of the award, every month for the period so extended, at the rate of
not less than five per cent. of the value of the award, for each month of such delay.”.
15. After section 11A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘11B. ( 1) The Collector shall adopt the following criteria in assessing and
determining the market value of the land,—
(i) the minimum land value, if any, specified in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899
for the registration of sale deeds in the  area, where the land is situated; or
(ii) the average of the sale price for similar type of land situated in the
village or vicinity, ascertained from not less than fifty per cent. of the sale deeds
registered during the preceding three years, where higher price has been paid;
or
(iii)  the average of the sale price, ascertained from the prices paid or
agreed to be paid for not less than fifty per cent. of the land already purchased
for the project where higher price has been paid, for the purpose of item (iii) of
clause (f) of section 3,
whichever is higher.
(2) Where the provisions of sub-section  ( 1) are not applicable for the reason
that—
(i) the land is situated in such area where the  transactions in land are
restricted by or under any other law for the time being in force in that area; or
(ii) the registered sale deeds for similar land as mentioned in clause (i) of
sub-section (1) are not available for the preceding three years; or
(iii) the minimum land value has not been specified under the Indian
Stamp Act,1899 by the appropriate authority,
the concerned State Government shall specify the floor price per unit area of the said
land based on the average higher prices paid for similar type of land situated in the
adjoining areas or vicinity, ascertained from not less than fifty per cent. of the sale
deeds registered during the preceding three years where higher price has been paid,
and the Collector shall calculate the value of the land accordingly.
Substitution of
new section
for section
11A.
Period within
which an
award shall be
made.
Insertion of
new sections
after section
11A.
Determina-
tion of
market value
of land.
2 of 1899.
2 of 1899.

8
(3) The Collector shall, before assessing and determining the market value of the
land being acquired under this Act,—
(a) ascertain the intended land use category of such land; and
(b) take into account the value of the land of the intended category in the
adjoining areas or vicinity,
for the purpose of determination of the market value of the land being acquired.
(4) In determining the market value of the building and other immovable property
or assets attached to the land or building which are to be acquired, the Collector may
use the services of a competent engineer or any other specialist in the relevant field, as
may be considered necessary by the Collector.
(5) The Collector may, for the purpose of determining the value of trees and
plants, use the services of experienced persons in the field of agriculture, forestry,
horticulture, sericulture, or any other field, as may be considered necessary by him.
(6) For the purpose of assessing the value of the standing crops damaged
during the process of land acquisition proceedings, the Collector may utilise the services
of experienced persons in the field of agriculture as he considers necessary.
11C. (1) When land is acquired for the purpose of item ( iii) of clause ( f) of
section 3 and the person for whom the land is acquired is a company authorised to
issue shares and debentures, such company shall, with the previous approval of the
appropriate Government, offer its shares or debentures to the extent of fifty per cent.
but in any case not less than twenty per cent. of the compensation amount to be paid
to the person whose land has been acquired.
(2) On the acceptance of the offer, a part of the compensation amount shall be
adjusted by transfer of shares and debentures to the person to whom such
compensation is due and on such transfer the liability of the company in respect of
such part of the compensation shall stand discharged.
(3) The allotment of shares and debentures mentioned in this section shall be
made by the company in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—In this section, the expression “shares and debentures” has the
same meaning as assigned to it under the Companies Act, 1956.’.
16. In section 12 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) The Collector shall keep open to the public and display a summary of the
entire proceedings undertaken in a case of acquisition of land including the amount of
compensation awarded to each individual along with details of the land finally acquired
under this Act.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3), the summary of the entire proceedings
shall include the summary of schedule for payment of compensation, dates of taking
possession of the land and such other information as may be prescribed.
17. In section 15 of the principal Act, for the words and figures “sections 23 and 24”,
the words, figures and letter “sections 11B, 23 and 24” shall be substituted.
18. For section 16 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"16. (1) the Collector shall ensure that full payment of compensation is paid or
tendered to the entitled persons within a period of ninety days commencing from the
date of the award under section 11.
Part payment
of compensa-
tion by shares,
debentures,
etc.
Amendment
of section 12.
Amendment
of section 15.
Substitution of
new section
for section 16.
Payment of
compensation
and taking
over posses-
sion.
1 of 1956.

9
(2) On the fulfillment of the condition provided in sub-section (1), the Collector
shall take possession of the land acquired, which shall, thereupon, vest absolutely in
the Governor, free from all encumbrances."
19. In section 17 of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely :—
“(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 3) and sub-section
(3A), an additional compensation of seventy-five per cent. of the market value as
determined under section 11B, shall be paid by the Collector in respect of land and
property for acquisition of which proceedings have been initiated under
sub-section (1) of this section.”.
20. In section 17 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A) The powers of the appropriate Government under sub-section (1) shall be
restricted to minimum area required for the defence of India or national security and
the compensation amount shall be estimated having regard to sections 118 and 11C."
21. After Part II of the principal Act, the following Parts shall be inserted, namely:—
‘PART  IIA
E
STABLISHMENT OF THE STATE AUTHORITY
17A. (1) The State Government shall, for the purpose of providing speedy
disposal of disputes relating to land acquisition compensation, establish, by notification
in the Official Gazette, an Authority for the State to be known as the (name of the
State) Land Acquisition Compensation Disputes Settlement Authority to exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act with regard to
acquisition of land by the State Government:
Provided that a State Government may constitute more than one Authority or
the benches thereof, for the purposes of this Act, if considers necessary.
(2) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the State Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
(3) The Authority shall consist of not more than three but not less than two
Members, including the Chairperson to be appointed by the State Government.
(4) The Members of the Authority shall be persons of ability, integrity and
standing who have adequate knowledge of, and have shown capacity in, dealing with
the problems relating to land acquisition matters, public administration, finance,
economics and law.
(5) A person shall not be qualified to be a Member of the Authority unless he is
or has been—
(i) a judge of a district court;
(ii) an officer of the State Government not below the rank of district
collector;
(iii) an officer of the State Government in the Law Department not below
the rank of Director.
(6) The Members of the Authority shall not hold any other office.
(7) The Authority shall ensure transparency while exercising its powers and
discharging its functions.
Amendment
of section 17.
Insertion of
new Parts IIA
and IIB.
Amendment
of section 17.
Establishment
of Land
Acquisition
Compensation
Disputes
Settlement
Authority.

10
17B. (1) A Member shall hold office for a term of five years from the date he
enters upon his office:
Provided that the Member shall not be eligible for reappointment in the same
capacity in that Authority in which he had earlier held the office:
Provided further that no Member shall hold office as such after he has attained
the age of sixty-seven years.
(2) A Member of the Authority may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed
to the State Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Member shall, unless he is permitted by the State Government
to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months
from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor
enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
(3) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the
Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service
of the Members, shall not be varied to their disadvantage after appointment.
17C. (1) No Member shall be removed from office except in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(2) The State Government may by order remove from office any Member, if he—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent;
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the State
Government, involves moral turpitude;
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member;
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a Member;
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to the public interest; or
(f) has been guilty of proved misbehaviour.
(3) No person shall be removed under this section until that person has been
given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
17D. (1) The State Government may specify the numbers, nature and categories
of the officers and employees of the Authority.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and employees of the Authority  shall be such as may be
prescribed by the State Government.
17E. The Authority shall have its sittings at the head office or any other place
and at such time as the Chairperson may direct, and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business in its sittings as it may specify.
17F. A casual vacancy in the office of a Member of the Authority shall be filled
by the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, as soon as may be,
after the occurrence of the vacancy.
17G. (1) The Authority shall, for the purposes of the settlement of disputes
relating to land acquisition compensation under this Act or the settlement of disputes
relating to rehabilitation and resettlement of the affected family under the provisions
of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2009 , have the same powers as are vested
Term of office
and conditions
of service of
Members.
Removal of
Member.
Powers of
Authority.
Officers and
employees of
Authority.
Proceedings of
Authority.
Filling of a
casual vacancy.

11
in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
(b) discovery and production of any document or other material object
producible as evidence;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning of any public record;
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses;
(f) reviewing its decisions, directions and orders;
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) The Authority shall have the powers to pass such interim order in any
proceeding, hearing or matter before it as it may consider appropriate.
17H. All proceedings before the Authority shall be deemed to be judicial
proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and
the Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and
346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
17-I. The applications relating to settlement of land acquisition compensation
under this Act, shall be decided by the Authority as expeditiously as possible and
endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the disputes finally within a period of six
months from the date of receipt of the reference under section 18.
17J. The Members and officers of the Authority shall be deemed to be public
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
17K. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any dispute relating to
land acquisition in respect of which the Collector or the Authority is empowered by or
under this Act, and no injunction shall be granted by any court in respect of any such
matter.
PART  IIB
E
STABLISHMENT OF THE  AUTHORITY  FOR  THE CENTRE
17L. (1) The Central Government may, for the purpose of providing speedy
disposal of disputes relating to land acquisition compensation, by notification in the
Official Gazette, establish one or more Authority to be known as the Land Acquisition
Compensation Disputes Settlement Authority for the Centre to exercise jurisdiction,
powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act with regard to the acquisition
of land by the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall specify in the notification referred to in sub-
section (1) the matters and places in relation to which the Authority for the Centre may
exercise jurisdiction.
(3) The Authority for the Centre shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than
two Members to be appointed by the Central Government.
Proceedings
before
Authority.
Speedy
disposal of
disputes by
Authority.
Members and
officers of
Authority to
be public
servants.
Jurisdiction of
civil courts
barred.
Establishment
of Land
Acquisition
Compensation
Disputes
Settlement
Authority for
the Centre.
5 of 1908.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.

12
(4) A person shall not be qualified to be a Member of the Authority for the Centre
unless he,—
(i) is or has been a Judge of a High Court; or
(ii) has for at least fifteen years held any Legislative or Legal post of the
Union and a post in the Grade II of the Indian Legal Service for at least three
years; or
(iii) a person who is or has been a member of the Indian Administrative
Service having sufficient knowledge of land acquisition and has held the post of
Collector of a district and a post equivalent to a Joint Secretary in the Government
of India:
Provided that no appointment of a sitting Judge under clause (i) shall be made
except after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned.
(5) The Authority for the Centre will have a Secretariat consisting a Secretary-
General and such other staff as may be decided by the Central Government.
17M. The provisions of sections 17B, 17C, 17D, 17E, 17F, 17G , 17H,17-I, 17J and
17K shall apply to the Authority for the Centre and shall have effect, subject to the
following modifications, namely:—
(a) references to “Authority” shall be construed as references to
“Authority for the Centre”;
(b) references to “State Government” shall be construed as references to
“Central Government”;
(c) for the reference “any Member” in sub-section (2) of section 17C, the
reference “any Member except a sitting Judge of a High Court” shall be
substituted.’.
22. In section 18 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), the following provisos shall be inserted, at the end, namely:—
“Provided that the Collector shall, within a period of fifteen days from the
date of receipt of application, make a reference to the Authority for the Centre, or
as the case may be, the Authority:
Provided further that where the Collector fails to make such reference
within the period so specified, the applicant may apply to the Authority for the
Centre, or as the case may be, the Authority, requesting it to direct the Collector
to make the reference to it within a period of thirty days.”;
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely :—
“Provided further that the Collector may entertain an application after the
expiry of the said period, within a further period of one year, if he is satisfied that
there was sufficient cause for not filing it within the period specified in the first
proviso.”.
23. In section 23 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), in item “first”, after the words ‘‘market value of the land”,
the words, figures and letter ”in terms of section 11B” shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “a sum of thirty per centum on such market-
value”, the words “a sum of sixty per centum on such market-value” shall be substituted.
24. Part VII of the principal Act relating to “Acquisition of Land for Companies” and
sections 38 to 44B (both inclusive) shall be omitted.
Application of
certain
provisions
relating to
Authority for
compensation
disputes
settlement to
Authority for
the Centre.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment
of section 23.
Omission of
Part VII.

13
25. In section 45 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words "adult male
member", the words "adult member" shall be substituted.
26. After section 54 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“54A. (1) The land acquired under this Act shall not be transferred to any other
purpose except for a public purpose, and after  obtaining the prior approval of the
appropriate Government.
(2) When any land or part thereof, acquired under this Act remains unutilised for
a period of five years from the date of taking over the possession, the same shall return
to the appropriate Government by reversion.
54B. Whenever any land acquired under this Act is transferred to any person for
a consideration, eighty per cent. of the difference in the acquisition cost and the
consideration received, which in no case shall be less than the acquisition cost, shall
be shared amongst the persons from whom the lands were acquired or their heirs, in
proportion to the value at which the lands were acquired, and for the purpose, a
separate fund may be maintained which shall be administered by the Collector in such
manner as may be prescribed.”.
27.  In section 55 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) the first proviso shall be omitted;
(ii) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided further that”, the words
“Provided that” shall be substituted;
(iii)  in the third proviso, for the words “Provided also”, the words “Provided
further” shall be substituted.
Insertion of
new sections
54A and 54B.
Utilisation of
land for the
purpose it is
acquired.
Sharing with
landowners
the difference
in price of a
land when
transferred for
a higher
consideration.
Amendment
of section 55.
Amendment
of section 45.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
Bill
further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
GMGIPMRND—1141LS(S-5)— 25-02-2009.