5
                                       As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE GOVERNMENTS
(FOR  PROTECTION OF WATER BODIES) BILL, 2022
Byy
DR. ALOK KUMAR SUMAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide financial assistance to the State Governments
for protection of water bodies.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Financial Assistance to the State Governments (for
Protection of Water Bodies) Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “aquatic ecosystem” means all organic and inorganic matter and all living organisms
living in or located in or on water or the beds or shores of a water body;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
 Bill No.  97  of  2022

5
10
15
20
25
2
30
(ii) “drain” included gutters, wastewater canals, sewers and all outlets or flow of waste
water including overflow of rainwater;
(iii) “groundwater” means all water under the surface of the ground, whether in solid or
liquid form; and
(iv) “water body” means a body of flowing or standing water, whether natural or artificial
and whether the flow or presence of water is continuous, intermittent or occurs only
during a flood, including but not limited to a lake, river, creek, stream, tank, well,
pond and wetland.
3. Every State Government shall inform the Central Government –
(i) about the existence of water bodies in the respective State; and
(ii) requirement of financial assistance to protect the water bodies in the State.
4. Every State Government shall, before informing the Central Government under
section 3, make a regulation for the purpose of –
(a) designating any area as a water quality control zone for the purpose of protecting
water, aquatic eco-system or drinking water source;
(b) governing, regulating or prohibiting any use or activity in a water quality control
zone or any part of a zone;
(c) improving the drainage and sewerage system;
(d) ensuring clear separation between sewerage/waste water and sources of clean water
to avoid contamination; and
(e) ensuring quick absorption or clear flow of rain water for conservation.
5. Every State Government shall, before informing to the Central Government under
section 3, take into consideration the scientific, intrinsic and other information relating to –
(a)  the physical characteristics of land in the area, including its topography and soil
types;
(b)   the ability of the soil or water in the area to assimilate nutrients and other pollutants;
(c)   water bodies or groundwater in the area, including information relating to –
(i) the quality characteristics of the water;
(ii) the susceptibility of the water to contamination or adverse changes in level; and
(iii) the extent to which the water is undisturbed by human activity;
(d) the area’s aquatic ecosystems;
(e) whether the area contains a source or a potential source, of drinking water;
(f) whether the area supports species that are sensitive to alterations in water quality
or quantity resulting from human activity;
(g) whether the area provides habitat for endangered species; and
(h) the perception of farmers and native inhabitants of the area regarding quality,
quantity and prospects of water in a particular zone including –
(i) the possibilities of flood and/or water logging; and
(ii) any other matter which the Government considers relevant.
6. The Central Government shall render scientific and technical advice and assistance
to State Governments if so required to achieve the purposes  of  this  Act.
State Govern-
ments to inform
the Central
Government.
Power of State
Governments to
make regulation.
State
Government to
consider the
scientific,
intrinsic and
other
information
relating to water
bodies.
35
Central Govern-
ment to render
scientific and
technical advice.
40

7. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide financial assistance to every State Government for protection of
water bodies and for promotion of rain harvesting and watershed management programmes.
(2) The Central Government shall before releasing the money, ensure that the State
Government has complied with the provisions of this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
    (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government to
provide financial
assistance to
State
Governments.
Power to make
rules.
5
15
10
3

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Water is the most valuable natural resource of a country. However, the scarcity and
supply of clean water is a major concern for the sustenance of human, animal, plant and
ecology. The protection of water resources/water bodies available in the country is an
endless – task to be completed by the Government. The major constraint in this regard is
the lack of financial resources available with the States.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide financial assistance to the State Governments for the
protection of water bodies and promotion of rain harvesting and watershed management
programmes.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                                                          ALOK KUMAR SUMAN
18 November, 2021.
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDA TION UNDER ARTICLE 117(3) OF THE
CONSTITUTION
[Copy of  letter No. P-22021/2/2021-O/o SJC(MI)-MOWR dated 4 February, 2022 from
Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, Minister of  Jal Shakti to the  Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject-matter of  the Financial Assistance
to the State Governments (For Protection of Water Bodies) Bill, 2022 by Dr. Alok Kumar
Suman, M.P., recommends to the House, the consideration of the Bill under clause (3) of
article 117 of the Constitution.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for rendering of scientific and technical advice and assistance
to the State Governments. Clause 7 provides for financial assistance to every State
Governments for protection of water bodies, etc.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two thousand crore may be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A  non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide financial assistance to State Governments
for protection of water bodies .
————
(Dr . Alok Kumar Suman, M.P .)