Bill No, 97-F of 2000

THE BIHAR REORGANISATION

rina 2000

(As Passep BY THE Houses oF Paruiament—

Lox Sanita on 2np Auausr, 2000

Ratya Sapna ow 11TH Aucust, 2000
AMENDMENTS MADE BY Ragya SABHA

AGREED TO BY Lox Sanna ON 117H AuGust, 2000)

| ee | To
oN

257H Avousr, 2000 |
Act No. 30 oF 2600



Bill No. 97-F of 2000

THE BIHAR REORGANISATION BILL, 2000

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
PARTI
PRELIMINARY
Clauses:
1. Short title.
2, Definitions,
PART IL
REORGANISATION OF THE STaTE OF Briar

3. Formation of Jharkhand State.

4. State of Bihar and territorial divisions thereof.

5. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution.

6 Saving powers of State Governments.

PART पा
RePreseNTAnON IN THE LecisLaTURES
The Council of States
7. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.
8. Allocation of sitting members.
The House of the People

9. Representation in the House of the People.
10, Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies,
IL. Provision as to sitting members.

The Legislative Assembly
12. Provisions as to Legislative Assemblics.
13. Allocation of sitting members,
14. Duration of Legislative Assemblies.
1S. Speaker and Deputy Speaker. |
16. Rules of procedure,
‘The Legislative Council of Bihar

17. Legislative Council of Bihar.
18. Council constituencies.
19, Provision as to sitting members,
20. Chairman and Deputy Chairman.


Ea

Clauses

21.

22.

23
24,

38.
39,
40,

41,
42,
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.

“4s.
49;

5.
52.
53.

Delimitation of constituencies
Delimitation of constituencies,
Power of the Election Conumission 10 maintain Delimitation Orders up-to-date.
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Amendment of the Scheduled Castes Order.
Amendment of the Scheduled Tribes Order.

PART [V
Ficn Courr
High Court for Sharkhand,
Judges of High Court.
Jurisdiction of High Cour
Special provision relating to Bar Council and Advocates,
Practice and procedure in High Court.
Custody of seal of High Court,
Form of writs and other processes,
Powers of Judges.
Procedure as to appeals 16 Sapreme Court.
‘Transfer of proceedings from High Court at Patna to High Court of Jharkhand.
Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to High Court of Jharkhand,
Interpretation.
Saving,
PART V
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OP REVENUES
Authorisation of expenditure of Jharkhand State
Reports relating to secounts of Bihar State.
Distribution of revenue,
PART VI
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
Application of Part,
Land and goods.
‘Treasury and bank balances,
Arrears of taxes.
Right to recover loans and advances,
Tnvestments and credits in certain funds.
Assets and liabilities of State Undertakings.
Public Debr
Floating Debt.
Refund of taxes collected in excess.
Depasits, cic,
Provident fun‘
Pensiou
Contracts.



(ii)
Causes
35, Liability in respect of actianable wrong,
56. Liability as guarantor,
उपाए. पक्का in suspense.
58. Residuary provision.
59. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement.
60, Power of Central Government to order allocation of adjustment in certain cases.
61. Cerzin expenditure to be charged on Consolidated Fund.
PART शा
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS

62. Provisions as to Bihar State Electricity Board, State Warehousing Corporation and

State Road ‘Transport Corporation,
63. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electric

power and supply of water.
64, Provisions as to Bihar State Financial Corporation
65. Provisions as to certain companies,
66. General provision as statutory corporations.
67.

Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport
permits,

6%. Special provisions relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases,
69, Special provision as to income-tax,
70. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions.
PART VID
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES
71... Provisions relating to All-India Services.
2. Provisions relating to servicesan Bihar and Sharkhand.
73, Other provisions relating to services,
74, Provisions as to continuance of officers in same post.
75, Advisory Commitices.
76, Power of Central Government to give directions.
71. Provisions as to State Public Service Commission.
PART 1X
MANacement ANO DEVELOPMENT 06 Warer Resources
78 Water Resources Development and its Management,
79. Constifution and functions of Management Board.
80. Staff of Management Board
81, Jurisdiction of the Board,
82, Power to make regulations.

PART X
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

83. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956.
84. Territorial extent of laws,


be
87.

89.
90.

85.

88.

91,
92.

{iv)

CLAUSES

Power to adapt laws,

Power to construe laws.

Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory functions.
Legal proceedings.

Transfer of pending proceedings.

Right of pleaders to prattise in ceriain cases.

Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws.

Power to remove difficulties.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE,
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE,
‘THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.
‘THE SIXTH SCHEDULE.
‘THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE.
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE.
‘THE NINTH SCHEDULE,
‘THE TENTH SCHEDULE.


43 of 1950,

301 No. 97-F of 2000
THE BIHAR REORGANISATION BILL, 2000
(As Passep 8५ THE Houses oF PartiamMENT)
4
BILL

40 provide for the reorganisation of the existing State of Bihar and for
matters connected therewith.

Be itenucted by Purliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India es follaws:—
PARTI
PRELIMINARY
1. This Act may be called the Bibar Reorganisation Act, 2000.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appointed day" means the day which the Central Government may, by
tion im the Official Gazette, appoint;

(७) “article” means an article of the Constitution;

(०) “assembly constituency”, "council constituency" and “parliamentary

constituency" have the same meanings us in the Represeatation of the People
Act, 1950;

(४) "Election Commission" means the Election Commission appointed by the
President under article 324;

‘Short title,
Definitive,


z

(९1 “sxtstiny State of Bihar” means the State of Bihar 2s existing immediately
before the appointed day

(7) “lave” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye-law,
rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having, immediately before the
appointed day, the force of law in the whole of in any part of the existing State of
Bihar;

{g) “notified order" means an order published in the Official Gazetie:
(h) "population ratio”, in relation to the States of Bihar and Jharkhand, means
the ratio of 645,30:218.44;

~ _(@ “sitting member", in relation to either House of Parliament or of the
Legislature of the existing State of Bihar, means a person who immediately before the
appointed day, is a member of that House;

(0) “successor State", in relation to the existing State of Bihar, means the State
of Bihar o¢ Jharkhand;

{k) “transferred territory” means the territory which on the appointed day is
transferred from the existing State of Bihar to the State of Jharkhand;

(1) “weasury” includes a sub-treasury; and

(tr) any reference 10 a district, tahsil or other territorial division of the existing
State of Bihar shall be construed as a reference to the area comprised within that

aye
territorial division on the appointed day.

namely:—

PART 0
REORGANISATION OF THE STATE OF BaaAR
Formation of 3. On and from the appointed day, there shall be formed a new State to be known as |
Jharkhand the State of Jharkhand comprising the following territories of the existing State of Bihar, |
Stare

Bokaro, Chatra, Deogarh, Dhanbad, Dutnka, Gashwa, Gindih, Godda, Gumla,
Hazaribagh, Kodarma, Lohardaga, Pakur, Palamau, Ranchi, Sehcbganj, Singhbhum

(Bast) and Singhbhum (West) districts; |
and thereupon the said territories shall cease to form part of the existing State of |
Bihar. |
अकाल of Bihar 4. On and from the appointed day, the State of Bihar shall comprise the territories of |
and terial — the existing State of Bihar other than those specified in section 3.
divisions
theron! |
| Amendment of 5. On and from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Constitution, under the
| the First heading "I, THE STATES", —
ee (a)in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Bihar, the following
Constitution. shall be added ut the end, namely>—
“and the territories specified in section 3 of the Bihar Reorganisation Act,
2000"; 2
| (8) after entry 27, the following entry shall be inserted, aamety;—
"28. Jharkhand: ‘The territories specified in section 3 of so
| the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000."
Saving power 6. Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be deemed to affect the
cat Stae power of the Government of Bihar or Jharkhand 10 alter, after the appointed day, the

Goveraments. ame, area or boundaries of any district or other territorial division in the State,



er तप नननग2गन--.. 0000

3

PART Il
REPRESENTATION IN THE Licist AruRES
The Council of States
7. On and from the appointed day, in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Amendment of
Table,— the Fourth
Schedisle 10 the
(०) entries 4 10 29 shail be renumbered as cnries 5 to 30 respectively; ‘Constitetion,

(0) in entry 3, for the figures "22" the figures “16" shall be substituted;
fe) after entry 3, the following entry shall be inserted, namety:*—
“4, Sharkhand.....c. cn satyenncerereernrsn Oe

(2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.
The House of the People

9. On and from the appointed day, thexe shall be allocated 40 seats tothe soccessoe Representation
State of Bihar, and 14 10 the successor State of Jharkhand, in the House of the People and in i the House

“3 0f 1950. the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, under heading “I, of the Peaple.
STATES." —

(०) for entry 4, the following entry stall be substituted, namely:—
“4. Bihar 53 7 5 40 7 oe

(8) entrics 10 to 25 shall be renumbered 2s entries 11 to 26 respectively;
(८) after eniry 9, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—

"10. Jharkhand .. a = “4 1 85,
10. On and from the appointed day, the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly — Detiméusion of
Constituencies Order, 1976, shall stand amended as directed in the Second Schedule wo this Act be
‘Contingencies.

H. (2) Every siting member of tie House of the People representing ४ constituency Provision as 40
which, on the uppeinted day by virtue of the provisions of scction 10, stands allotted, ware siming

OF without alteration of boundries, to the successor State of Bihar or Jharkhand, shall be. Mb
deemed to have been elected tothe House of the People by that constituency as s0 allotted

(2) The term of office of such Sitting tembers shall remain unaltered,
The Legislative Assembly

12.(/) The fuinber of seats us 00 the appointed day in the Legislative Assemblies of Provisions as
the States of Bihar and Jhurkhand shall be two hundred and forty-three and eighty-one 1 Legislative
respectively, Astemblirs.

43 of 1950 (2) In the Second Schedule 10 the Representation of the People Act, 1950, under
heading “I. States", —

(०) for emey 4, the following entry shall be substituted, mamely:—
“4, Bihar 318 4s 29 243 39 o%
(6) entries 11 (0 27 shall be renumbered at entries 12 to 28 respectively;


2 naam of
sitting.
member,

(Legisdative
‘Council of
Biv.

‘Council
conminecncies.

4

(6) after entry 10, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“21. Sharkhand न $1 9 28",

13. (1) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of
Bihar elected to fill a seat in that Assembly from @ constituency which on the appointed day
by virtue of the provisions of section 10 stands allotted, with or without alteration of
boundaries, to the State of Jharkhand shall, on and from that day, cease to be a member of
the Legislative Assembly of Bibar and shall be deemed to have been elected to fill a seat in
the Legislative Assembly of Jharkhand from that constituency 85 ४० allotted.

(2) # other sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of
Bihar shall continue to be members of the Legislative Assembly of that State and any
such sitting member representing # constituency the extent, or the name and extent of
which are altered by virtue of the provisions of section 10 shall be deemed to have been
clected to the Legislative Assembly of Bihar by that constituency as so altered.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Legislative Assemblies of Bihnr and Jharkhand shall be deemed to be duly
constituted on the appointed day.

(4) The sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Bihar
nominated to that Assembly under article 333 to represent the Anglo-Indiza community
shatl be deemed to have been nominated to represent the said community in the
Legislative Assembly of Jharkhasd under that article.

14. The period of five years referred to in clause (1) of articte 172 shall, in the case of
Legislative Assembly of the State of Bihar or Jharkhand be deemed to have commenced on
the date on which it actually commenced in the case of Legislative Assembly of the existing
State of Bihar.

15. (7) The persons who imrnediately before the appointed day are the Speaker and
Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Bibar shall continue
to be the Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively of that Assembly on and from that
day,

(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the, Legislative Assembly of
Jharkhand shall choose two members of that Assembly to be respectively Speaker and
Deputy Speaker thereof and until they are so chosen, the duties of the office of Speaker
shall be performed by such member of the Assembly as the Governor may appoint for
the purpose.

36. The rales of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative Assembly of
Bihar as in force immediately before the appointed day shall, until rules are made
under clause (1) of article 208, be the rules of procedure and conduct of business of the
Logislative Assembly of Jharkhand, subject to such modifications and adaptations as
may be made therein by the Speaker thereof.

The Legislative Council of Bihar
17. On and from the day on which all the members specified in the Third Schedule
retire, there shall be seventy-five seats in the Legislative Council of Bihar, and in the Third
Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, for the existing entry 2, the following
entry shail be substituted, namely:—

“2. Bihar 75 24 6 6 27" 12".

18. On and from the appointed day, the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Bihar)
Order, 1951 shall stand amended as directed in the Fourth Schedule.

of tf



6 1990,

19. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 17, all siting members of the
Legislative Coupeil of the existing State of Bihat, shall continue tw he members of thar
Council till they retire on the expiration of their present term of office

20. The person who immediately before the appointed day is the Chairman or Deputy
Chairman of the Legislative Council of the existing State of Bihar shall continue 16 be the
Chairman or Deputy Chairman, as the case may be, on and from that day of that Council

Delimitation of constituencies

21. (1) For the purpose of siving effect to the provisions of Section 12, the Election
Commisston shall determine in the manner hereinafter provided—

(a) the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduied Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Bihar and Jharkhand
respectively, having regard to the relevant Provisions of the Constitution;

(2) the assembly constituencies into which each State referred to in clause (a)
shall be divided, the extent of cach of such constituencies and in which of them
Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes; and

(८) the adjustments in the boundaries and description of the extent of the
Parliamentary constituencies in vach successor States that may be necessary or
expedient
(2) In determining the matters referred to in clauses (6) and (८) of sub-section (7),

the Election Commission shall have regard to the following provisions, namely; —

(4) all the constituencies shall be single-member constituencies;

(0) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact
afeas, and in delimiting therm, tegard shall be had to physical features, existing
boundaries of administrative Units, facilities of communication and conveniences
to the public; and

{c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled ‘Tribes shall, us fue as practicable, be located in areas where the
Proportion of their population to the total population is the largest.

(3) The Election Commission shall, for the purpose of. assisting it in the performance
Of its functions under sub-section (/), associate with itself as associate members, five
persons as the Central Government may by order specify, being Persons who are members of
the Legislative Assembly of the State or of the House of. the People representing the State:

Provided that pone of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to Sign any
decision of the Election Commission.

(4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls vacant, it
shall be filled as faras practicable, in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3).
(3) The Election Commission shalt—
(०) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies together with the

dissenting proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof
in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit,

(6) consider all objections and Suggestions which may have been received by it
before the date so specified:

(c)afterconsidering all objections and Suggestions which may have beenreceived
by it before the date so Specified, determine by one or more orders the delimitation of
constituencies and cause such order or orders to be published in the Official Gazette;

Proviseon as tn
sinay
members

Chasrman and
Deguity

Charrmas

Delemiaven ot
COnstiteemctes.



4 ot the
Election
Conumession 09
maintain
Delimitation

Atscndment
of the
Scheduled
Castes Order.

of the
Schedwled
Tribes Onder,

High Count of
Jrarkhand.

Jedges of High
Court

High Conrt.

6

and upon such publication, the order or orders shall tiave the full force of law and shall
not be called in question in any court,

(6) As soon as may be afer such publication. every such order relating to assembly
constituencies shall be laid before the Legistutive Assembly of the concerned State,

(7) The delimitation of constituencies in the States of Bihar and Jharkhand shall be
determined on the basis of the published figures of the census taken in the year 1971.

22 (1) The Election Commission may, from time 10 time, by notification in the
Official Gazctte,—

(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 21 or any
error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission;

(8) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any
such order or orders is or are altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be
necessary of expedicat for bringing such order up-to-date,

(2) Every notification ander this section relating to an assembly constituency shall be
laid, 2s soon as may be after it is issued, before the concerned Legislative Assembly,

Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes

23. On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950,
shall stand amended as directed in the Fifth Schedule,

24, On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950,
shall stand amended as directed in the Sixth Schedule. .

PARTIV
Hic Courr

25. (1) On and from the appointed day, there shall be a separate High Court for the
State of Jharkhand (hereinafter referred to ss the High Court of Jharkhand) and the High
Court at Patna shall become the High Court for the State of Bihar (hereinafter referred to as
the High Court at Patna).

(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Jharkhand shall be at such piace as the
President may, by notified order, appoint. .

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Judges and division
courts of the High Court of Jharkhand may sit at such cther place or places in the State of
Jharkhand other than its principal seat as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the
Governor of Jharkhand, appoint.

26. (1) Such of the Judges of the High Court at Patna holding office immediately
before the appointed day as may be determined by the President shall on that day cease to
be Judges of the High Court st Patna and become Judges of the High Court of Sharkhand.

+ _ (2) The persons who by virtue of sub-section (/) become Judges of the High Court of
Tharkhand shall, cacept in the case where any such person is appointed to be the Chief
Justice of that High Court, rank in that Court according to the priority of their respective
appointment as Judges of the High Court of Patns.

27. The High Court of Jharkhand shall have, in respéct of any part of the territories
included in the State of Tharkhand, all such jurisdiction, powers and authorities as, under
the law in force immediately before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect of that
part of the said territories by the High Court at Patna.



25 of 1963

25 af 196)

7

28. (7) On and from the appointed day, ia the Advocates Act, 1961, in section 3, in
sub-section (/), in clause (a), afier the words “Jammu and Kashmir”, the word “Sharkhand”
shall be inserted,

(2) Any person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate on the rolt
Of the Bar Council of the existing State of Bihar may give his option in writing, within one
year from the appointed day to the Bar Council of such existing State, to transier his name
on the roll of the Bar Council of Jharkhand and notwithstanding ariything contained in the
Advocates Act, 1961 and the rules made thereunder, on such option so giver his neme shall
be deemed to have been transferred on the roll of the Bar Council of Jharkhand with effect
from the date of the option so giver for the purposes of the said Act and the rules made
thereunder,

(4) The right of audience in the High Court of Jharkhand shall be regulated in
accordance with the like Principles as, immediately before the appointed day, are in force
‘with respect te the right of audience in the High Court at Patna.

29, Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law in force immediately before the
appointed day ‘with respect 10 practice und procedure in the High Court at Patna shall, with
the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Jharkhand, and
accordingly, the High Court of Jharkhand shall have all such powers to make rules and
orders with respect to practice and procedure as immediately before the appointed day
‘exercisable by the High Court at Patna:

Provided that any rules or orders which are in force immediately before the appointed
day with respect to practice and procedure in the High Court af Patna shall, until varied or

30. The law in foree immediately before the appointed day with respect to the custody
of the scal of the High Court at Patna shall with the necessary modifications, apply with
fespect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Jhurkhand.

31. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the form
of writs and special processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court at Paina shall,
with the necessary modificaitons, apply with respect to the form of writs and other processes
used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Jharkhand,

32. The law in force immicdiately before the appointed day relating to the powers of
the Chief Tustice, Single Judges and division courts of the High Court at Patna with respect
toall matters ancillary to the exercise af those powers shall, with the necessary modification,
apply in relation to the High Court of Jharkhand.

33. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to appeals to the
Supreme Court from the High Court at Paina and the Judges and division courts thereof
shall, with the necessary modification, apply in relation to the High Court of Jharkhand.

34. (7) Except as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Patna shall, as from the
appointed day, have no jurisdiction in respect of the transferred territory.

(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Patna immediately before the
appointed day as are certified, whether before or after that day, by the Chief Justice of
the High Court, having regard to the places of accrual of the cause of action and other
Circumstances, to be proceedings which are ought to be henrd and decided by the High

Special
provision
rotating 40 Bar
Council and
Advocates,

of
seal of High
Court,

Foam of wries
and other

Powers of
Judges.


= t0 appear
of to act in
procesdings
ttansferred to
High Coart of
Jharkhand.

Interpretetion.

Saving.

Authorisation
of expenditure
of Jnarkhaad
‘State.

Court of Jharkhand shall as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the
High Court of Tharkhand.

131 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2) of this section or
in section 27, but save ay hereinalter provided, the High Court at Patna shall have, and the
High Court of Jharkhand shall not have, jurisdiction to enteriain, hear or dispose of
appeals. applications for keave to appeal to the Supreme Coun, applications for review
und uther proceedings where any such proceedings seck any relief in respect of any order
passed by the High Court at Patna before the appointed day

Provided that if after such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court at
Patni, it appears to the Chief Justice of the High Court that they ought to be wansferred to
the High Court of Jharkhand, he shall order that they shall be sp transferred, and such
proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly.

(4) Any order made by the High Court at Patna—

(a) before the appointed day, in any proceeding to the High Court of Tharkhand
by virtue of sub-section (2), or

{b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Patna retains
jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section (3) shall for all purposes have effect, not only
as an order or the High Court ar Patna, but also as an order made by the High
Court of Jharkhand.

35. Any person, who immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to
practice or an attorney entitled (o act, in the High Court at Pata and so authorised to appear
of to actin any proceedings transferred from that High Court to the High Court of Jharkhand
under section 34 shall have the right to appear or to wc, as the case may be, in the High
Court of Jharkhand in relation to those proceedings.

36. For the purposes of section 34—

(@) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until that court has
disposed of all issues between the parties, including any issues with respect to the
taxation of the costs of the proceedings and shall include appeals, applications
for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, application for review, petitions for
revision and petitions for writs;

(0] references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a
Judge or division court thereof, and reference to onder made by @ court ०८ the Judge
shall be construed as including references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or
made by that court of Judge.

37. Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High Court of Jharkhand of
aay provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision
that may be made on of after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any
Legislature or other authority having power to make such provision.

PART V

AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUI

38. The Governor of Bihar may, at any time before the appointed day, authorise such
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Jharkhand as he deems necessary
for any pertod not more than six months beginning with the appointed day pending the
sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Jharkhand: .

Provided that the Governor of Jharkhand may, after the appointed day, authorise
such further expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State
of Jharkhand for any period not extending beyond the said period of six months,



ee

9

39. (1) The reports of the Comptroller und Auditor-General of India referred to in
lause (2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of the vaisting State of Bihar in respect of
any period price to the appointed day shull be gubenitted to the Governor of each of the

successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature
of thai State.

(2) The President, after considering the views of the State Legislatures of the successor
States, may by order—

(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of Bihar on
any service in respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the financial
year or in respect of any earlier financial year in excess of the amount granted for tht
service and for that year as disclosed in the reports referred to in sub-section ह1) 10
have been duly authorised; and

(0) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the said
reports.

40. The President shall, by order, determine the share of States of Bihar and Jharkhand
in the total amount payable to the existing State of Bihar on the recommendation of the
Finance Commission constituted under article 280 of the Constitution, in such mannez as
he thinks fit.

PART VI
APPORTIONMENT 06 ASSETS AND LIABILITIES

41. (7) The provisions of this Part shall apply in relation 10 the apportionment of the

ussels and lubilities of the existing State of Bihar immediately before the appointed day.

(2) The successor States shal! be entitled to receive benefits arising out of the decisions

| taken by the prodecessor State and the successor Staes shall be liable to bear the financial

Nabilities arising out of the decisions taken by the existing State of Bihar,

(3) The apportionment of assets and liabilities would be subject to such financial
adjustment as may be necessary to secure just, reasonable and equitable apportionment of
the assets and liabilities amongst the successor States.

(4) Any dispute regarding the amount of financial assets and liabilities shall be settled
through mutual agreement, failing which by order, by the Central Government on the
advice of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India,

Ad (7) Subject to other peovisions of this Part, af! land and all stores, articles and
other goods belonging to the existing State of Bihar shall,—

(a) if within the transferred territory, pass to the State of Jharkhand; or
(6) in any other cese, remain the property of the State of Bihur:

Provided that where the Central Government is of opinion that any goods or class of
goods should be distributed between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand, otherwise: that
according 10 the situation of the goods, the Central Government may issue such directions
asitthinks fit for a just and equitable distribution of the goods and the goods shall pass 10
the successor States accordingly.

(2) Stores held for specific purposes, such as use 66 utilisation in particular institutions,
workshops or undertakings or on particular works under construction, shall pass to the
Successor States in whose territories such institutions, workshops, undertakings or works
are located.

Reports
tetating, 60
accounts of
Bikar State,

‘Tisantation of
revenue.

Applicatios of

Pet.

Asem कराए
yheds:


=
eed advances.

Investments
and ceodits in
conta funds,

10

(3) Stores relating to the Secretariat and offices of Heacs of Departments having
jurisdiction over the whole of the existing State of Bihar shall be divided as may be agreed
upon between the successor States, or in default of such. agreement, as the Central Government
may by order direct for a just and equitable distribution of such stores,

(४) Any other unissued stores of any class in the existing State of Bihar shall be
divided between the successor States in proportion to the total stores of that class purchased
in the period of three years prior to the appointed day, for the territories of the existing State
of Bihar included respectively in each of the successor States:

Provided that where such proportion cannot be ascertained in respect of any
class of stores or where the value of any class of such stores docs not exceed rupees ten
thousand, that class of stores shall be divided between the successor States according
to the population ratio.

(5) In this section, the expression “land” includes immovable property of every
kind and any rights in or over such property, and the expression "goods" does not
inelede coms, bank notes and currency notes.

43. The total of the cash balances in all treasuries of the State of Bihar and the credit
balances of the State with Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India or any other bank
immediately before the appointed day shall be divided between the States of Bihar and
Jharkhand according to the population ratio:

Provided that for the purposes of such division, there sbalf be no transfer of cash
balances from any treasury to any other treasury and the apportionment shall be
effected by adjusting the credit balance of the two States in the books of the Reserve
Bank of India on the appointed day:

Provided further that if the State of Jharkhand has no account on the appointed day
with the Reserve Bank of India, the adjustment shall be made in such manner as the Contral
Government may, by order, direct.

44. The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty on property, including arrears of
land revenue, shall belong to the successor State in which the property is situated, and the
right to recover arrears af any other tax or duty shall belong to the successor State in whose
territories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included on the appointed day.

45. (1) The right of the existing State of Bihar to recover any loans or advances made
before the appointed day to any local body, society, agriculturist or other person in an area
within that State shall belong to the successor State in which that area is included on that day.

(2) The right of the existing State of Bikar to recover any loans or advances made
before the appointed day to any person or institution outside that State shall belong to the
State of Bihar:

Provided that any sum recovered in respect of any such loan or advance shall be
divided between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand according to the population ratio.

46. (7) The securities held in respect of the investments made from Cash Balances
Investment Account o¢ from any Fund in the Public Account of the existing State of Bihar
as specified in the Seventh Schedule shall be apportioned in the ratio of population of the
successor States:

Provided that the securities held in investments made from the Calamity Relief Fund
of the existing State of Bihar shall be divided in the ratio of the area of the territories occupied
by the successor States:

Provided further that the balance in the Reserve Funds in the Public Account of
Bihar created wholly out of appropriations from the Consolidated Fund of the existing
State of Bihar, to the extent the balances have not been invested outside Government
account, shall not be carried forward to similar Reserve Funds in the Public Account of,
successor States,



(2) The investments of the existing State of Bihar immediately before the appointed
day, in any special fund, the objects of which are confined to a local area, shall belong to
the Stste in which that area is included on the appointed day

(3) The investments of the existing State of Bikar immediately before the appointed
day in any private, commercial or industrial undertaking, in so far as such investments have nee
been made or are deemed not to have been made from the cash balance investment secount,
shall pass to the State in which the Principal seat of business of the underthing is located,

(4) Where aay body corporate constituted under aCentral Act, State Act or Provincml
Act for the existing State of Bihar or amy part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of
Part I, becomes an inter-State body corporate, the investments in, or loans or advances to,
any such body corporaic by the existing State of Bihar made before the appointed day
shall, save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, be divided between the
90४८5 of Bihar and Jharkhand in the same propostion in which the assets of the body corporate
are divided under the provisions of this Part,

47. (1) The assets and fiabitities relating to any commercial or industrial undertaking
of the existing State of Bihar shall Pass to the State in which the undertaking is located,

(2) Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by the existing State of Bihar for
any such commercial or industrial undertaking, the securities held in respect of investments
made from that fund shall pass to किट State in which the undertaking is located.

48. (/) ALL liabilities on account of Public Debt and Public Account of the existing
State of Bihar outstanding immedutely before the appointed day shall be ‘apportioned in
the ratio of Population of the successor States unless a different mode of apportionment is
provided under the provisions of this Act.

(2) The individuat items of liabilities to be allocated 10 the successor States and the
Smount of contribution required to be made by one successor State to another shall be such
as may be ordered by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India:

Provided that til! such orders are issued, the liabilities on account of Public Debt and
Public Account of the existing State of Bihar shall continue to be the lisbilities of the successor
State of Bihar.

(3) The liability on account of loans raised from any source and re-lent by the existing
State of Bihar to such entities as may be specified by the Central Government and whose
area of operation is confined to either of the successor States shall devolve on the respective
States as specified in sub-section (4),

(#) The public debt of the existing State of Bihsr attributable to loan taken from any
Souree for the express purpose ofre-lending the same toa specific institution and outstanding
immediately before the appointed day sh how

(@) if re-lont to any local body, body corporate or other institution in any local

area, be the debt of the State in which the local area is included on the appointed 0५);

or

(b) ifre-leat to the Bihar State Electricity Board, the Bihar 518८ 1१०७6 7190७
Corporation, or the Bihar Housing Board or any other institution which becomes an
inter-State institution on the appointed day, be divided between the Sues ot Whar
sad Jharkhand in the same proportion in which the assets of such body oorporate or
institution are divided under the provisions of Part VII of thit Act.

(5) Where a sinking fund or a depreciation fund 15 maintained by the existing 8106 of
Bihar for repayment of any loan raised by it, the securities held in respect of investments
made from that fund shall be divided between the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand
in the same proportion in which the total public debt Is divided between the {wo States
under this section.

Aswets and
liabilities of
State
undertakings

Pablic Debe.


LS Debt

Refund of
taxes
collected em

Deposits, लए.

12
(6) In this section, the expression "Government security” means a security created
and issued by a State Goverament for the purpose of raising 3 public loan and having any
of the forms specified in, or prescribed under clause (2) of section 2 of the Public Debt
Act, 1944,

49. The linbility of the existing State of Bihar in respect of any floating loan to provide
short-term finance to any commercial undertaking shall be the liability of the State in whose
territories the undertaking is located.

50. The liability of the existing State of Bihar to refund any tax or duty oa property,
including land revenue, collected in excess shall be the liability of the successor State in
whose territories the property is situated, and the liability of the existing State of Bibar to
refund any other tax or duty collected in excess shall be the liability of the successor State
in whose territories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included,

51. (1) The liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of any civil deposit or loan
fund deposit shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State im whose area the
deposit has been made,

(2) The liability of the existing State of Bibar in respect of any charitable or other
endowment shail, as from the appointed day, be the liabitity of the State in whose area the
institution entitled to the benefit of the endowment is located or of the State to which the
objects of the endowment under the terms thereof, are confined.

§2, The liability’of the existing State of Bihar in respect of the provident fund account
of a Government servant in service on the appointed day shall, as from that day, be the
liability of the State to which that Government servant is permanently allotted.

53, The liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of pensions and other retirement
benefits shall pass to, or be apportioned betweea, the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand
in accordance with the provisions contained in the Eighth Schedule to this Act.

54. (J) Where, before the appointed day, the existing State of Bihar has made any
contract in the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the State, that contract
shall be deemed to have been tnade ib the exercise of the executive power—

(a) if the purposes of the contract are, on and frém the appointed day,
exclusive purposes of either of the successor States of Bihar and Sharkhand; and

(b) any other case, of the State of Bihar,

and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue under any such contract
shall, to the extent to which they would have been rights of liabilities of the existing State of
Bihar, be rights or liabilites of the State of Jharkhand or the State of Bihar, as the case may
be: Ny

Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause (0), the initial allocation
of rights and liabilities made by this sub-section shall be subject to such financial
adjustment as may be agreed upon between the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand
or in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.

(2) Por the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in the
liabilities which have accrued or may accrue under any contract—
(७) any liability 10 satisfy an order or award made by any court or other
tribunal in proceedings relating to the contract; and
(0) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in connection with any
such proceedings.

(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating
to the apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial
obligations: and bank balances aod securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake of
the nature of contractual rights, be dealt with under those provisions.

ta of 1944.



55. Where, immediutcly before the Appoimed day, the existing State of Bihar is

subject to any liability in Fespect ef any actionable wrong other than breach of contract,
that Hiability shall—

161 ॥ the couse of activn arose wholly within the territorios which, as from
that day, are the territories of either of the successor States of Bihar or Jharkhand, be
a lisbility of that successor State; and

(0) in any other case, be initially 4 liabiitty of the State of Bihar, bat subject to
such financial adjustment as may be ‘greed upon between the States of Bihar and
Tharkhand or, in default of sach agreement, as the Central Government may, by order,
direct,

56. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of Bilar is liahke
= guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co-operative Society or other person,
that Hiability of the existing State of Bihar shvall—

(a) if the area of operations of such society 9¢ persons is limited ६0 the territories
which, as from that dity, are the territories of either of the States of Bihar or fharklsand,
be a liability of that successne Stale: and

(6) im any other case, be initially a lability of the State of Bihar, subject to such
financial adjustincot ax may be agreed upon between the Stutes of Bihar and Jharkhand
or, in default of such apreements, ay the Central Government may, by order, direct,

57. Mf uny item in suspense is vitimatcly found to affect an asset or liability of the
sature referred 10 in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in
accordance with that provision,

58. The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the existing State of Bihar not
Sealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Port shall pass to the State of Bihar in the first
instance, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of
Bihar and Jharkhand or, in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may, by
order, direct.

$9. Where the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand agree that the benefit or barden
of any particular asset or liability should be apportioned between them in 2 manner other
than that provided for in the foregoing provisions of this Past, notwithstanding anything
comained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be apportioned in the
manner agreed upon.

60. Where, by virtuc of any of the provisions of this Part, any of the successor Staies
of Bihar and Jharkhand becomes catitled to any property ज obtains any benefits or becomes
subject to any liability, and the Central Government is of opinion, on a reference mae
within @ period of three years from the Appointed day by cither of the States, that it is just
and equitable that property or those benefits should be transferred to, or shared with, the
other successor State, or that a contribution towards that liability should be rade by the
other successor State, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such manner between
the two States, or the other State shall make to the State Subject 10 the linbifity such
contribution in respect thereof, as the Central Government may, afer consultation with the
two State Governments, by order, determine.

61, All sums payable either by the State of Bihar or by the State of Jharkhand to the
other States or by the Central Government 10 cithier of those States, by virtue of the peovinions
of this Act, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State by which such sums ore
payable or, as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of India,

Laabaliy m
respect of
actionable
wrome.

Liability ox
guarantor.

hems in
suspense

provision,


हे =
to Bihar Seam
Blecericigy
Board, State

Corporation
and Stare Road
Transport
‘Corporstion.

14

PART Vit
PROVISIONS AS TO CEXIAIN CORMURATIONS

62. (1) The following bodies corporate constituted for the existing State of Bihar,
namely:—
(a) the State Electricity Board constituted under the Electricity Supply
Act, 1948;
(8) the State Warchousing Corporation established under the Warehousing
Corporations Act, 1962;
(८) the State Road Transport Corporation established under the Road
Transport Act, 1950,
shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function in those areas in Tespect of
which they were functioning immediately before that day, subject to the provisions of
this section and to such directions as may, from time to time, be issued by the Central
Government.

(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under Sub-section (/) in respect
of the Board of the Corporation shall include a direction that the Act under which the Board
or the Corporation was constituted shall, in its application to that Board or Corparation,
have effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as the Central Government thinks
fit.

(3) The Beard or the Corporation referred to in sub-section (7) shall cease to
function as from, and shell be deemed to be dissolved on such date as the Central
Government may, by order, appoint; and upon such dissolution, its assets, rights and
liabilities shall be apportioned between the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand in such
Tanner as may be agreed upon between ther within one year of the dissolution of the
Board or the Corporation, as the case may be, or if no agreement is reached, in such manner
#5 the Central Government may, by order, determine:

Provided that any liabilities of the said Board relating to the unpaid dues of the
coal supplied to the Board by any public sector coal company shall be provisionally
apportioned between the State Electricity Boards constituted respectively in the
Successor States of the existing State of Bihar or sfter the date appointed for the
dissolution of the Board under this sub-section in such manner as tay be agreed upon
between the Governments of the successor States within one month of such dissolution or if
no agreement is reached, in such manner as the Central Government may, by arder, determine
subject to reconciliation and finalisation of the Habilities which shall be completed within
three months from the date of such dissolution by the mutuzal agreement between the successor
States or failing such agreement by the direction of the Central Government:

Provided further that an interest at the ratc of two per cent. higher than the Cash
Credit interest shall be paid on outstanding unpaid dues of the coal supplied to the Board by
the public sector coal company til! the liquidation of such dues by the concerned State
Electricity Board constituted in the successor States on or after the date appointed for the
dissolution of the Board under this sub-section.

(4) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as
Preventing the Government of the State of Bihar, 0६, as the case may be, the Government
of the State of Jharkhand from constituting, at any tine on or after the appointed day,
4 State Electricity Board or a State Warehousing Corporation or a Road Transport
Corporation for the State under the provisions of the Act relating to such Board or
Corporation; and if such ॥ Bourd or Corporation is $0 constituted in either of the States
before the dissolution of the Board or the Corporation referred to in sub-section (J) —

(2) provision may be made by order of the Central Government enabling the
new Board or the new Corporation to take over from the existing Board or Corporation
all or any of its undertakings, assets, rights and liabilities in that State, and

S4of 1948,

SS of 1962.

64 of 1956.



eh or ron

5

(७) upon the dissofution of the existing Board ot Corporation, —

(i) any assets, Tights and liabitities which would otherwise have passed to
that State by or under the provisions of sub-section (3) shall puss to the new
Board or the new Corporation instead of to that State:

(ह) any employee who would otherwise have been transferred to or
Fe-employed by that State under sub-section (3), read with clause (i) of
sub-section (5), shall be transferred to or re-employed by the new Board or
the new Corporation instead of to of by that State,

(5) An agreement catered into between the successor States under sub-section (3) and
an order mage by the Central Government undes that sub-section or under clause (a) of sub-

(00०० by the successor States, in the case ofan agreement under sub-section
or an order made under that sub-section;

(ii) t0 or by the new Board or the new Corporation constituted under sub-section
(A), in the case of an order made under clause (a) of that sub-section, 7 $

and, subject to the provisions of section 65, also for the terms and conditions of service
*pplicable to such employees after sach transfer or re-employment.

63. If it appears to the Central Government that the arrangement in regard to the
generation or supply of electric power or the supply of water for any area or in regard to the
‘execution of any Project for such generation or supply has been or is likely to be modified
to the disadvantage of that area by teason of the fact that itis, by virtue of the provisions of
Part I of this Act, outside the State in Which the power stations and other installations for
the generation and supply of such power, or the catchment area, reservoirs and other works
for the supply of water, as the case may be, are located, the Central Government may give
such directions as it deems proper to the State Government or other authority concemed for
the maintenance, so far as practicable, of the Previous arrangement.

4, (1) The Bihar State Financial Corporation established under the State Financial
Corporation Act, 1951 shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function in those
areas 10 respect of which it was functioning immediately before that day, subject to the
Provisions of this section and to such directions as may, from time to time, be issued by the
Central Government.

specified in the direction,

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4) or sub-section (2), the Board
of Directors of the Corporation may, with the previous approval of the Central Government
and shall, if so required by the Central Government, Convene at any time 8161 ite appointed
day a meeting for the consideration of a scheme for the Feconstitution छा reurganisation ar
dissolution, as the case may be, of the Corporation, including proposnls rogucding the
formation of new Corporation, and the tranefer thereto of the assets, rights und liabilities of
the existing Corporation, and if such & scheme is approved at the gonoral mocting by »
resolution passed by a majority of the shareholders present and voting, the scheme alall he
Submitted to the Central Government for its sanction,

(4) If the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government either without
modifications or with modifications which are approved at a general meetiny, the Central
Government shall certify the scheme, and upon such certification, the schemo shall,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force,
be binding on the corporations affected by the acheme as well as the shureholders and
creditors thereof,


=

(3) If the scheme is not ३० approved or sanctioned, the © entral Government may
refer the scheme to such Judge of the High Court st Patna and Jharkhand os may be
nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice thereof, and the decision of the Judge in
fegard to the scheme shall be final and shal? he binding on the corporations affected by the
scheme as well as the shareholders and creditors thereof,

(6) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing
the Government of the States of Bihar and Jharkhand from constituting, at any time on or
afier the appointed day, a State Finanekal Corporation for that State under the Stare Financial

Corpornjons Avi 1951 Gor ist
Provisions, as 65. (/) Nowwithstanding anything Contained in the foregoing provisions of this Part,
fo corum cach of the companies specified in the Ninth Schedule to this Act shall, of and from the
Sea appotnted day and until otherwise provided for in any law, or in any agreement among the
successor States, of in any divection issued by the Central Government, continue 10 function
in the areas in which ॥ was functioning immediately before that day; and the Central
Government may, from tine to time, issue such directions in relation to such functioning as
it may deem fit, notwithstanding anything to the Ceatrary contained ia the Companies
Act, 1956, of in any other law 1 of 1956,
| (2) Any directions issued unter sub-section (/) in respect of a company referred
to in thet sub-section, may include directions—
(@) rogurding the division of the interests ang shares of existing state of Bihar
| in the company among the successor States:
(6) requiring the reconstitution of the Board of Directors of the company so as
to give adequate representation to both the successor States.
Gener! 66. (/) Save as otherwise expressly provided by the foregoing provisions of this Part,
proverse a 10 where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for
॥ pre AE the existing State of Bihar or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of Part H of
|| ee this Act, become an inter-State body corporate, then, the body corporate shall, on and feom
| the appointed day, continue to function and operate in those areas in respect of which it was
| functioning and operating immediately before that day, subject (9 such directions as may
from time to time be issued by the Central Government, until other provision is made by
law in respect of the said body corporate.
{2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub-section (/) in
| respect of any such body corparate shall include @ direction that any law by which the
said body corporate is governed shall, in its pplication to that body corporate, have
effect subject to such exceptions and madifications as may be specified in the direction.
‘Temporary 67. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained ia section 88 of the Motor Vehicles
Provisions 28 Aci, 1988, a permit pranted by the State Transport Authority of the existing State of 59 of 1988,
poorer gage Bihar of any Regional Transport Authority in that State shall, if such permit was,
existing read immediately before the appointed day, valid and effective in any area in the transferred
Staneport territory, be deemed to continue to be valid and effective in that area after that day
| subject to the provisions of that Act as for the time being in force in that area; and it *'

shall not he nevessury for any such Permit to be countersigned by the State Transport
Authority of Jharkhand or any Regional ‘Transport Authority therein for the purpose
of validating it for use in such area:

Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the successor
State Government or Governments concemed add to, amend 04 vary the conditions attached
to the permit by the Authority by which the permit was granted. |

(2) No tolls, entrance fees or other charges of a like nature shall be levied afier the
appointed day in respect of any transport vehicle for its ‘Operations in any of the successor
States under any such parmit, if such vehicle was, immediately before that day, exempt



951.

।
||

14 |# 1947,

॥4 of 1947,

7

Hoo the payment of any such toll, cntrance fees or other charges for its operations jn the
transferred territory:

Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State
Government or Governments concerned, authorise the levy of aay such toll, entrance
fees of other charges, as the case may be,

68. Where on account of the Teorganisation of the existing State of Bihar under this
Act, any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provinciul Act, any
£0-operative society registered under any law relating to co-operative societies or any
commercial or industrial undertaking of that State is reconstituted or reorganised in any
manner whatsoever or is amalgamated willy any other body corporate, co-operative society
of undertaking, or is dissolved, and in Consequence of such reconstitution, reorganisation,

body corporate, or in any other co-operative society or undertaking, then notwithstanding
anything contained in section 258 25FF or 25FFF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947,
stich transfer or re-employment shall not entitle him ६0 any compensation under that section:

Provided that—

(०) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after
such transfer or re-employment are not Jess favourable to the workman than
those applicable to him immediately before the transfer of re-employment;

(6) the employer in relation to the body corporate, the co-operative society
or the undertaking where the workman transferred or fre-employed is, by
agreement or otherwise, legally liable to pay to the workman, in the event of his
retreachment, compensation under section 258 25FF or 25FFF of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 on the basis that his service has been continuous and has not
been interrupted by the tansfer or re-employment,

69. Where the assets, rights and Liabilities of any body corporate carrying on business
are, under the provisions of this Part, transferred to any other bodies corporate which after
the transfer carry on the same business, the losses or profits or gains sustained by the body
Corporate first mentioned which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed lobe carried
forward and set off in accordance with the Provisions of Chapter V1 of the Incame-tax Act,

with the provisions of Chapter VI of the said Act, as if the transferee body corporate had
Hself sustained such Fass in a business carried on by it in the years in which these losses
were sustained.

70. (1) The Government of State of Bihar or Sharkhand, as the case may be, shall, in
respect of the institutions specified in the Tenth Schedule to this Act, located in thnt State,
continue to provide facilities to the people of the other State which shall not, in any respect,
be less favourable to such people than what were being provided to them before the appointed
day, for such period and upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon betwoen
the two State Governments before the Est day of December, 200) of if no agreement tx
reached by the said date as may be fixed by order of the Central Government,

(2) The Central Government may, at any time before the Ist day of December,
2001 by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in the ‘Tenth Sehedule any other
institution existing on the appointed day in the States of Mihw and Jharkhand and on
the issue of such notification, the Schedule shall be dowmed 10 be arvended by the Inetunon
of the said institution therein.

Special
peovisivas
relating to
retrenchnicnt
Compensation
का certain

Provissan as to

Continence
al Tecate #.
Cette 848
Amarr


2

relating  All-

India Services,

Provisions
relapeng to
services in
‘Bihar and
Tearkhand.

provi
relating to

18

PART VIL
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES
प्रा, (J) In this section, the expression “State cadre" —

(a) in relution to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned
to it in the Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;

(8) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in
the Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954; and

(2) in relation to the Indian Forest Service, has the meaning assigned to it in
the Indian Forest Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966,

(2) In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service, Indian Police
Service and Indian Forest Service for the existing State of Bihar, there shall, on and
from the appointed day, be two separate cadres, one for the State of Bihar and the
other for the State of Jharkhand in respect of each of these services,

(3) The initial sirength and composition of the State cadres referred to in sub-
section (2) shall be such as the Central Government may, by order, determine before
the appointed day.

(४) The members of cach of the said service borne on the Bihar cadre thereof
immediately before the appointed day shall be allocated to the State cadres of the same
Service constituted under sub-section (2) in such manner and with effect from such
date or dates as the Central Government may, by order, specify.

(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the Operation, on or after the
appointed day, of the All-India Service Act, 1951, or the rules made thereunder,

72. (1) Every person who immediately before the Appointed day is serving in
connection with the affairs of the cxisting State of Bihar shall, on and from that day
provisionally continue (0 serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Bihar unless he
is required, by general or special order of the Central Government to serve provisionally in
connection with the affairs of the State of Tharkhand:

Provided that no direction shall be issued under this section after the expiry of a
period of one year from the appointed day.

(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall, by
general 06 special order, determine the successor State to which every person referred
to in sub-section (/} shall be finally allotted for service and the date with effect from
which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to have taken effect.

(3) Bvery person whe is finally allotted under the provisions of sub-section (2) ४0
a successor Simte shall, if he is not already serving therein be made available for serving
in the successor State from such date as ray be agreed upon between the Governments
soncerned or 18 default of such agreement, as may be determined by the Central

Government,

73. (1) Nothing in section 72 shall be deemed to affect on of after the appointed day
the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to
determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs
of the Union or any State:

Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed
day in the case of any person deetned to have been allocated to the State of Bihar of to the
‘State of Tharkhand under section 72 shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the
previous approval of the Central Government.

61 of 1951.



19

(2) All services prior to the appointed day rendered by a persan—
(०) if he is deemed 10 have been allocated to any State under section 72, shal]
be deemed to have been rendered in connection with the affairs of that State;
(8) if he is deemed 30 have been allocste’d to the Union in connection with the
administration of the Jharkhand shal) be deemed to have been rendered in connection
with the affairs of the Union,
for the purposes of the rules regulating his conditions of service.
(3) The provisions of soction 72, shall not apply in relation to members of any All-
India Service,
74, Every person who, immediately before the appointed day is holding or discharging — Provisions as
the duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs Of the existing State of Bihar in 10 cofttinesance

have been daly one tat f88cessor Siac, and shall be deemed, on and from that day, to ane

authority in, that swecessor State:

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to Prevent a competent
authority, on and from the ‘appointed day, from passing in telation to such person any
order affecting the continuance in such post or office.
75, The Central Government may by order establish one or more Advisory Committees Advisory
for the purpose of axsisting it in Tegard to— Comanitiees.
(०) the discharge of any of its functions under this Part; and
' (9) the ensuring of fair and cquitable treatment to all Persons affected by the
Provisions of this Part and the Proper consideration of any representations made by
such persons.
76. The Central Government may aive such directions to the State Government of Power of
Bibar and the State Government of Jharkhand as Muly appear to it to be necessury for the —
Purpose of giving effect to the foregoirig provisions of this Part and the State Government गम कई

|
shalt comply with sach directions. ane ae,
| 77. (1) The Public Service Commission for the existing State of Bihar Shall, om and — Pruvisions #

| from the appointed day, be the Public Service Commission for the State of Bihar. #0 Stine Vetaliy

Service
(2) The persons holding office immediately before the appointed day as Chairman Comminsion:
or other member of the Public Service Commission for the ex ing State of Bihar
shall, as from the appointed day, be the Chairman Or, a5 the case may be, the other
member of the Public Service Commission for the State of Bihar,
(3) Every person who becomes Chairman or other member of the Public Service
Commission for the State of Bihar on the appointed day under sub-section (2), shall—
(a) be entitled to reveive from the Government of the State of Bihar conditions
of service pot less favourable than those to which he was entitled under the provisions
applicable to him;
{b} subject to the proviso to clause {2) of article 316, hold office or continue ty
hold office until the expiration of his term of office as determined under the Provisions
applicable to him immediately before the Sppornted day,
(4) The report of the Bihar Public Service Commission ax t the work dane by the
Comminsion in Fespect of any period prior to the appointed doy shatl be Presented winder

before the Legistature ofthe State of Hihar and it shall aot be necessary to cause such report
Or any such memorandum to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State of Jharkhand.

$:४- 4332७ ४७४७७, छा


2

and its

20

PART IX
MANAGEMUNT AND DEVELOPMENT OF WATER RESOURCES

78. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act but subject to the provisions
of section 79, al! rights and liabilities of the oxisting State of Bihar in relation to water
resource projects in relation 10,—

(@) Ganga and its tributaries; and

(@) Sone and its iributarics,
shall, on the appointed day be the tights and liabilities of the successor States in such
Proportion as may be fixed and subject 10 such adjustments as may be made, by
agreement entered into by the said States after consultation with the Central
Government, of, if no such agrecment is entered into within two years of the appointed
day, then the Central Government may, by order, determine within one year having regard
to the purposes of the project

Provided that the order so made by the Central Government may be varied by
any subsequent agreement entered into by the successor States after consultation with
the Central Government,

(2) 20 agreement o¢ order referred to in sub-section (/) shall, where an extension
or further development of any of the projects referred to in that Sub-section after the
appointed day is undertaken, be the Fights and liabilities of the successor States in
relation 10 such extension or further development,

(3) The rigtts and liabilities referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall include,-—

(a) the right 10 receive and utilise the water available for distribution ag 9
result of the projects; and

(8) the right to receive and utilise the power generated as a result of the
Projects,

but shall not include the tights and liabitities under any contract entered into before the
appointed day by the Government of the existing State of Bihar with any person or authority
other than Government

79. (1) The Centrat Goverament shall constitute a Board to be called the Ganga and
Sone Management Board (hereinaticr referred to as the Board) for administration,
construction, maintenance and opceation of projects referred to in sub-section (J) of
Section 78 for any or for a combination of. following purposes, namely-—

(0 Irrigation;

(i) Rural and Urban Water Supply:

(#4) Hydro Power generation;

(iv) Navigation;

(v) Industries; and

{vi) for any other purpose which the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazene, specify )
(2) The Board shall consist of—

(6) a whole-time Chairman and two whole-time members to be appointed by
the Ceatral Government;

(b) a representative cach of the Government of the States of Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, Jharkhand and Madhyn Pradesh to be nominated by the respective Governments;

{c) two representatives of the Central Government to be nominated by thar
Government



—,

21

(3) The functions of the Board shall inchude—

(a) the regulation of supply of water from the projects referred to in sub-
section (/) of section 78 to States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and Madhy
Pradesh having regard to—

(7) any agreement entered inte or arrangement made covering the
Governments of existing State of Bihar and the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bitar,
Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh, and

(४) the agreement or the order referred to in sub-section (2) of section 78;

(8) the regulation of supply of power generated at the projects referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 78, 10 any Electricity Board or other authority incharge of
the distribution of power having regard to—

(7) any agreement entered into OF arrangement made covering the
Governments of existing State of Bihar and the States of Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh, and

(si) the agreement or the order referred to in sub-section (2) of section 78;

(c) the examination of the requirement of funds for various projects in terms of
the programme laid down for such projects and to advise the apportionment of the
expenditure to the participating States keeping in view the agrecment on the sharing
of costs;

(d) to decide the withdrawal of water from the reservoirs during the
onstruction period for irrigation and power purposes with a view to securing
better use of available water;

() the responsibility of devising programme of resettlement for persons
displaced as a result of Irrigation Projects;

@ construction of such of the remaining or new works connected with the
development of the water resource project relating to the rivers or their tributaries
as the Central Government may specify by notification in the Official Gazette; and

(g) such other functions as the Central. Government may after consultation
with the Governments of the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and
Madhya Pradesh entrust to it.

80. (1) ‘The Board may employ such staff, as it may consider necessary for the
efficient discharge of its functions under this Act: है

Provided that every person who immediately before the constitution of the said
Board was engaged in the construction, maintenance or operation of the works relating
to the projects referred to in sub-section (/) of section 78 shall continue to be so employed
under the Board in connection with the said works on the same terms and conditions
of the service as were applicable to him before such constitution untill the Central Goverament
by order, directs otherwise:

Provided further that the said Board may at any time in consultation with the
State Governments or the Electricity Board concerned and with prior approval of the
Central Government retain any such person for service under that State Government or
Board.

(2) The Government of the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihne, Jharkhand and Madhya
Pradesh shall at all times provide the necessary funds to the Board 10 meet all expenses
(including the salaries and allowances of the staff) required for the discharge of itn functions
and such amounts shall be apportioned among the Stnies concerned in such proportion
ts the Central Government may having regard to the benefits to cach of the sald Suites
specify.

(3) The Board shall be under the control of the Centeal Government and shall comply
With such directions, as may from time 40 time, be given to it by dint Government,

‘Staff of the


=
the Boasd,

Power co maki
regulations,

Areniovent of
Act 47 of
1956,

extent Of laws.

Power to adapt
Jaws.

Power to

22

(4) The Boar! may, with the approval of the Central Government delogate such of its
powers, functions and duties as it may deem fil to the Chairman of the said Board of to any
Officer subordinate to the Board

(5) The Central Government may, for the purpose of cnabling the Board to
function efficiently, issue such directions to the State Governments concerned. or any
other authority, and the State Governments, or the other authority shall comply with
such directions,

81. (1) The Board shall, ordinarily exercise jurisdiction in tegard to any of the projects
referred to in sub-section (7) of section 78 over headwork (barrages, dams, resecwoir,
fegulating construction), part of canal actwork and transmission lines necessary to deliver
water or power to the States concerned,

(2) If any question arises as 16 whether the Board has jurisdiction under sub.
section (1) over any project referred thereto, the same shall be referred to the Central
Government for decision thereon.

82. The Board may, with the prior approval of the Central Government by notification
in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act. and orders made thereunder,
to provide for—

(०) regulating the time and place of meetings of the Board and the procedure
to be followed for the transaction of business at such meetings;

(6) delegation of powers and duties to the Chairman or any officer of the
Board:

(०) the appointment and regulation of the conditions of service of the officers
and other staff of the Board: and

(4) any other maticr for which regulations are considered necessary by the
Board.

PART X
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEDUS PROVESIONS

$3. On and from the appointed day, in section 15 of the States Reorganisation Act,
1956, im clause (२), for the words "Bihar", the words “Bihar and Jharkhand” shall be
substituted.

$4. The provisions of Part II of this Act shall not be deemed to have effected any
change in the tervitories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed
day extends or applies, and territorial references in any such law to the State of Bihar
shall, until otherwise provided by a competent Legislature or other competent authority,
be construed as meaning the territories within the existing State of Bihar before the
appointed day.

85. For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of Bihar or
Jharkhand of any law inade before the appointed day, the appropriste Government may,
before the expiration of two years from that day, by order, make such adaptations and
modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or
expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect Subject to the adaptations and
modifications so made until altered, tepealed or amended by a competent Legislature or
other competent authority,

Explanation.—\n this section, the expression “appropriate Government” means as
fespects any law relating to a matier enumerated in the Union List, the Central Government,
and as respects any other Jaw in its application to 3 State, the State Government.

86, Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been made under
section 85 for the adaptation of a law made before the @ppointed day, any court, tribunal or
authority, required or empowered to enforce such Law may, for the purpose of facilitating its
application in relation to the State of Bihar or Sharkhand, construe the law in such manner,



a

ee

23

without affecting the substance, as may be necessary o¢ proper in regard to the matter
before the court, tribunal or authoeit ५]

87, The Government of the State of Jharkhand, as respects the transferred territory
may, by notification in the Official (४०21९, specify the authority, officer or person who, on
or after the appointed day, shall be competent to exercise such functions exercisable under
any law in 010९ on that day as may be mentioned in that notification and such law shalt
have effect accordingly.

88. Where immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of Bihar is a party
10 any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights of liabilities subject to
apportionment between the States of Bihar-and Jharkhand under this Act, the State of Bihar
tr Jharkhand which succeeds to, or acquires a share in, that property oc those rights ot
liabilities by virtue of any provision of this Act shalt be deemed to be substituted for the
existing Statc of Bihar or added as 3 Party to those proceedings, and the proceedings may
Continue accordingly,

89. (/) Every proceeding pending immediately before the appointed day before a
court (other than the High Court), tribunal, authority of officer in any area which on
that day falls within the State of Bihar shall, if it is @ proceeding relating exclusively to
the territory, which as from that day is the territory of Jharkhand State, stand
fransferred to the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer of that State,

(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred
under sub-section (1), it shall be referred to the High Court at Patna and the decision of thar
High Court shall be final.

(3) In this section—

(a) “proceeding” includes any suit, case or appeal; and
(8) “corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer" in the State of

Jharkhand means—

(0 the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before whom,
the proceeding would have luid if it had been instituted after the appointed
day; or

(i) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority, of officer in that
Sate. as may be determined after the appointed day by the Government of
that State or the Central Government, as the case may be, or before the
appointed day by the Government of the existing State of Bihar to be the
corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer,

90. Any person who, immediately before the *ppointed day, is enrolled as a pleader
entitled to practise in any subordinate courts in the existing State of Bihar shall, for a
period of one year from that day, continue to be entitled to practise in those courts,
foewithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of thase
courts has heen transferred to the Simic of Jharkhand,

91. The provisiods of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law.

92. (1) If any difficuly arises in Hiving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such Provisions which appears
10 him to be necessary or expedient fur the purpose of removing the difficulty:

Provided that no such order whall be made after the expiry of ॥ period of three years
from the appointed day,

(2) Every order made under thix section shall be inid before cach House of
Parliament.

Power to name
authorities,
ee., for
exercising

Functions.

Legal

‘Tesrsfer of
Pending
Proceedings.

Bilect of prowi-
sions of the Act
leconsistene
with other laws,
Power to
femove
difficulties.


a FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section है)

(i) Of the seven sitting members whose term of office will expire on 9th April, 2002,
namely, Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi, Ven'ble Dhammaviriyo, Shri Nagendra Nath
Ojba, Shri Prem Chand Gupta, Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav, Shri Shatrughan Sinha and Shei
Ram Deo Bhandari; Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi and Ven'ble Dhammaviriyo, shall be
deemed to have been elected 10 fill two of the seats allotted to the State of Jharkhand and
the other five sitting members shall be deemed to have been elected to fill five of the seats
allotted 10 the State of Bihar. नम

(#) Of the seven sitting members whose term of office will expire on 70 July, 2004,
namely, Shri Shibu Soren, Shri Gaya Singh, Shri Parmeshwar Kumar Agrawala, Shri Anil
Kumar, Dr, R.K. Yadav Ravi, Shri Kapil Sibal, Smt. Saroj Dubey, Shei Shibu Soren and Shri
Parmeshwar Kumar Agrawal shall be decmed tu have beea elected to fill two of the seats
allotted to the State of Jharkhand and the other five sitting members shall be deemed to have
been clected to fill five of the seats allotted to the State of Bihar,

(ii) Of the eight sitting members whose term of office will expire on 2nd April, 2006,
namely, Shei 5.5, Ahluwalia, Smt. Kum Kum Rai, Shri Faguni Ram, Shri Mahendra Prasad,
Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad, Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh, Shei Ram Kumar Anand and Shi Vijay
Singh Yadav, Shri 5. 5. Ahluwalia and Shri Ram Kumar Anand shall be deemed to have
been elected to fill two of the seats allotted to the State of Jharkhand and the other six
sitting members shall be deemed to have been elected 10 fill six of the seats allotted to the
State of Bihar,



THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 10)
In the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976,—
(7) in Schedule I—

(a) for serial number 3 and the entrics relating thereto, the following shall
be substituted, namely:—

a SE We Isles SeSs Sc निभा 2 3 4 5 6 Ed

“3 Bihar 53 7 5 40 7 ee a ae ५ हक

(0) after serial number 21, the following serial number and enties shall be
inserted, namely:-—

a PE ae Stee See See ee 7ग 2 3 4 5 6 7

“21A Jharkhand 4 1 31

(6) in Schedule 1,--

(a) for serial number 3 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall
be substituted, namely:>—

1 2 3 4 5 6 7

"3 Bihar 318 45 2 243 39

(0) after serial number 21, the following serial number and entries shall be
inserted, namely:—

ne ES ES sce See ee Gee ee 2 3 a 5 7
—_—_—_—_—_—_—_——_______ +3+»न-+-आन 3७०००. 3०००००००००७

“21A  Shorkhand ४ ७७ a 9 28°;

—_—_—_—_—_—_————— ५५५५».

(iii) in Schedule View
(4) in शिक्षा A—Parliamentary Constituencies, —

(A) serial Aumbers 26 to 28, 44 to 54 and the entries relating thereto
shall be omitted;

(8) against serial number 29 —
(4) the entry "158 Deaghar (SC)" shall be omitted;
(2) afler entry “176-Katoria”, the entry "177-Chakal” shall be
inserted;
(९) against serial number 30, the entry “1 64-Mahagama” shall be omitted;
(0) against serial number 30, after entry “WT t-Subtanganj*, the entry
“173-Dhuraiya” shall be inserted;
(8) against serial number 40, after entry “241-Goh*, ine entry “251-
Imamganj (SC)" shall be inserted;
(0) against serial number 42, for entry “25¢-Aui", the entry °255-Fatehpur
(50), 256-Atri® shall be substituted:

(6) against serial number 43, ofr entry "253-Bodhgaya (SC)*, the
entry "254-Barachatti (SC)" shall be inserted;
(b) in Part B-Assembly Constituency, serial numbers 147 to 164, 262 to 324 and the
entries relating thereto shall be omitted.

25


=e

{vr adler Setedule NU. the following Schedule shatl hy inverted. namely
SCHEDULE NNILA
JHARKHAND
Paw A --1" ५॥।1५४॥ ५1 ७0 Cossaierscns
Seal Na ____ Name aml cxtenl in छू of @amuhly Goma No. Nonve wel extent ov events af axscimbly Qonstitwencies

1. Rajmahal (ST)—1-Rajmabal, 2-Boiny (SF), 3-Rashail (४१५. 2-Litipura (ST)
5-Pakaur, Mabheshpar (ST)

2 Dumka (ST).—17-Sikuripana (ST), ¥-Nals, 9 Jartans, 14-Sarath, 10-Durmks (51%,
Hi -Jama (ST).

3, Godda,—13-Madhupur, 15-Deozhur (SC), 12-Junnandi, 16-Poreyahat. 17-
Godda, 18-Mahayama

4. Chatra,—27-Chitra (SC), 26-Simaria (SC), 74-Latchar (SC), 75-Panki, 73-Manika
(ST).

5. Kodarma.—19-Kodarma, 20-Barkatha, 28-Dhunwar, 29-Bayodar; 30-Jamua (SC),
31-Ganiey.

6. Giridih.—32-Giridih, 33-Dumri, 34-Gomiu, 35-Bermo, 42-Tundi, 43-
Baghmara.

7. Dhanbad.—36-Bokaro, 38-Sindri, 39-Nirsa, 40-Dhanbad, 41-Jharia, 37-
Chandankiyari (SC).

8, Ranchi.—i0-Ichagarh, 61-Silli, 62-Khijri (ST), 63-Ranehi, 64-Hatia, 65-Kanke
(SC),

9. Jamshedpur.—4}-Bahragora, 45-Ghatsila (ST), 46-Potka (ST), 47-Jugsalai
(SC), 48-Jamshedpur-East, 49-Jamshedpur. West.

10. Singhbhum (ST).—51-Scraikela (ST), 52-Chaibasa (ST), 53-Majhgaon (ST),
54-Jagannathpur (ST), 55-Manoharpur (ST), $6-Chakaradharpur (ST).

11. Khunti (ST).—57-Kharsawan (ST), 58-Tamar (ST), $9-Torpa (ST), 60-Khunti
(ST), 7!-Kolebira (ST), 70-Simdega (ST),

12. Lehardaga (ST).—66-Mandar (ST), 67-Sisai (ST); 68-Gumla (ST), 69-
Bishunpur (ST), 72-Lohardagga (ST).

13. Palamu (SC).—76-Daltonganj, $0-Garhwa, 81-Bhawanathpur, 77-
Bishrampur, 78-Chhatarpur (SC), 79-Hussainabad,

44, Hazaribagh.—21-Barhi, 22-Barkagaon, 23-Ramgarh, 24-Mandu, 25.
Hazaribagh.

Part B.—Assematy Constrruenctes
Serial No. Name and extent of constituencies
SAHEBGAN] DISTRICT

1. Rajmahal_—Rajmaha! and Sahebganj Police Stations in Rajmahal sub-division.

2. Boro (ST).—Borio and Taljhari Police Stations in Rajmahal sub-division; and
Boarijor Police Stution (excluding G,Ps Rajabhita, Kero, Kairasol, Bara 1810 and Barapipea)
in Godda sub-division.

3. Barhait (ST)—Barhait and Ranga Police Stations in Rajmahal sub-division; and
Sundarpahari Police Station and G.Ps, Rajabbita, Kero, Kairaso!, Bara Telo and Barapipra
in Boarijar Police Station in Godda sub-division.



2

Sef No Name and exeal of consnaeagheg No Name and extent of SSS सलाद

PAKAUR DISTRICT

4, Litipara (ST).—1itipara, Amrapara and Hiranpur Police Stations in Pakaur sub-
division; and Gopikandar Police Station in Dumke Sadar sub-division.

5, Pakaur—Pakaur Police Station in Pakaur sub-division; and Barharwa Police Station
in Rajmahal sub-division.

6. Maheshpur (ST} }.—Maheshpur and Pakuria Police Stations in Pakaur sub-division.
DUMKA DISTRICT

7. Sikaripara (ST).—Sikaripara, Raneshwar and Kathikund Police Stations in
Dumka Sadar sub-division.

8. Nala.—Nala and Kundahit Police Stations in Jamtara sub-division,

9. Jamtara.—Jamtara Police Station (excluding G.Ps. Karmatanr, Sahajpur,
Pindart, Lakhanpur, Rataniya, Rampurbhitra and Kajra) and Narayanpur Police
Station in Jamtara sub-division,

10. Dumka (ST).—Dumka Town, Dumka Muffassil and Masalia Police Stations
in Dumka Sadar sub-division.

11, Jama (ST).—Jama and Ramgarh Police Stations in Dumka Sadar sub-division.

12. Jarmundi.—Jarmundi Police Station in Dumka Sadar sub-division; and
Sarawan Police Station in Deoghar sub-division

DEOGHAR DISTRICT

13, Madbupur.—Madhupur and Karon Police Stations and G.Ps, Kusmil,
Chanddih, Pathra and Basbariya in Jasidih Police Station in Deoghar sub-division,

14, Sarath.—Sarath and Palojori Police Stations in Deoghar sub-division; and
(0.85. Karmatanr, Shahajpur, Pindari, Lakhanpur, Rataniya, Rampurbhitra and Kajra
in Jamtara Police Station in Jamtara sub-division.

15. Deoghar (SC)—Deoghar town and Mohanpur Police Stations and Jasidih
Police Station (excluding GPs. Kusmnil, Chanddih, Pathra and Bashariya) in Deoghar sub-
division.

GODDA DISTRICT

16, Poreyahat.—Poreyahat Police Station and G.Ps, Burhikura, Dammajhilua,
Sandmara, Nonbatia, Makhni, Pathra and Punsiya in Godda Police Station in Godda
sub-division; and Saraiyahat Police Station in Dumka Sadar sub-division.

17. Godda.—Godda Police Station {excluding G.Ps. Burhikura, Dammajhitua,

Sandmara, Nonbatta, Makhni, Pathra and Punsiya) and Pathargama Police Station in
Godda sub-division.

18. Mahagama.—Mahayama and Meherma Police Stations in (00909 sub-division,
KODARMA DISTRICT
19, Kodarma,—Kodarma and Sargawan Polive Stations (i Kedtarine pub-division,
, HAZARIBAGH DISTRICT

20. Barkatha —Barkatha and Jainagar Police ope oy sl whrdivision; and
Ichak Police Stations in Kodarma sub-division, and ‘ in Hazaribagh
Sadar sub-division, é

71. Darbl—Barhi Police Sution In Manaibagh Bala Hubidivitlon; und Chauperan
Police Station in Kodarmasub-divislan,


E

Serial No. Name and extent of constituencies
—— eee

22, Barkagaon.—Bsrakgaon Police Station and G.Ps. Terpa, Patratu, Koto, Palani,
Hapuhus, Harijarpu Gegda, Deoria, Bargama, Pali, Salgo, Sanki, Jabo, Chaingara, Chikor,
Lapanga, Ghutua, Barkakana and Sidhwar. Kalan in Ramgarh Police Station in Hazaribagh
Sadar sub-division.

23. Ramgarh.— Ramgarh Police Station (excluding G.Ps. Terpa, Patratu, Koto,
Palani, Hapubua, Harikarpur, Gegda, Deoria, Bargama, Pali, Salgo, Sanki, Jabo, Chaingari,
Chikor, Lapanga, Ghutua, Barkakans and Sidhwar-Kalan) and Gola Police Station in
Hazaribagh Sadar sub-division.

24. Mandu.—Mandu and Bishungarh Police Stations in Hazaribagh Sadar sub-division.

25, Hazaribagh.—Hazaribagh Police Station in Hazaribagh Sadar sub-division,
CHATRA DISTRICT

26. Simaria (SC).—Simaria, Itkhori and Tandwa Police Stations in Chatra sub-division.

27. Chatra (SC) —Chatra, Pratappur and Hunterganj Police Stations in Chatra
sub-divison.

GIRIDIH DISTRICT
28. Dhanwar.—Dhanwar and Gawan Police Stations in Giridih Sadar sub-division.
29, Bagodar—Bugodar and Birni Police Stations in Giridih Sadar sub-division,
30. Jamua (SC).—Jamua and Deori Police Stations in Giridih Sadar sub-division.

31. Gandey.—Gandey and Bengabad Police Stations and G.Ps. Leda, Semaria,
Badgunda, Palmo, Sathibad, Senadoni, Dhanaidih, Guro, Jitpur, Telodih, Ranidih and
Karharbari in Giridih Mufassil Police Station in Giridih Sadar sub-division,

32. Giridib.—Giridih Town Police Station and Giridih Mufassil Police Station
(excliding 0.05. Leda, Semaria, Badgunda, Palmo, Sathibad Senadoni, Dhanaidih, Guro,
Jitpur, Telodih, Ranidih and Karharbari) and Pirtanr Police Station in Giridih Sadar sub-
division,

33. Dumwrii—Dummi Police Station in Giridih Sadar sub-division; and Nawadih Police
Station in Bermo sub-division.

BOKARO DISTRICT

34, Gomia,—Gomia Police Station and Petarbar Police Station (excluding G.Ps.
Champi, Rohar, Chando, Pichhri, Angwali and Chalkari) in Bermo sub-division.

35. Bermo,—Jaridih and Bermo Police Stations and G.Ps, Champi, Robar, Chando,
Pichhri, Angwali and Chalkari in Petarbar Police Station in Bermo sub-division.

36. Bokaro.—Chas Police Station (excluding G.Ps. Bijulia, Alkusa, Buribinor,
Khamarbendi, Dudhigajar, Kura Dabartupara, Jaitara, Pundru and Sardaha) in Baghmara
sub-division,

37. Chandankiyari (SC).—Chandankiyari Police Station and 0.75. Bijulia, Alkusa,
Buribinor, Khamarbendi, Dudhigajar, Kura, Dabartupara, Jaitara, Puadrau and Sardaha in
Chas Police Station in Baghmara sub-division.

DHANBAD DISTRICT

38. Sindri.—Sindni, Baliapur and Gobindpur Police Station in Dhanbad Sadar sub-
division.

39. Nirsa.—Nirsa and Chirkunda Police Stations in Dhanbad Sadar sub-division.



29

SeialNo. __Nameand exeat of Goustiuencies _"प"०प२7“7प70०"-"-.7<८ No. Name and exteat of constituencies

40. Dhanbad.—Dhanbad, Putki and Kenduadih Police Stations in Dhanbad Sackar
sub-division,

41. Jharia—Jharia and Jorapokhar Police Stations in Dhanbad Sadar sub-division,
42, Tundi.—Tundi Police Station in Dhanbad Sadar sub-division: Topehanchi Police

Station and 5.93. Dharkiro, Daludih, Rajganj, Bugdabs, Dhawachita, Nagri Kalin and
Ramkanalichandur in Katras Police Station in Baghmara sub-division

43. Baghmara.—Baghmara Police Station and Katras Police Station (excluding G.Ps.
Dharkiro, Daludih, Rajganj, Bagdaha, Dhawachita, Nagri Kalan and Ramkanalichandur) in
Baghmara sub-division; and Jogta Police Station in Dhanbad Sadar sub-division,

(EAST) SINGHBHUM DISTRICT
44. Baharagora—Bahsragora and Chakulia Police Stations in Dhalbhum sub-division,

45. Ghatsila (ST).—Ghatsila Police Station and Musabnai Police Station (excluding
G.Ps, Palasbani, Asta Koyali, Nunia, Kumarasol, Barakanjiya, Bomaro Bangoriya and
Darnudih) in Dhaibhum sub-division.

46, Potka (ST).—Potka Police Station, G.Ps, Palasbani, Asta Koyali, Nunia,
Kumarasol, Barakanjiya, Boraro Bangoriya and Damudih in Musabnai Police Station,
Bagbera town and (3.75, Karandih - Purihasa, Hargarghutu, Bagbera and village 1167-
Kitadih in Jugsalai Police Station in Dhalbhum sub-division.

47. Jugsalai (SC),—Jugsalai Police Station (excluding Bagbera town and G.Ps,
Karandih - Purihasa, Hargarghutu, Bagbera and village 1167-Kitadih) Golmuri and Patamda
Police Station in Dhalbhum sub-division,

48. Jamshedpur East.—Census wards 20 and 23 to 40 in Jamshedpur Notified Area
Committee in Dhalbhum sub-division.

49. Jamshedpur West.—Jamshedpur Notified Area Committee (excluding census
wards 20 and 23 to 40) in Dhalbhum sub-division.

(WEST) SINGHBHUM DISTRICT

50. Ichagarh.—Ichagarh, Chandil and Nimdih Police Stations in Seraikella sub-
division,

$1. Seraikella (ST).—Scraikella municipality and 0.75. Govindpur,
Pandra, Manik Bazar, Tangrani, Pathanmé@ra, Jordiha, Gurgudia
and Badakakda in Seraikella Police Station, Rajnagar Police Station (cxctuding village 98-
Dighi) and Adityspur Police Station in Seraiketla sub-division.
52. Chaibasa (ST).—Chaibasa Sadar and Jhinkpani Police Stations and Chaibasa
° Mufassit Police Station (excluding 0.85. Bhoya, Keadchalam, Domra-Parnia, Lota,
Thakuragutu, Dopai-Gamhariya, Sarda, Makamhatu, Khuntpani, Chiru and
Rajabasa) in Chaibasa Sadar sub-division.

53. Majhgaon (ST).—Majhgaon and Manjhari Police Stations in Chaibasa Sadar
sub-division.

54. Jaganathpur (ST).—Naomundi and Gua Police Stations and G,Ps, Kurtabera,
Urkiya, Makaramda, Thalkobad, (Part 1) and Chhotanagra (Part 1) in Manoharpur
Police Station in Chaibssa Sadar sub-division,

55. Manoharpur (ST).—Manoharpur Police Station {exoluding (0.10. Kurubera,
Urkiya, Makaramda, Thalkobad (Purt 1) and Chhotanagen (Part 1) and 0, Deralumin,
Jojoda, Serengds, Orenga, Jhilrua, Goilkera, Kuira, Kadamdiha, Dalaikela, Sonun
Jorapokhar, Porahat, Sogoisul, Gudri Jarakel, Asnntaliya, Dalki-Goblndpur, Bhalurangl,

em + 3 me -

ee


=

इक  Nameandextentofeonstimencies SS No. Name and extent of constituencies

Harimara, Tuniari Gajpur, Bandu, Poronger, Kolooda, Kulda, Bari, Lonjo, Bera Kayam,
Mamail, Piring, Komrora, Komrora-Dairyo, Dura-Jante and Banskata and Chakradharpur
Police Station in Chaibasa Sadar sub-division.

56, Chakradharpar (ST).—Chakradharpur Police Station (excluding G.Ps.
Beralumin, Jojoda, Serengda, Ovenga, Jhilrua, Goilkera, Kuira, Kadamdiha, Dalaikela,
Sonua-Jorapokhar, Porahat, Sogoisai, Gudri Jarakel, Asantaliya, Dalki-Gobindpur,
Bhalurangi, Harimara, Tunian Gajpur, Bandu, Poronger, Koloeda, Kulda, Bari, Lonjo, Bera
Kayam, Mamail, Piring, Komrora, Komrora-Dariyo, Dura-Jante and Banskata) in Chaibasa
Sadar subdivision,

57. Kharsawan (ST).—Kharsawan and Kuchai Police Stations and Scraikella Police
Station (excluding Seraikella municipality and G.Ps. Govindpur, Para, Manik Bazar, Tangrani,
Psthanmara, Jordiha Gurugudia and Badakakda) and village 98-Dighi in Rajnagar Police
Station in Seraikella sub-division; and G-Ps. Bhoya Keadchalam, Domra-Parnia, Lota,
‘Thakurgutu, Dopsi-Gamhariya, Sarda, Matkambatu-Khuntpani, Chiru and Rajebasa in
Chaibasa Mufassil Police Station in Chaibasa Sadar sub-division,

RANCHI DISTRICT

58. Tamar (ST)—Tamar, Erki and Bundu Police Stations in Khunti sub-divisions,

59, Torpa (ST}.—Torpa and Rania Police Stations and G.Ps. Gumru, Gobindpur,
Tilmi, Lapa, Jariagarh, Unikel and Hutub and Karma Police Station in Khunti-sub-division;
and Bano Police Station in Simdega sub-division,

60. Khunti (ST).—Khuati and Murhu Police Stations and Karra Police Station
(excluding 0.95. Gumru, Gobindpur, Tilmi, Lapa, Jariagarh, Urikel and Htub) in Khunti

sub-division.

61. Silli—Silli Police Station, G.Ps. Barwadag, Tati, 10008, Kashidih, Merha,
Ambajharia and Kontaioli and Angara Police Station in Ranchi Sadar sub-division; and

62. Khijri (ST)—Ormanjhi, Mamkum and Hatia Police Stations and Angara Police
Station (excluding G.Ps, Barwadag, Tati, Jona, Kashidih, Metha, Ambajharia and Kontatoli)
in Ranchi Sadar sub-division,

63. Ranchi —Ranchi municipality in Ranchi Kotwali Potice Station in Ranchi Sadar
sub-division.

64. Hatin —Jaganathpur, Ratu and Doranda Police Stations and Ranchi Kotwali Police
Station (excluding Ranchi mdnicipality) in Ranchi Sadar sub-division.

65. Kanke (SC).—Kanke, Ranchi Sadar, Burmu and Khelari Police Stations in Ranchi
Sadar sub-division.

66. Mandar (ST).— Bero, Mandar and Lapung Police Stations, in Ranchi Sadar sub-

division.

GUMLA DISTRICT
67. Sisai (ST) — Sisai, Kamdara and Basia Police Stations in Gumia sub-division.

68. Gumla (ST).— Gumla Municipality, 0.15. Hurhuria, Ghatapaon, Asani, Chandati,
Telgaon, Pugu, Bangaru, Karaundi, Dumardih and Murkunéa in Gumla Police Station and
Raidih, Chainpur and Dumni Police Stations in Gumia sub-division,

69, Bishunpur (ST).— Bishunpur and Ghaghra Police Stations and Gumila Police
Station (excluding Gumla municipality and G.Ps. Hurhuria, Ghatagaon, Asani, Chandali,
Telgaon, Pugu, Bangaru, Karzundi, Dumardih and Murkunda) in Gumle sub-division; and
Senha Police Station in Lohardaga sub-division.

70. Simdega (ST).— Simdega and Kurdeg Police Stations in Simdega sub-division;
and Palkot Police Station in Gumia sub-division.



3

ScialNo. Name and extent of consiimenciey जज "त+ज3य-२-२]_77्+न्‍ Name and extent of constituencies
71, Kolebira (ST).— Kolebira, Thethaitangar and Bolba Police Stations in Simdega
sub-division,
LOHARDAGA DISTRICT

72, Lobardaga (ST)— Lohardaga, Kuru end Kisko Police Stations in Lohardaga
sub-division.

PALAMAU DISTRICT

73. Manika (ST).— Latehar Police Station (excluding Latehar (N.A.C.} and G.Ps.
Pochra, Luti, Kaima, Kura, Bishunpur, Mungar, Nindir, Laharpur and Zalim),
Barwadih, Garoo and Mahuadanr Police Stations in Latehar sub-division.

74, Latehar (SC).— Latehar (N.A.C.), G.Ps. Pochra, Luti, Kaima, Kura, Bishunpur,
Mungar, Nindir, Laharpur and Zaiim in Latchar Police Station, Chandwa and Balumath
Police Station in Latehar sub-division.

75. Panki.—Panki, Lesliganj and Manatu Police Station in Palamu Sadar sub-division.

76. Daltonganj.—Daltonganj and Chainpur Police Station in Palamu Sadar sub-
division; and Bhandaria Police Station in Garhwa sub-division.

77. Bishrampur—Bishrampur Police Station in Palamu Sadar sub-division; and
Majhiaon Police Station in Garhwa sub-division.

78. Chhatarpur (SC)—Chhatarpur and Patan Police Station in Palamu Sadar sub-
division.
79. Hussaimabad.—Hussainabad and Hariharganj Police Station in Palamau Sadar
sub-division.
GARHWA DISTRICT

80. Garhwa.—Garhwa Police Station (excluding G.Ps. Jarhi Balekhar, Raro, Sonehara
and Dandai) and Ranka Police Station in Garhwa sub-division.

81. Bhawanathpur.—Bhawanathpur and Nagar Uptari Police Station and G-Ps. Jarhi,
Balekhar, Raro, Sonchara and Dandai in Garhwa Police Station in Garhwa sub-division.”



पा THIRD SCHEDULE
(See section 17)

SITTING MEMBERS WHO SHALL CONTINUE TO BE MEMBERS OF THE

BIHAR LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL TILL THEIR RESPECTIVE
PRESENT TERMS OF OFFICE

(i) Members representing any of the cleven Constituencies specified in item (1) of the
Third Schedule.

(ii) The following members elected by the members of the Bihar Legislative Assembly,

hamely;—

“1, Shit Sarfaraj Ahmed

2, Shri Saryu Rai

3, Sh Mahavir Lal Vishwakarma
4. Shri Bhutnath Soren

5. Shri Rajendranath Shabdev

6. Sat. Vibha Ranjan

7. Shei Badri Narayan Lal

8. Shri Praveen Singh”.



लाार्त-#---..ममम..39-1))])33.0#--म न मन

—

वा POUR THE SCHEDULE
(See section 18)

AMENDMENTS TO THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES
(BIHAR) ORDER, 1951

(1) In the Table, omit the entries relating to—

(0) Bhagalpur-cum-North Chhotanagpur (Graduates) Constituency,

(ij) South Chhotanagpur (Graduates) Constituency;

(iii) Bhagalpur-cum-North Chhotanagpur (Teachers) Constituency;

(iv) South Chhotanagpur (Teachers) Constituency;

(v) Santhal Parganas (Local Authorities) Constituency;

(vi) Hazaribagh (Local Authoeities) Constituency;

(vii) Giridih (Local Authorities) Constituency;

(vill) Ranchi (Local Authorities) Constituency;

(ix) Palamau (Local Authorities) Constituency;

(x) Dhanbad (Local Authorities) Constituency;

(xi) East Singhbhum-cum-West Singhbhum (Local Authorities) Constituency,
(2) In the Table, in column 2,—

(i) against “Kosi (Graduates) Constituency” in column 1, after the word
“khagaria”, insert the words “Bhagalpur Monghyr";

(ii) against “Kosi (Teachers) Constituency” in column 1, after the word
“Khagaria", insert the words “Bhagalpur Monghyr”.

33


F FIFTH SCHEDULE
(See section 23)
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 1950

In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, im the Schedule, —

(7 in Part Il relating to State of Bihar, in itern No. 5, the brackets and words “(excluding
North Chhotanagpur and South Chhotanagpur divisions and Santal Pargnas district)”, shall
be omitted;

Gi) after Part VI. Himachal Pradesh, the following shall be inserted, namely-—

“PART VIA—Jharkhand

1. Bantar
2, Baur
3. Bhogta
4, Bhuiya
5, Chamar, Mochi
6. Choupal
7, Dabajar
8, Dhobi
9, Dom, Dhangad
10, Dusadh, Dhari, Dharhi
11. Ghasi
12, Hataikhor
13, Hair, Mehtar, Bhangi
14, Kanjar
15, Kuraiar
16, Lalbegi
17. Musahar
18, Nat
19. Pan, Sawast
20. Pasi
21, Rajwar
22. Turi.”.

34



THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
(See section 24)
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950
In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950,— :
(1) in paragraph 2, for the figures “XXI", the figures “XXIT" shall be substituted:
(2) in the Schedule —

(A) in Part HI relating to State of Bihar, the item No, 6 and the caries
relating thereto, shall be omitted, and the item Nos. 7 to 30 shall be renumbered
as item Nos. 6 to 29;

(i) after Part XX1, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
i “Part XX — Jharkhand
1. Asur
i 2. Baiga
3, Banjara
4, Bathudi

A tS ee

eee So


E SEVENTH SCHEDULE
[See section 46(7)]
(Investments and Credits in certain funds)
1. State Provident Funds.
2. Trusts and Endowments.
3, Insurance and Pensions Punds.

4, Depreciation Reserve Funds — relating to Government Commercial
Departments and Undertakings.

5. Famine Relief Funds.
6, Investment Account.
7. Development Fund for Educational Purposes.

8. General Reserve Funds of Government Commercial Departments and
Undertakings,

9. Zamindari Abolition Funds.

10, Calamity Relief Fund Investment Account.

11. Revenue Deposits.

12. Security Deposits.

13. Civil Courts’ Deposits.

14. Criminal Courts’ Deposits.

15, Personal Deposits.

16. Trust Interest Funds.

17. Public Works Deposits.

18. Forest Deposits.

19. Deposits of Public Funds.

20, Other Departmental Deposits.

21. Deposits under various Central and State Acts,

22. Deposits for work done for Public bodies or peivate individuals.

23, Deposits of fees received by Government servants for works done for private
bodies.

24. Deposits in connection with Elections.

25. Mines Labour Welfare Deposits,

26. Deposits of Educational Institutions.

27. Unclaimed Deposits in the General Provident Fund

28. Unclaimed Deposits in other Provident Funds.

29, Deposits on account of cost price of Liquor, Ganja and Bhang.

30, District Funds,

31, Monicipal Punds.

32. Cantonment Funds.



Se +नमीाा कसम न»

—

7

33. Funds of Insurance Association,

34. Suute Transport Corporation Fund.

35, State Electricity Boards Working

36. State Housing Funds.

37. Panchayats Bodies Funds,

38. Education Funds

39. Medical and Charitable Funds.

40. Other Funds.

41. Subventions from Central Road Fund.
42. Miscellaneous Deposits.


हि EIGHTH SCHEDULE
(See section 53)

APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILITY IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS AND OTHER
RETIREMENT BENEFITS

1, Subject to the adjustments mentioned in paragraph 3, each of the successor State
shall in respect of pension and other retirement benefits sanctioned before the 2ppointed
date, pay from their respective treasuries.

2. Subject to the said adjustment, the liability in respect of pensions and other retirement
benefits of officers serving in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Bihar who
retire छा proceed on leave preparatory to retirement before the appointed day, bus whose
claims for pensions and other retirement benefits are outstanding immediately before that
day, shall be the liability of the State of Bihar.

3, Subject to the said adjustments, sanctions of such pension and other retirement
benefits by the competent authority may be given in those cases, in which their office falls
in the territory of Jharkhand State,

4. There shall be computed, in respect of the period commencing on the appointed
day and ending on the 31st day of March of that financial year and in respect of cach
subsequent financial year, the total payments made in all the successor States in respect of
pensions and other retirement benefits referred to in paragraphs | and 2. The total
representing the liability of the existing State. of Bihar in respect of pensions and other
retirement benefits shall be apportioned between the successor States in the ratio of number
of employees of each successor State and any successor State paying more than its due
share shall be reimbursed the excess amount by the successor State or State paying less.

5. The liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of pensions and other retirement
benefits granted before the appointed day and drawn in any area outside the territories of
the existing State shall be the liability of the State of Bihar paying subject to adjustments 10
be made in accordance with paragraph 3 as if such pensions and other retirement benefits
had been drawn in any treasury in the State of Bihar under puragraph 1

6. The liability in respect of the pensions and other retirement benefits of any officer
serving immediately before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing
State of Bihar and retiring on or after that day, shall be that of the successor Stale granting
him the pension and other retirement benefits, but the portion of the pension and other
retirement benefits attributable to the service of any such officer before the appointed day in
connection with the affairs of the existing State of Bihar shall be allocated between the
successor States in the population ratio and the Government granting the pension and other
retirement benefits shall be entitled to receive from each of the other successor States its
share of this liability

7. Any reference in this Schedule to a pension and other retiremeat benefits shall be
construed ps including a reference to the commuted value of the pension and other retirement
benefits.



THE NINTH SCHEDULE
[See section 65(/)]
LIST OF STATE OWNED CORPORATIONS/COMPANIES
1. Bihar State Industries Development Corporation.
2. Bihar State Leather Development Corporation,
3. Bihar State Electronics Development Corporation,
4. Bihar State Sugar Corporation Limited,
5. Bihar State Medicine and Chemical Development Corporation.
6, Bihar State Fruit and Vegetables Development Corsporation.
7. Bihar State Dairy Corporation Limited,
8. Bihar State Agro Industries Corporation,
9, Bihar State Textiles Corporation Limited,
10, Bihar State Small Industries Corporation Limited,
11. Bihar State Handioom and Handicrafts Corporation,
12. Bihar State Khadi Gramadyog Board,
| 13. Bikar State Agriculture Marketing Board.

14, Bihar State Forest Development Corporation Limited.
15. Bihar State Export Development Corporation Limited,
16. Bihar State Seeds Corporation Limited.
17. Bihar State Fish Seeds Development Corporation Limited,
18. Bihar State Warehousing Corporation,
19. Bihar State Tourism Development Corporation Limited.
20, Bihar State Road Transport ‘Corporation.
21. Bihar State Pood and Civil Supplies Corporation.
22. Bihar State Text Book Publishing Corporation Limited.
23. Bihar State Construction Corporation Limited.
24. Bihar State Mineral Development Corporation Limited.
25, Bihar State Housing Board.
26. Bihar State Bridge Construction Corporation Limited.
27. Bihar Siate Police Building Construction Corporation Limited,
28. Bihar State Electricity Board.
29. Bihar Stace Hydroelectric Power Corporation Limited. x4
30. Bihar State Hill Area and irrigation Developrnent Limited,
31. Patna Industrial Area Development Authority.
32. Bokaro Indusirial Area Development Authority,
33, Ranchi Industrial Area Development Authority.
34, Adityapur Industrial Area Development Authority,
35. North Bihar Industrial Area Development Authority.
36, Darbhanga Industrial Area Development Authority,
37, Patna Area Developmeat Authority.
38, Ranchi Area Development Authority.

39

es


ie

40,

4)
42,
43
a4
45,

49,

50,

Ss!

52.

33
54
55.
56.

40

Muzaffarpur Area Development Authority,
Darbhanga Area Development Authority.
Gaya Area Development Authority

Bihar State Pollution Control Board.

Bihar State Water and Sewage Disposal Board.
Bihar State Financial Corporation

. Bihar State Credit and Investment Corporation Limited,
46.
47.
48.

Bihar State Panchayati Raj Finance Development Corporation Limited
Bihar State Minorities Finance Corporation Limited.

Bihar State Film Development and Finance Corporation Limited
Electricity Corporation Limited,

Mines Area Development Authority, Dhanbad.

Hazaribagh Mines Board,

Bhagalpur Regional Development Authority, Bhagalpur,

. Women’s Development Corporation,

Backward Classes Development Corporation.
Scheduled Castes Development Corporation,
Scheduled Tribes Development Corporation.



THE TENTH SCHEDULE
(See section 70)
CONTINUANCE OF FACILITIES IN CERTAIN STATE INSTITUTIONS
List of Training Institution/Centres
1. Sri Krishna Institute of Public Administration.
2. Police Training College,
3. Bihar Institute of Rurai Development,
. Village Handicrafts Training Centre,
. Tribal Village Handicraft ‘Training Centres.
. Training-cum-Production Centres for Toys, Ceramic Goods, Embroidery and
Applique, Hommade Goods and Catting and ‘Tailoring.
. Ideal Woodwork Workshopsilron Workshops,
- Indo Danish Tool Room and Training Cenice, Jamshedpur,
. All Government Industrial 745 810855
~ Affiliated with N.C.V.T.
- Un-affiliated.
10. All Private Industriat Institutes
~ Affiliated with 1.० ए1:
~ Un-affiltated.
11. BLL, Sindri,
12. R.LT, Jamshedpur.
13, Government Polytechnic, Dhanbad.
14. Government Polytechnic, Ranchi.
15. Government Polytechnic, Adityapur,
16. Government Polytechnic, Khutri.
17. Government Polytechnic, Lathehar.
18. Government Women's Polytechnic, Jamshedpur.
19. Goversment Women’s Polytechnic, Ranchi,
20, Government Women’s Polytechnic, Bokaro,
21. Mines Instinwtion, Dhanbad.
22. Mines Institution, Bagha.
23. Mines Institution, Koderma.
24. Government Polytechnic, Duma.
25, Government Women’s Industrial School, Ranchi.
26. Government Women’s Industrial School, Hazaribagh,
27, Government Women's industria! School, Daltonganj.
28. Sainik School, Tilalya.
29. Netarhat School.
30. Indira Gandhi Girls School, Hazaribagh.

Dus

on

at


A
BILL

to provide for the reorganisation of the existing Suxe of Bihar and for matters
connected therewith,

{As passed hy the Houses of Parliament)

MGIP(PLUIMANG-—a06s, S—28,06-2009,