1
THE HERITAGE CITIES AND SITES DEVELOPMENT BILL, 2016
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the development of heritage cities and sites in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Heritage Cities and Sites Development Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  97 of  2016
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means a State Government or a Union territory
Administration, as the case may be;
(b) "heritage city or heritage site" means a city or site which has been, or may be,
from time to time, declared by the United Nations Organisation or any other international
organisation or the Central Government as the city or site having special cultural or
physical significance;
(c) "Fund" means the Heritage Cities and Sites Development Fund constituted
under section 3; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Heritage
Cities and Sites Development Fund for the development of heritage cities and sites in the
country.
4. The Fund shall be utilised for—
(i) development of heritage cities and sites;
(ii) creating necessary infrastructure for promotion and development of tourism
in heritage cities and sites; and
(iii) providing necessary transport facilities to reach the heritage cities and
sites.
5. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a committee to be known as Heritage
Cities and Sites Development Committee, to be headed by a Chairperson and consisting of
such number of members, as may be prescribed, to administer the Fund.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity if anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
5
10
Heritage
Cities and
Sites
Development
Fund.
Utilization of
fund.
Constitution
of Heritage
cities and sites
development
committee.
Power to
make rules.
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our country is a very ancient country and is a conservation of innumerable historical
cities and sites of heritage value. A majority of these cities and sites are in a dilapidated
condition and requires urgent refurbishment. Many of these cities have been declared as
heritage cities by United Nations Organisation but they do not have any development worth
naming. In fact, from time to time Central Government also declares many cities and sites as
heritage cities and sites but their declaration are only in paper and no real development has
been noticed as such. If these cities are developed it would not only bring considerable
revenue by way of tourism but also can inculcate the importance of these sites in the minds
of our youth. Needless to say it would create ample employment opportunities for our youth.
Therefore, it is proposed to set up a fund for development of heritage cities and sites in the
country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIRANG APPA BARNE
March  9, 2016.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of a fund for the development
of heritage cities and sites. Clause 6 provides for the constitution of the Heritage Cities and
Sites Development Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees ten thousand crore would involve from Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the development of heritage cities and sites in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5352LS(S3)—25.04.2016.