Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No.  97 of  2024
THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA (ESTABLISHMENT OF
A PERMANENT BENCH AT PALAKKAD) 
BILL, 2024
By
Sඁඋං V . K. Sඋൾൾ඄ൺඇൽൺඇ, M.P.
A
BILL
 to provide for the establishment of a Permanent Bench of the 
High Court of Kerala at Palakkad.
 
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the seventy-fifth year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the High Court of Kerala (Establishment of a Permanent  
Bench at Palakkad) Act, 2024.
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and commencement.

   2. There shall be established a Permanent Bench of the High Court of  Kerala at Palakkad 
and such Judges of the High Court of Kerala, being not less than five in number, as the 
Chief Justice of that High Court  may, from time to time nominate, shall sit at Palakkad in 
order to  exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in that High Court at 
Ernakulam in respect of cases arising in the district of Palakkad and other districts falling 
in the Malabar region of Kerala and such other territories within that State as the President 
may by notification specify.   
2
Establishment of a 
Permanent Bench 
of High Court of 
Kerala at Palakkad.
5

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The principal seat of the Kerala High Court is at Ernakulam, which is situated at a 
distance of nearly 150 kilometres from Palakkad and more distance from other districts 
falling in the Malabar region of Kerala to Ernakulam.
 Palakkad is the second most industrial district in the State of Kerala, having industrial 
units of both Central and State Governments, apart from private sector units. Palakkad is also 
the divisional headquarter of Southern Railways. In addition to the above, the density of the 
population in the district is also quite high as also in the neighbouring districts. Therefore, 
the litigations are bound to be quite high here. However, since the present seat of the 
High Court of Kerala is far away from here, the litigants are not able to pursue their legal 
cases as promptly as they should be. Even if the litigants manage to reach the present 
High Court at Ernakulam, after sparing their valuable time and money, it is not sure that the 
case will be heard on that day, the case is either postponed for many reasons or the sitting 
is cancelled in the absence of judges, and this way the litigations take years to come to a 
conclusion and this creates a question mark on our judicial system. Moreover, it is the duty 
of a State to make judicial system at the doorstep to provide justice to its citizens and to erase 
the saying that justice delayed is justice denied.
 It will be, therefore, appropriate if a Bench of the High Court is established at 
Palakkad in the State of Kerala. 
 Hence this Bill.
       Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                         V . K. SREEKANDAN 
   July 9, 2024.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to provide for the establishment of a Permanent Bench of the 
High Court of Kerala at Palakkad.
————
(Shri V . K. Sreekandan, M.P .)