Bill No. 97 of 2019
THE YOUTH SKILL TRAINING BILL, 2019
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to impart skill training to every youth to make them more employable; to provide
an alternative path for those pursuing higher education as part of
corporate social responsibility and to expand education
opportunities for the young and socially disadvantaged
section and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1 . (1) This Act may be called the Youth Skill Training Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "internship and training module" means a position of a student or trainee
who works in an organization, in order to gain work experience or satisfy requirements
for a qualification;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "youth" means a person who has attained the age of eighteen years but
below the age of thirty years.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up
a separate unit to provide skill training opportunities as alternatives to higher education,
primarily for the economically and/or socially disadvantaged persons.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute for the
funding of the unit set up under sub-section (1) in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The appropriate Government shall encourage private firms to set up enterprise-
based training institutes as a part of Corporate Social Responsibility for Imparting high
quality job oriented training to youth and ensures opportunities for employment to youth on
completion of training.
(4) The appropriate Government shall provide necessary training options to employers
and trainers of Public and Private enterprise to ensure expertise and employability of
predefined number of fresh trainees.
4. The Skill Training unit set up under section 3 shall,—
(a) provide facilities for all trainers and employers to ensure skill training of the
fresh candidates;
(b) educate trainees and staff in regard to use and uptodate working knowledge
of products, services or features of technology;
(c) contribute towards modernizing or upgrading the existing training
establishments in order to impart new skills and introduce new conceptual abilities for
trainees; and
(d) ensure proper utilization of local materials and skills of the trainee, using the
acquired knowledge and polishing the skills efficiently to ensure optimum exposure
for growth.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall, on the completion of training, ensure job
availability to the skilled persons within the firm where such persons have undergone training
or internship.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1) the appropriate Government shall—
(a) organise job fairs in each State;
(b) introduce internship and training modules in accordance with the policies of
private enterprises; and
(c) conduct assessment after regular periods of trainee's employment.
6. The appropriate Government shall reserve—
(a) twenty per cent. of seats for these trainees in each public and private enterprise
whenever there is a vacancy for fresh candidates; and
(b) five per cent. of the jobs under the State for candidates trained by the skill
training unit.
7. The appropriate Government shall—
(i) make skill building workshops a compulsory part of higher education to
impart basic skill training to students and refine their talents;
Appropriate
Government
to set up skill
training unit.
Responsibility
of skill
training units.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure job
availability to
skilled
individual.
Reservation
in favour of
fresh trainees.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
compulsory
skill building
workshops in
higher
education.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(ii) provide options for skill development to the students and enable them to
learn any one of the particular set of skills out of available options.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to skill development
and training, or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
9. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, Parliament agrees in making any modification in the rule or Parliament
agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifications
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is the State's responsibility to ensure that efforts at skill development meet multiple
objectives. Skilling the youth will help reduce poverty, provide a second chance for dropouts,
and serve as a reservoir to keep youth out of the streets and ensure dignified life and
livelihood for the aspiring youngsters that make more than half of India's population. These
multiple objectives may be shaped coherently and strategically to fight unemployment,
underemployment and other social and economic evils that the youth faces today.
Skill development can no more be looked as an inferior alternative, it's time to motivate
the youth and channelize their energies in the right direction by helping them realize and
refine their skills and talents in the most efficient and productive ways, nationally and
globally. Employability of skilled youth shall be our priority in today's times, the high dropout
rate has created a vacuum and is required to be dealt with immediately by providing the
youth with quick access to opportunities for skill development.
The State shall uphold its social responsibility by providing skill-training opportunities
that are alternatives to higher education, primarily for economically and/or socially
disadvantaged, other than only strengthening the industrial skill base. Since there is very
little enterprise-based training in the formal sector of the economy and only seventeen
per cent. of manufacturing firms in India provide any training for employees, it will be a
remarkable step from the State to ensure the participation on both public and private enterprises
in ensuring the employability of youth. By having a customized training program and portal
under the State, the employers can directly participate in bringing about this much needed
social change.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
June 6, 2019.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of skill units by the appropriate Government
for imparting skill training to youth. Clause 4 provides for training facilities for employers.
Clause 5 provides for organising job fairs, modules, and assessment sessions. Clause 6
provides for reservation of jobs in favour of persons who have undergone skill development
programme in both public and private enterprises. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one
thousand crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  impart skill training to every youth to make them more employable; to provide an
alternative path for those pursuing higher education as part of corporate social
responsibility and to expand education opportunities for the young
and socially disadvantaged section and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—497LS(S3)—20-06-2019.