As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
/, , 
'" ott ,~~ 
',> 
l ' "I, 'J'IlEI OOD AL" BruI;;! r 198t' ' • 
___ !.~ .)I,~ 
,f. 
CLAUSES 
, \i' .. ~ t" 
1. Short title and commencement . •. ~ ~. 1 
2. Definitions. . " ' 
MACHINERY POR INQUlllIES 
3. Establishment of Lokpal. 
4. Members to be ineligible to hold other offices. 
5. Term of office and other conditions of service of Members. 
6. Removal of a Member. 
7. Staff of Lokpal. 
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE IN RESPECT OF INQUDUES 
8. Jurisdiction, of Lokpal. 
9. Matters not subject to jurisdiction of Lokpal. 
10. Complaints. 
11. Preliminary scrutiny of complaints by Lokpal. 
12. Procedure in respect of inquiries. 
13. Power of Lokpal to issue, in ce.rtain circumstances, directions tor 
deferring or suspending investigation into an offence. 
14. Evidence. 
15. Search and seizure. 
16. Reports. 
MISCELLANBOUS 
17. Expenditure on Members to be charged on the Consolidated Fund 
of India. ' 
18. Secrecy of information. 
19. Intentional insult, or interruption to, or bringing into dfsre.. 
pute, Lokpal. 
20. Power of Lokpal to try certain offences summarily. 
21. Disclosure of information and publication of false informatioa 
in respect of complaints and proceedings under this Act. 
22. Action in case of false complaints. 
23. Bar of prosecution on allegations not proved or not elubstant.iated. 

'j" (ii) 
Cuusu 
-....~2*. :~li'?lt>n of Act 2 of 1974. 
25. Conferment of additional functions on Lokpal. 
26. Disposal of deposit. I 
27. Compensation or rewardt or botbi. payable in certain cues to com-
plainant. 
28~ Protec::tion of action taken in good faith. 
29. Power> to delegate. 
30. Power to make rules. 
31. Removal of doubts. 
32. Savings. 
38. Consequential amendment of Act 60 of 1952. 
THE SCHEDULE . 
. ; 

THE LOKPAL BILL, 1989 
A "I 
71 
BILL 
to prooide 1M the establish,me71t of the inmtution of 'Lokpal! to'~ iftQui~ 
into allegations of comLption aguimt public functiOnariu.!mel ;fM-" 
m4tters connected thereWith. ".~. I if) . (i • 
• , J .. :' 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Yekr ()f· the~1b!" 
of India as follows: - . 
t, I. \; 
PHEI..IMINARY 
.' I 
, ' .1 . f \' ' 
l. (1) This Act may be called the Lokpal Act, 1989. 
S (2) It shall come ~to force on such date as .the C~ntral povem-
menf may,' by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoJnt:' . 
10 
( :1 
Z. ·In· this Ad, unless the context otherwise requiNII,-
(a) "chairman" means the Chairman of the Lokp81; 
(b) "compete.ut,auijlority", ;in relation to- '!' ' .. 
(i) the Prime Minister, means the HOUle of the PeoJ)l~1 
ShOrt 
title, 
and eom-
meace· 
ment, 
Defini-
tions. 

Dltab-
Usbment 
Of LolL. 
pal. 
Members 
to ibe 
ineligible 
to hold 
other 
of&cel. 
!, 
I' 
2 
(ii) a public functionary, other than the Prime Minister, 
means the Prime Minister; 
(c) "complaint" means a complaint alleging that a public 
functionary has committed any offence punishable under the Pre-
vention of Corruption Act, 1988; 5 49 of 1988 
(d) "Lokpal" means the institution established under section 3; 
(e) uM.ember" means a M.ember of the Lokpa} and includes 
the Chairman of the Lokpalj 
(1) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; I ; 
(g) "public functionary" means a person wpo holds, or has held. 
the oftlce of the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister, 
Minister of State or Deputy Minister, of th~ Union. 
MACHINERY FOR lNQUIRII'S 
10 
3. (1) As from the commencement of this Act, there shall be. establi- 15 
shed. for the purpose of making enquiries in respect of complaints under 
this Act, an institution to be called the "LokpaP. 
(2) The Lokpal shall c",si.st of a Chairman and two other Members. 
(3) The President shall, after consultation with the Chief Justice 
of India, appoint, by warrant under his hand and seal, persons who are 20 
0~~1Wv~ .~ ~Y~ of the Supreme Court as the Chairman and Members, 
aL.lMl4aii "."".. ' 
r , " f 
(4) Every Member 'ahall, before entering upon his offi.ce, make and 
subSCribe before the President, or a person appointed in that behalf by 
the Presicient, an oath or affirmation in the form set out in the Schedule. 25 
, L.' 
T.~r:4i~'DfHe. '~. (,sP~ ~~,be.!.a. , .. ~lQ..be. f fJf.,Par~~t '~.' a.,Me~~r of 
~,.Le~~'~iAAN"S~'r~~~ IJR,~,ho14~x om~~pt'lr~t, or 
profit (other than his office as Member), oribe collDecu.d with 8D¥~~~ti­
cal party) or carry on any business, or practiSe any profession and 
~~y~'betm"e:~e!enterllupqn his o1Rce, a ~ber, .luUl.~ 30 
(4) if he is a MeJIlber of Parliament or of the Leiislature ot 
any State, resign 'S.tch memb~~hi:p;, 01:1 
.' • of ~. I _ ~ 
~~)o:f h'~u~fl",1I1Y.~j~e ,pf ~t or . profit, ~sif'ftr,tr9~ sllCh 
ll'I')V' '\c)' Tt~t}~"~Onn~~,W1th.~~Y '~litlc~1;,par~'('s~~~thiS~f!r 35 
nection with It; 'at" " '. , 
(d) if he is carrYing on any business, sever his connection 
(short of .. ,4iW ..... )attpaeIt :.f.:~) with the eoiIdMt .and 
lBanagem~~T~J~~i«JJ :.", :(",,, ;;1:, \ 
(e) if he is pra~Jey' profeiiHcm:'~tcir~actl .. such 40 
~'I''')''''''! ,I; .1 

s 
5. (1) 'Every: Member shall bald office for a term of awyeanfrom.tt:.. Term c4J . 
date on whi<lh Jh~,enteB'Upon his. ofI4e~ . office aDel, •• ; 
other COD-
ditiolll Provided that he may- of aervice 
() b the D- • of Mem-a y writing under his hand adQr8ll8d .. to. ... __ .." "n. 
resign his oftice j 
(b) be removed from his office in the manner provided in! 
section 6. 
(2) On c~ing to hold office, a Member shall be ineligible for fur· 
ther emplayment ,to . any om.ze of proM under ·the GCMtrBIDIent· of India 
l' 10 or, tAe,Goverp~nt Qf aS~e. 
::; 
15 
20 
2S 
(3) The salary, allow .. ees' and other cOIlditions of service of-
(i) the Chairman shall be the same as those of the Chief Justice 
of, 11IIIIIiII;., ,! ! 
(ii) other Members sball be the same as those of the Jud.re 'of' 
the Supl'eZDe -C-oult: 
Provided. that if a Member is, at the time of his aptOintmen*, in 
receipt of a pension (other than a disability or wound peasiOd.) ill nil-
pect of any'prmolls'semce under the Govemm.ellt,Ac;f-'IIMIIa.r,....,.,.· ; 
the Government of a State, his salary in respect of lIel'Vice as a Mem""";' 
be reduced-
(a) by tlae-,-nOllDt of that peoaion; aad 
(b) if he has, befere' -such' Qpointaeat, recehecl,l _ .. o£~" . 
portMaJof._the 'penMoa,JIae<-to, him. Jnl ··nspeet·ofl ~ f-pr ........... 
vice, the commuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion 
of the pension: ; 
Provided further that the salary, allowances and pension payable to. 
and other conditions of service of, a Member shall not be varied to his 
disadvataae"aitel' his 'appointment. 
6. (1) A Member shall not be removed.~;his,oftlOIt._ •• jan I,Removal 
orde.r of the President passed after an address by each House of ParHa- of. 
30 ment'18UpDOried. ,byi a majority of1he total mambenhtpti_,~",lIo_ Member. 
and .by. ,a DWljorit,yof.no.t lese than,two-thirda of,. the M.embel-s, of . tbat-
House present and voting has been presented to the President in the 
same session for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour 
35 
or incapacity., 
(2) The proeedure for thepresentattoft of 'an address and for the 
investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or. incapacity of a Member 
under sub4eetion (1) shall be as provided 'in the Judges (Inqutrr) 
Act,. 1918, in:)relatiOlt. to I :the ,removal of. JUdgeand ft accordingly. "the.;. 
51 of 1968. provJ,ai~ of., that. AI:t . sh~; subjeet, to neclelHry modificatioas. apply , 
40 in relation to the removal of a Member as they apply in relation to . 
the removal of a Judge. 

staff of 
LokpaJ.. 
Jurisdic-
tion .f 
LoItpal. 
.. 
1. (1) The ~al shall, for the purpose of usiItID, it in the 
discharge of its functions (incladin, verifieation and i'nquiriea in res--
pect of complaints) under this Act, appoint a Secretary and such other 
officers and employees as the President may, in consultation with the 
LokpaI,determiDe from time to time. S 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the 
Lokpal may, for the purpose of dealin, with any complaints or 8D)' 
classes lof eomplaill~s, secure-
(i) the services of any oftlcer or employees 0l'I investiptiDg 
agency of the Central Government or a State Govemment with 10 
the CCJIIl'CUITeIlCt: of that Government; _ 
(ii) the services of any other perIOn or agency. 
(3) The tenns and! conditions of service of the officers and employees 
referred to in sub-section (1) and of the officers, employees, apncies 
and persons referred to in s.-b-secticm (2) (inc1udin'8uch apecia)i COll- IS 
dltions as may be considered necessary for enabling them to act with-
out fear in the cJ.ise!har,e of their functions) shall be su.ch as the 'Presi-
dent IDBY, in eQDlJUltatioll with the Lokpal, determine from time to 
time. 
(4) In the discharge of their functions under this Act, the oftlcers 20 
and employees referred to in sub-section (1) and the ofticers, employees, 
agencies and persons referred to in sub-section (2) shall be subject to 
the exclUl!llve 'adminiStrative control and direction of the Lokpal. 
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE IN RESPECT OF INQUIRIES 
8. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Lokpal may 
2~ 
inquire into any matter involved in, or arising from, or connected with, 
any allegation made in a complaint. 
(2) The Lokpal may inquire into any act o,r conduct of .any person 
other than a }>ublic functionary in so far as it conSiders 1t necessary 80 
to do for the purpose of its inquiry into any such allegation: 
Provided that the Lokpal shall give such person a reasonable op~ 
tunity of being heard and to produce evidence in his defence. 
(3) No matter in respect of which a complaint may be made under 
this Act shall be referred for inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry 
30 
Act, 1952, except on the recommendation, or with the concurrence, of the 3S 60 of 195:z. 
[Alkpal. 

I" \ 
60 of 1952. 
1 of 1906. 
5 
9. (1) The Lokpal shall not inquire into any matter concerning any 
person if any Member has any bias in respect of such matter or person 
and if any dispute arises in this behalf, the President shall, on an appli-
cation made by the party aggrieved, obtain, in such manner as may be 
5 prescribel, the opinion of the Chief Justice of India and decide the dis-
pute in conformity with such opinion. 
(2) The Lokpal shall not inquire into any matter which ha'S been re-
ferred for inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, on itt 
recommendation or with its prior concurrence. 
10(3) The Lokpal shall not inquire into any complaint if the complaint 
is made after the expiry of five years from the date on which the offence 
mentioned in such complaint is alleged to have been committed. 
10. (1) Any person other than a public servant may make a complaint 
under this Act to the Lokpal. 
15 Explanation.-For the purpose of this sub-section, "public servant" 
20 
means--
(a) any person who is a member of a Defence service or of a 
civil service of the Union or a State or of an all-India service OF holds 
any post connected with Defepce or any civil post under the Union 
or a State; 
(b) any person in the service or pay of a local authority, 8 cor-
pOration established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act 
or a Government company as deftr,ed in section 617 of the Companies 
Act, 1956. 
25(2) The complaint shall be in the prescribed form and shall set forth 
particulars of the offence alle~ed and shall be· aecompanied by an aftl-
davit in support of such particulars and a certificate in the pnasc:rtbed 
form in respect of the deposit under sub-section (3) or, if the complainant 
is unable to make the deposit. an appli.cation for exemption from the ra-
30 quirement as to such deposit. ' 
(.1) The complainant shall deposit in such manner and with such 
authority or agency as may be prescribed a sum of one ~ousand rupees 
to be available for disposal under section 26: . 
Provided that the Lokpal may. for sufficient cause to be recorded in 
3S writing. exempt a complainant from the requirement under tRis sub-
section. 
(4) Notwithstarrdinp: anvthinE! contaitled in 'the fore~oing 8'Dti-sections, 
I1llY letter written to the Lokpal or. as the case may be; the appropriate 
authorit:v by a person in anv jail or other place of custody or in any 
40 asylum or othe,. place for insane persons mav, if,the Lokpal or, as the 
case may be. the appropriate authority is !¥ltisfled that it is necessary 
so to do, be treated as a complaint made in aceorda!,)ctt with the prmsions 
of this lIection, 
Matter. 
not 1Ub-
ject to 
jurisdic-
tiOn of 
LQkpal. 

Prelim!-
aary 
aerutiDy 
of com-
pldltl 
ibf 
4JOJipal. 
6 
" . (.5)-NotwiU.tuding, ,anything eOBtatned in any other l8Ilac:tment, it 
.ahaU be the duty of a· police officer or other person in 'charge of. an~ jail 
-ol"ot8erplace"'of,'cudodyor of any asylum or otherplaee for insane per-
eons to forward. ·witbOut'Ope.rlIig.any letter addressed to the Lokpal or S 
the -.ppropriate" authority by . a " person 'imprisoned . or"' detained in such 
jail, place of custody. asylum or other place,to the Lokpalor 'i:he appro-
priate authority without delay . 
.Ea:planation.-For the purposes of this section, "appropriate authority" 
means any of the authorities which the Lokpal may. by general,or special 10 
order, in writing, determine to be the appropriate authority. 
11. (1) If the Lokpal is satisfied, after considering a complaint and 
after, making such verification as -it deems :a.ppropriate,-
(CJ) that the complaint is not made within the period of five years 
specified in sub-section (3) of section 9; or 
(b) that it cannot make an inquiry in respect of the complaint 15 
by reason of. the :provisions of sub-section (1) or su~ion (2) of 
section 9 or any other provision of this Act; or 
(c) that the complaint is frivolous or vexatious or is not made 
in gdM faith; or : I 
20 
'Cd) that there are no suftlcient grounds for inquiring into the 
complaint, 
., the "bJiqMl·shaH disMiss Ute 'cOftlplablt after recording its reasons there-
... Ikld 'cmnmUl'lttatetb~ Banie to the complainant and to the competent 
,.~ty. I 
25 
(2) The procedure for verification in respect of a complaint under 
,')tsatJ..ieettoa "(1) 1H1D iJe 'Well'8! the Lokpal 'deems IIPtw'oprlate in the 
',. etccmhBtaaeetlr(Jf tke·-ease'tbd m particular, the LdkPal may, if it deems 
• r tt·"JIl!!I:.at'y so· t(hto,~al1 fO!- t'he comments of the public functionary 
-,~"~ mueel ned. 
Procedure 
In 'respect 
of in-
qulritl. 
30 
12. (1) If, after the consideration and v-erification under section 11, 
in respect of a complaint, the Lokpal proposes to conduct any inquiry, it---< 
(4) may make such orders as to, the safe custody of documents 
relevant to the inquiry as it deems fit; I ! 35 
'(b) shall, at such time as it considers appropriate, fOlWard a 
eopy· of the eomplaint to the. public functionary concerned and afford 
him an opportunity to represent his case. 
'(2) J!M!lty sUch inqUiry slianbe conducted-in CUTrWaby the Chair-
:~m.Jl anC!'th~ MeWlbers 8lttlrig jointly. 40 
(8) Save alf afOl'eilaid, the procedure for conductiitg any such inquiry 
" ·llatDbe such 81" the Lokpal considers appropriate in the circumstancea 
·et'the eu'e. - . . 

CORRI~-;ENDA 
to 
'liIE LOKl? A ~ BILL, 1?89 
L-':&" qe/As in tt-Qducer; in Ip k Sa1ila 7 
1 . Page 2, line 111 ,-
iOI' "enquiries" read "inquiries" 
2. Page 2, line 29,-
f J r ''p ar ty)" re ad lip ar ty, " 
3. Page 11-1 line 9,-
for "employees" reaq ''employee'' 
4. Pa:;e 13, line 9,-
, .for 'he It read "i t" 
5. page 17, line 8,-
for ''po s i tion " read ''po s1 tio n s " 
(; . Par:e 17, line 2') c.,-
fQr "en () uire n rea:!. Itinquire" 
7. Page 17, line 3 fro m be t to ffi, -
fQr "specific rl read "specified" 
8. Pa,ge 18, line J 1 ,-
for I1con~nizance II ~g.c1. "co !7niZaIlce It 
9. page 18, lines 14 and 15, -
omit 'Y-,-sub- clause '1) J " 
10. page 19 ~ line 18,-
Qmit "InJd ified " 
11. page 19, lmel1 fro'!, bottom,-
for "10k Satlla" read ''House of the people" 
12. page 20; line 14,-
for "serv!res" read "services It 
13. page 21, line 2,-
f:J f _ "Centrf'l ('lOvern:Jent" read "president rt 
NEil DELHI; 
.J~e CjMb~r 27, 19 e, 
.' 
, -. 

10119'14. 
201 197". 
, of 1908. 
.. , ')f 1860. 
's 
7 
13. (1) Where the Lokpal is satisfied-
(4) thnt in.vestigation by any police officer U'it'der the Code of 
CriininalProcedure, 19'i'3, into any oftenee tat ~~ of Which a 
~ompl"lIt is made or into any matters eOnnee4ied therewith may 
preJudicially affect theeonduct of inquiry 1D\~ this Act witb res-
pect to such 'Complaint; ami 
(b) that having regard to all the circumstances of the case it 
would be proper to defer s1.1Ch in'ftstigation pending' the completion 
of such inquiry, 
J'() it may, by order in writing andlfor reasons to be recorded therein, direct 
that till the completion of such inquiry or for sl.idl .shorter period as 
may be specified in the order, any such investigation shall be deferred 
~, ._ 'ibe case may be, shall be suspended: 1 
, Provided that no such direction shall app.ty with respect to an~ 
15 investigation required to be made in pursuance of an order of any court. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything cOJiltained in the Cede of O'y;njnal 
Pl'ocedure, 1973, in computing, for theJl'll'poses of ,Chapter XXXVI of 
that Code, the period of limitation for taking ,~e ot. aAy~nce, 
being an offence the investigation in respect of which ha!!! been deferred 
10 or ~d. by reason of an order tmder tm'b-sectton (1), the date on 
which ·1NJIil order was made, the-period during·1Irirld1 the inftlltiption 
remained deferred or, as the case may be, suspended by reason of the 
"e:r' ami the date on which the order cenedto 'have- ~t, shalt 'tie 
.. clmted. :'~i~ 
IS 14. (1) Subject to the provisions of thris section, for the p~e 'of 
any inquiry (including the verification under section 11), ~e Lo~l-
(a) may require any public servant or any o'tfler person who; 
hi its opinion is able to furnish information fir' produee 't:tbet1n'rewtts 
relevant to such inquiry, to furnishal\y sUm information o~ prCJduee 
.ftld1 document; I j 
(b) shall have all the powers of a civil court while trying a 
suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, liMMl, in T8speret of.1he ·fOllow-
ing matters, namely:""': I 
(i) summoning and enforcing the atMildalllee of any person 
and examining him on oath; 
(ii) requiring the discovery and produGtiQn of any ctocmment, 
(iii) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(tv) requisitioning any public reeord or c~y thereof from 
any court or oft\ce; , 
{v) issuing commissions for the e'Xamiflation of witnesses or 
documents; and 
(m) such other matters as may be prege~. 
(2)' A proceeding before the Lokpal shan :be deemed to be a ju'dlt:fal 
proceeding within the meaning of !Jection 193 of the Indian Penal Code • 
Power of 
Lokpal to 
issue, in 
certain 
circum-
stances, 
direct-
tiOln6 for 
deferring 
or sus-
pending 
investi-
gation 
into an 
offence. 
,,, 
£videoce. 
f1""\",· 
~ .. i. 

(3) Subject to the provisions of sub· section (4),-
(a) no obligation to maintain secrecy or other restriction upon 
the disclosure of information obtained by or furnished to Go,'ern-
ment or any public servant, whether imposed by any enactment or 
by any provision of law whatever shall apply to the disclosure of 5 
information for the purposes of any inquiry (including the verifica-
tion under section 11) under this Act; and 
(b) the Government of any public servant shall not be entitled, 
in relation to any such verification or inquiry, to any such privilege 
in respect of the proQuction of doctUnents or the giving of e,vidence 10 
as is allowed by any enactment or by any provision of law whatever 
in 'legal proceedings. \ 
(4) No person shall be required or authorised by virtue of this Act 
to furnish any such information or answer any such question or prQduce 
10 much of any document- 15 
(a) as might prejudice the security, or defence, or international 
relations, of India (including India's relations with the Government 
of any other country or with any international organisation), or the 
mvestigation or detection at crime; or 
(b) as might involve the disclosure of proceedings of the Cabinet 20 
of the Unicm. Government or of any Committee of such Cabinet, 
and for ,the purpose of this sub-section, a certiflCate issued by a Secretary 
to the Government of India certifying that any information or answer or 
portion of a document, is of the nature specified in clause (a) or clause 
(b) shall be ·binding and conclusive: 2' 
Provided that the Lokpal may require any information or answer or 
portion of a document in respect of which a certificate is is'Sued under this 
aub-section to the effect that it iso! the nature specified in clause (4) to 
be d.isclosed to it in private for scrutiny and if In such scrutiny the 
Lokpal is satisfied that such certificate ought not to have been/ issued, it 30 
shall declare the certificate to be of no effect. 
EzpZanati«m.-For the purposes of this section "public servant" has 
the same meaning as in section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
l!S. (1) If the LDkpaI has reason to beUeve tlhat any \documents 
which, in its opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to, any inquiry under 35 
this Act,are secreted in any place, it may authorise any officer subordi-
nate to it, or anyofticer of an investigating agency referred to in sub-
section (2) of section 7, to search for and to seize such documents. 
(2) If the Lc:>kp~ is satisfied that any document seized under sub-
seetlon (1) would be evidence for the 'purpose of any inquiry under this 40 
Act and that it would be necessary to retain the document in its custody, 
jt may so retain theaaid document till the completion of such inquiry: , ,. 
PrOVided that where such document is seized before the commence-
ment of such inquiry, the Lokpal 9hal1 return the document before the 
expiration of a period of one year from the date on which it is "ej~ed 45 
\P1~~ such inquiry has b~n Ciqrnmenceq before such expiration. 
46 of 1_ 

2 of 1974. 
/ 
",.~ ... 
:E:xplanation.-For the purpoae 'Of this sub-section, an inquiry-1n reSpect 
of a complaint- . 
(a) shall be deemed to have commenced on the date on whick 
it is made to the Lokpal under section 10; 
5 (b) shall be deemed to have been cDmpleted 'On the date 'On 
which the Lokpal clDses the case under clause (a) 'Of sub-section U) 
of sectiDn 16 Dr where the Lokpal makes a report tD the competent 
authority under clause (0) of that Bub-section, Dn'the expiry of the 
periDd mentiDned in sub-section (4) of that sectiDn. 
10 (3) 'The provisiDns of the CDde of Criminal PrDcedure, 1973, relating 
to 5earches shall, SD far as may be, apply tD searches under this section 
Subject to the modification that sub-secti'On (5) of section 165 of the said 
Code shall have effect as if, for the word "Magistrate", wherever it OCcurl, 
the words "Lokpal or any 'Officer authorised by it" were substituted. 
IS 16. (1) If, after inquiry in respect of a complaint, the Lokpal is I8tis- ~ 
fted- : I 
(4) that no allegation made in the complaint has been substan-
tiated either whDlly 'Or partly, it shall close the case and intimate the 
complainant, the public functjDnary and. the competent authDrity 
20 accordingly; 
(b) that all or any of the allegations made in the complaint have 
or has been substantiated either wholly or partly, it shall, by report 
in writing, cDmmunicate its findings and recommendations to. the 
competent authorit.y and intimate the complainant and the public 
25 functionary abDut its having made the report. 
(2) The competent authority in the case of a public functionary, other 
than the Prime Minister, shall examine the report forwarded to it under 
clause (b) of sub-sectiDn (1) and communicate to the Lokpal, within 
three months of the date of receipt of the report, the action taken 
30 or proposed to be taken on the basis 'Of the report. I 
(3) The Speaker, in the case of the Prime Minister, shall, as 800ft 
as may be after and in any case not later than ninety days from the 
receipt 'Of report under clause (b) of sub-section (1) ,cause thel8me 
to be laid before the House of the People. 
35 E.rplanation.-In computing the period of ninety days referred to in 
this sub-sectiDn, any period during which the House of the People is not 
in session shall be excluded, I I 
(4) The Lokpal shall present annually to the President a consolidated 
report on the administratiDn 'Of this Act and the President shall, as lOon 
40".8& may be after, and in any case not later than ninety days from the 
receipt 'Of such report, caUSe the same,. together with the explanatory 
memorandum, to be laid before each House of Par1iame~t. 
Ezplanation.-In computing the period of ninety days referred to in 
this ,sub-section, any period during which Parliament or, as the case may 
dfbe, .either House· of Parliament, if! not in session, shall be excluded. 

Expendi-
ture on 
Members. 
to be 
charged 
on the 
Consoli· 
dated 
Fund of 
India. 
secrecy 
Of infor-
mation. 
Inten-
tional 
insult, or 
Interrup' 
tiOn to, 
or brinl-
ing into 
disre-
pute, 
Lokpal. 
Power 01. 
Lokpal to 
try 
certain 
offen£eS 
.wn,. 
marfly. 
10 
MISCELLANEOUS 
. .1.'1., ~,.~ .. u_ .... 12 .. _,." ... 8 .,. or .. tetped' 01, 
the Members, shall be expenditure charged on the Consoll ..... ,~ .. 
IDcJi.a. I 
11. U} Any iI)iGrmaiioa obtained by the Lokpal, or by an,..cer, S 
employee, agency. or :perseJl referred 11o ill section 7, in the COUl'se 4, or 
for the purposes of, any verification or inquiry under this Act, and any 
ev.idence reeorded or eo)leded in connection therewith shall· be treated all 
CCIJlftdEltlal aJld, notwlthatandiD« anything eontained in the Indian 1Yf-
e.c~ Act, 1&'J2, DO ceurt shall be el'ltitled to compel the Lokpal, or any 10 lof lin. 
~ amcer, emp'kJyee, agency or pel'S()n, to give evidence relating to such 
information or to proouce the evidence so recorded or collected. 
(2') Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to the disclosure of tQe 
informati(\n or evidence referred to therein-
(a) for the purposes of this Act or for the purposes of ally action IS 
or proceedings to be taken on any report uooer seetion 16; ar 
(b) for the purposes of any proceedings, for an offence. of &i,ving 
or fabricating false evidence, under the Indian Penal Code; or 4' of 1160. 
(c) for such other purposes as may be prescribed. 
I'. (1) Whoever inten~ionally offers any insult, Qr causes my iDter- 20 
ruptiOll, to the Lokpal whHe theLokpal. or any of its MelJlbers, is mating 
any verification or conducting any inquiry under this Act, shall be 
PijAisbe4. ~~ imp~i8DIllDIDt ftJr a term whic~ m&Ir e3tte!itf to six 
1l,l~~ •. or ,vnth .~. pr Mth I*h. 
,2) WboeveI:,. by "".-cis spoken or iIltended to be read, maket or 2" 
publishes any statement, QI' 60esc allY other act, which is caleulated 10. bt'lnf ; . 
the Lokpal into disrepute, shall be pupished with simple impriSOlllllftt for 
a term 1'Iblefl may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
t8) The previsions of sub-secti9Jl (2) of section 19901 ~e~.oI. 
C.riminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply In relation to an offence unger "ub- 30 .. 2011 "'''' 
sectian.(l) er.'slJ~ctiQa. (2) as they apply in relation to an offence: refer-
red to in .8~t;.~ (2) .t Ute said ledion 198, subjeet to the modfflea-
ti~n that no complaint in respect of such ommce shall be made by the 
Public Prosecutor: except with the previous sanction of the Lo'kpal. 
to. (1) If,at 8Ilystage of a proceecling before the Lokpal. it appeari·'.' 
t8 the LoJtpal thllt any.persQtt appearing mauch proceeding had'kJlO~ 
010 Witfttlly given talse e~dence or had . fabricated false eviieme wiiIt.h 
intention that such evidence should be used in such proceeding, the. Lo)q)al 
m~"Jf ~tisfl~ that it\is-.De~.IHl.;expe.dlel1t:in the interests ~t}us-
~ce that the ,personslloulP ~.tried summarily tor giving or fabri~ath\&M;. 
as the .caae IQaY. be. falle., eviclenQe, tak& COl'l1iIHee of the otfenee an~ 

11 
J»,aYP after giving the offender a reasonable opportunity of showing c,ause 
wAr, he .should nQU be. punished for such offence, try su~h offender sum. 
lll4l'ily,. so far as may be, in accordance w.ith the procedure prescribed for 
2 of 11'7'- sUmmary trials under the Code of Crio1inal Procedure, 1973, and sentence 
S hjm to imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or 
to ~e. which may extend to five hundred rupees, or to both. 
(2) When any such offence as is described in section 175, section.1 '1B. 
48 of 1180 section 179 or sectIon Hro. of the Indian Penal Code is committed in the 
..... CIII' p:eaeace of the Lokpal, the Lokpal may cause the offender to 
)Q be detaiMd in custody and may, at any time on the same day, take cogni-
zance of the offence and, after giving the offender a reasonable opportu-
nity of showing. cause why he should not be punished under this section, 
try suc:b offender summarily so far as may be in accordance with ~, 
procedure prescribed for. summary trials under the Code of Criminal Pro-
2 Of 1974. l' ... , ·1178. aDd semec .. ,him to simple imprisonment for a tenn which 
may extend to one month. or to fine which may erlend to five hundt'E!d 
ru.pees, Qt to,~. I 
(9) In every case tried under this section, the Lokpal sball l'eccmi, .ibe· 
f.~~ ,copstit1.Jting tbe Qffen~e with the statalUeD.t (if any) made by 1N 
2Q o1tender as well as the finding and the sentence. 
~) ~ p8m1on, c:onvi.Qted 'On a trial held unc:lHthis seenOD. may ap-
peal to the Supreme Court. ~ ! 
('5t The provisions of thtssection shall have effect notwithstandi»s 
2 of 1974. _~lng contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
25 .21. (1) Ifany.pe&SOo,Pf~~'~ publishe. any information with.... Disclosure 
pect to any complaint under this Act. (including the identity of the per_ ~a:!or­
SOD making the complaint, the public functionary aaainst whom the com- and pub-
pIilmt has been made and the particulars contained in the complai.n,t) lication 
or ·with respect to any proceeding., act or thing -taken or done or purponed of false 
•. to have beeD taken or done under this Act in relation to such com- informa-tion In plaint- respect 
,.) where the Lokpal diamisses such complaint under section of COlD-
11~ at any time before IUh dismissali or I plaint. 
and pro-(b) where the Lokpal closes the case with respect to such com- ceec:UQ,Cs 
3$ pl~ wader clause (el} of s1:lb-sect.ion(l) of section 16, at any time under 
befpre $uch cloeure; or this A.c!f. 
~)wben tJae Lokpal forwards to the competent authority a 
rtI*'t. of bis findi.Drs and NClOmJIll)ndati01'ls with respect to such com-
pl_t Uftder clause (It> of. lUb-sediOll (1) ofseetion 16, at arlY time 
40 bet.- tbe .spiry. at, thNe months £10m the date of receipt of the 
report by the competent authority Gr, as the case may be, at any 
time before the report is laid before the House of the People under 
sub-section (3) of section 16, 
8Q~ ~r.&Q~.ahall be guilty of all. o1fence UIldel'. this. 8ub·sectioft . 
• 5 ~}~lf &n8 per..IOft;prints or publisheamy information alleging or 
......... tJaat • OIDIItplaint· has been made under this Aet against any 
:~ . :fJ.uaetiooary . and such information is false, sueh person shall be 
~ty ., all offenee under this alJb..HCtion. 

ActlOll 
in c ... 
of false 
com-
plaints. 
. , 
Blrof 
In'C*ICU-
tioD' on 
alleaa. 
tiOils 
not 
proved 
Or not 
subltul-
tl&ted. 
AppUca-
Uon of 
Act 2 of 
1974. 
(3) When any oftence under sUb-section (1) or sub-section (2) is 
committed, the Lokpal may take cognizance of the offence and, after 
giving the offender reasonable -opportunity of showing caU"Se why he 
should not be punished for such offence, try such offender summarily so 
far as may be in accordance with the procedure prescribed for summary 5 
trials under the Code of Criminal ProcedUl'e. 1973 and sentence him to 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months. 01' to fine 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or to both. 
(4) In every case tried under thi'i,section, the Lokpal shall record the 
facts constituting the offence with the statement (if any) made by the 10 
offender as well as the findings and the sentence. 
(5) Any person convicted on a trial under this section may appeal to 
the Supreme Court. ' 
(6) The provisions of this section shall have effect notWithstanding ,~, 
I " 
2 Of 1974. 
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 15 2 Of 1974. 
22. (1) Every person who wilfully or maliciously mak~s any com-
plaint which he knows or has reason to believe to be false under this Act 
shall be punh9hed with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to three thousand 
rupees. 
(2) ~o court, except a Court of Session, shall take cognizance of an 
offence under sub-section (1). 
(3) No Court of Session shall take cognizance of an offence under 
20 
sUb-section (1) except on a complaint in writing made by the Public 
Prosecutor at the direction of the Lokpal and the Court of Se5sion may 25 
take c:ognizance of the offence on such complaint without the caSe being 
committed to it. I 1 
(4) The Court of Session, on conviction of the person making false 
complaint, may award, out of the amount of fine, to the public functionary 
against whom such false complaint bas been made, such amour:t of com- 30 .. 
pensation as it thinks fit. 
(S) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
, > 
1973. : ":1 :1 q 2 Of 1974. \, 
23. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 3S' 
being in force, wrere on an inquiry in respect of a complaint against a 
public functionary the Lokpal has held that any allegations made in the 
complaint have not been proved or SJlbstantiated, no prosecution shall lie 
on any complaint, report, information or otherwise and no court shall take , 
cognizance of any offence on the basis of the same or substantially the 40 f\ 
same, allegations as in the complaint. 
24. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the provisiobS of the' ; 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply to proceedings before a ; to 
Lokpal under sections 20 and 21 and for the purposes of the said pro-' 
visions of that Code and the said proceedings the Lokpal shall be deemed 45 
to be a Court of Session and shall have all the powers of a Court' '01..' 
Session. 

IJ 
2&. (1) The President may, by order in writing and subject to su<:h 
conditions or limitations as may be specified in the order, require the 
Lokpalto inquire into any allegation (being an allegation in respect of 
which a complaint may be made) specified in the order in respect of a 
,5 public functionary and. notwithstanding anything contained in this Act. 
'. the Lokpal shall comply with such order. 
(2) When the Lokpal is to make any inquiry under sub-section (1), 
the Lokpal shall exercise the same powers and discharge the same func-
tions as he would in the case of any inquiry made on a complaint under 
~O this Act and the provisions of this Act (except section 22) shall apply 
accordingly. 
26. The sum deposited by a complainant under section 10 shall,-
(a) in a case, where\ the complaint is, dismissed under clause (c) 
of sub-section (1) of section 11, stand forfeited to the Central Gov-
IS ernment; 
20 
2S 
(b) if the Lokpal, for reasons to be recorded in writing so directs, 
be utilised for compensating the public functionary complained 
against; and . 
(c) in any other case, be refunded to the complainant. 
27. If the Lokpal is satisfied-
(a) that all or any of the allegations made in a complaint have 
or has been. substantiated either wholllY or partly; and 
(b) that having regard to the expenses incurred by the eom-
pluinant in relattIon to the proeeecIDI!t In.",.,ect of inch compWat 
and all other relevant circumstances of the case the complainant 
deserves to be compensated or rewarded, 
the Lokpal shall determine the amount which shall be paid to the com-
plainant by way of such compensation or reward and the Central Gov-
ernment shall pay the amount or amounts 80 determined to the com-
30 plalna'ht. 
28. (1) No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceedingS shall lie against 
the Lokpal or 'any Member or against any.officer, employee, agency or 
person referred to in section 7, in respect of anything which is in good 
faith done, or intended to be done, under this Act. 
3S (2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no proceedings or decision 
• of the Lokpal shall be liable to be challenged, reviewed, quashed or called 
In question, in any court. 
,"' 29. The Lokpal may. by general or speda! order in writing, and sub-
ject to such conditions and limitations as· maY' be specified therein, direct 
~ that any powers conferred or. duties imposed on it by or under this 
Act [except the powers under the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 
10, the power to dismiSS a complaint under sub-section (1) of section 11, 
the powers to close cases and make report.q under section 16 and the 
Confer-
ment of 
addi-
tional 
functions 
on 1.ok-, 
pal. 
Disposal 
of de-
poslt. 
Compen-
lation 
or reward, 
or both, 
payable 
in certain 
cases to 
com-
plainant. 
Protec-
tion of 
actioo 
taken fa 
gOOd 
faith. 
Power to 
delepte. 

,..rs und~ sections 20, 1M and 2.0] may also be exerd!led 'or di8chaf.ged 
'" suelt of the otBeers, employees or agencies refernc1 to ins .... ls'ttiiD 
(1) .orsub4ection tl) of section 1,as maybe ~ tin. dIe-oeder. 
30. (1.) The President may. by notification. in the otAcial G~ 
make rules for the purpose of carrying into etlect the proYi1liOiDl'ot tWI 5 
Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the geilertilty cd ~e 
mregotng provistollS. such rules may provide for-
(a) the manner in which the President shall obtain the opinion 
of the Chief Justice of India under sub-sectio~ (1)1 of section~ tG 
(b) the form in which complaints may be made under section 10 
and the fees, if any, which may be chargeci in respect thereef; 
(c) the manner in which and the authorities or ~gencies with 
whom'depoSit shall be made under sub-section (3), of section 10 and 
the torm in which certificates shall be furnished in' respect of dC!poait 15 
under sub-section (3) of section 10; 
{d~ tlle matters refenoed to in sub..clsU'8e (vi) otela1Pe (b) of 
Itlbwaection {l) ,of section 14; 
(e) the purposes referred to in clause (e) of s~~tIoa (f) of 
section 18; I I: -" 20 
(f) any other matter which is to be or may bfJ prescribed. 
'(3) Every ,ule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 1m.,. be 
after it is made, before each House {If Parliament, while it is in session. 
for a total period of thirty days. which may be comprised in Om:! session or 
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of ,the seulon 25 
Jmmediately following theaession or the successive seuions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree inmakiDg any modification in the.rWe, or 88th Bouses 
aeoee lthat the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter bave 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the cue lIlA, be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 30 
plIe'jutlfce to the valiclity of 81'lythiwg previously &me Vll8er tmrt nIe. 
Removal at. For the removal Df doubts, it.is beIleby aecllHled that IlOtbiaa_ 
0% doubt.. this Act shall operate to cortler or enable the conferring of any juri.le· 
tion on the Lokpal to make any ipquiry into any allegation against or 
aJW act or conduct of.- 3S 
(4) the President, the Vice-President or the Speaker .of *' 
- Hoase of the People; 
(b) the Chief 'Justice Ol'tmy other Judge of·tM StlJ'n!Wl'etl~ 
offu~a; , 
(e) the Comptroner and Auditor-General of India, the Chief ..0 
Election Commissioner or other Election Commissioner (it anY) or 
the Chairman or any othE'T Member of the Union Public Service 
Commission. 
32. Nothing contained in this Act shall be .construed as ,affectin& *be 
coostitution 01; Or the continuance of i'Unctioningor excerciBe,of ,Po"... " 
by, any Commission of Inquiry appointed under theCormnisaiom d. .m.. 
quiryAct 1952, "efore the commen~ement. of this Act 'awl -no -Gam,illiM ~ of .9!Z. 
lkallbe made URGer thts ,Actin respect of aIlY·mat\er referr.,a,I ... u41Y 
to such Commission before such commencement. 

IS 
31. In section 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry ~_ct, 1952, in sub-seetlon 
(1), for the words "The appropriate Government may", the words, brac-
kets and figures "Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 
8 of the Lokpal Act, 1989, the appropriate Government may" shall be 1lUb-
, atituted. 
. l .. 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 3(4)] 
I. . having been appointed Chairman/Member of the Lokpal, 
do swear in the name of God that I will bear true bith and allegiance 
10 solemnly affirm 
to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will duly ~nd 
faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment per-
form the duties of my oftice without ~ar or favour, affection or iU-Will. 
Con ... 
quential 
amend-
mentof 
Act 60 
of 1952 • 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Lokpal Bill has had a chequered history going back to 1988. 
Having studied the interim report of the Administrative Reforms Com-
mission submitted in 1966 on the subject and all the four Bills which 
were introduced in the Parliament earlier, the Government has come 
to the conclusion that such legislation for conl'tituting the institution of 
Lokpal is imperative to combat the problem of corruption at higher 
political levels. In the interest of democracy, it shou'd be the endeavour 
of every public functionary at top political levels to maintain high 
standards of public morality. HE!nce this Bill. 
2. The present Bill seeks to set up the institution of Lokpal consisting 
of Chairman and two Members. Only persons who are or have heen 
Jud~es of the Supreme rourt would be eligible for appointment to this 
Body. Th:s has been proposed to create a greater assurance of justiee 
and fair play in the minds of all. It is proposed that j)lrisdiction of 
Lolroal should cover the complaint of corruption within the meaning of 
the Prevention of Corruption Act. 1988 against the Council of Ministen 
including the Prime Minister. It is also provided that in case of 'com-
plaints against a Minister. the competent authority should be the Prime 
Minister to decide about the action on the recommendation of the Lokpal 
and in the case of the Prime MInister. it is left to the Hou8e of the 
Peoole as ultimately that political functionary is responsible' to the 
people through their representatives. To enable the persons constitut~ng 
the JAkoal to perform their functions with hh!hest ohiect;vftv and. to 
ensure their indeoendence it is also provided that thelr sqlary. other 
conditions of service including removal from oftlee shall be those of the 
Chief Justice of India in the case of the Chairman and Judges of the 
~upreme Court in the case of other Members. 
3. The Note! on clauses explain the various provisions of the Bill. 
N1Iw Dam; DINESH GOSWAMJ. 
The 21ft December, 1989. \ 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDA nON UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
. CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter dated 22nd December. 1989 from Shri Dinesh Goswamf, 
Minister of Law and JUstice to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.] 
The P~dent havin~ been in form en of the subiect matter of the Blll 
to provide for the appojntment of a Lokpal to enquire into allegations of 
corruption againm public functionaries and for matters connected there-
with, trecommends under clauses (1) and (3) of Article 117 of th& Consti-
tution of India, the introduction and consideration of the Bill in Lot 
Sabha. 
J6 

Clause 2. defines the various expressions uaed in the Bill 
Cl4use 3 provides for the establishment of an institution to be known 
as Lokpal which will consist of Chairman and two other Members. 
The Chairman and other Members will be serving or retired Judp 
01 the ::)upreme Court of India. 
Cla1L8e 4 provides that the Chairman or other Members of the Lok-
pal will be ineligible to hold certain offices or position and before entering 
upon the office of the Chainnan or a Member, he shall resign or sever 
his connection with such office or position. I 
Clause :5 provides for the term of office and other conditions of ser-
vice of the Chairman and other Members of the Lokpal. The conditiODS 
of service, salary, allowances and pension of the Chairman will be 
the same as those of the Chief Justice of India. The conditiona of 
service, salary and allowances of other Members will be the same u 
those of the Judges of the Supreme Court. 
Cln1L8e 6 provides for the removal of a Member and is self-explanatory. 
C:ause 7 provides for the staff of the Lokpal and the powers of the 
Lokpal to utilise the services inter aZia, of any investigating agencies 
of the Govt:!rnment or any other person or agency. 
C/Cluse 8 deals with jurisdiction of the Lokpal. Sub-clauSe (1) of tm. 
clause provides that the Lokpal may enquire into any matter involved 
in or arising from or connected with any allegations made in a complaint. 
Sub-clause (2) provines that the Lokpal may conduct an inquiry inOO 
any act or conduct of a person other than a public functionary in so 
far as it considers necessary so to do for the purposes of inquiry into 
any such allegations. Sub-clause (3) provides that inquiry under the 
Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 may not be made in respect of a matter 
in resIJect of which a complaint has been made to the Lokpal except 
on the recommendation or with the concurrence of the Lokpal. 
Clause !) provides that Lokpal shall not inquire into any matter in 
respect of any person if any of its Memberrs has any bias in respect 01 
such person or matter, or into any matter which has been referred for 
inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952. It also provides that 
the Lokpal shall not inquire into any complaint made after a period of 
five ,years from the date of the commission of the offence mentioned in 
the complaint. . i 1 .. ..1 
Clause 10 provides that any person other than a public servant mq 
file a complaint which shall be in the prescribed form and shall be ac-
companied by an affidavit. This clause also provides for a depoiit of 
Rs. 1000 by a complainan.t. l 
CLause 11 provides for the preliminary scrutiny of complaints by 
the Lokpal and empowers it to dismiss the complaint in specific cases 
after recording its reasons thert1ot' and communicate the lame to the 
complainant and the competent authority. 
17 

1S 
Clause 12 provides for the procedure for making inquiries into the 
~laint5 hy the Lokpal. 1 
Clowe 13 provides for deferment or for suspension for a specified 
period or till the completion of inquiry by the Lokpal of any investiga-
tion or inquiry by. any police officer under the Code of Criminai Pro-
cedure, 1973, in respect of matters connected with a complaint being 
inquired into by the Lokpal by an order and for reasons to be recorded. 
Sub-clause (2) of this clause also provides that for the purposes of 
chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the period of 
deferm~nt or suspension of any inv~tigation into an offence shall be 
GCluded from the period of limitation ·for taking congnizance of the 
oftence. 
Clause 14.-Sub-clause (1) empowers the Lokpal to require any public 
lel"Vant to furnish any information or produce any document [sub-clause 
(i)]. Sub-clause (2) provides that the proceedings before the Lokpal 
shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of section 
lal of the Indian Penal Code. 
Clause 15 seeks to confer powers of search and seizure on the Lokpal. 
Clause 16 relates to reports of the Lokpal and action thereon. Sub-
clause (1) provides that when after inquiry no allegation made in the 
complaint is substantiated, the Lokpal shall close the case and intimate 
'the complainant, the pubUc functionary and the competent authority 
ar.ccrdingly. When all or any of the allegations made in the complaint 
are substantiated, the Lokpal will make a report communicating his 
ftndings and recommendations to the competent authority and will a:.so 
intimate the complainant as well as the public functionary about his 
having made the report. Sub-clause (2) provides that the competent 
Authority will, in the case of a public functionary other than the Prime 
Minister, inform the Lokpal of the action taken or proposed to be taken 
on the. report within a period of three months. Sub-clause (3) provides 
that in the case of the Prime Minister. the speaker shall within three 
months from the date of receipt of the report, cause it to be laid bef(lre 
the House of the People. Sub-clause (4) provides for the presentati(\n 
'by the Lokpal or annual reports on the administration of the Act to the 
President and tor thE' laying of such reports before the Houses of 
Parliament. ' 
. Clause 17 provides that the expenditure on Lokpal shall be char,ed 
on the Consolidated Fund of India. 
Cla'UBl 18 provides f01 aecrecy of information and evidence collected • durir.g any inquiry by the Lokpal. 
Clause 19 provides for punishment for intentional insult or interrup-
iion to or bringing into disrepute the Lokpal or any of its Members. 
CI'ause 20 seeks to confer powers on the Lokpal to try summarily 
:and 1;'unish persons giying false evidence, etc, in any proceedings before 
·the Lokpal or committing offences under section 175. 178. 179 or 180 of 
the Indian Penal Code in the view or presence of the Lokpal. The 
clause also provides that a person convicted thereunder may prefer an 
appeal to the Supreme Court. 

19 
Clause 21.-Disclosurc of information in respect of complaints 
against public functionary or proceedings relating tJlereto causes, irre-
parablEt damage to the public functionary in those cases where the public 
functionary has been absolved of the charges agai:ru;t him. This accord-
ingly makes printing or pUblication of any such information in relation 
to any oomplaint before the inquiry. un~r the Act has reached a 
definitive stage an offence triable summarily by the Lokpal. The clause 
also seeks to make the printing or publishlng of any false information 
alleging or suggesting that a complamt has been maue against a publlc 
fUw':Lwil ... ry aI', offence triable summarily by the 1. ()kpal. The clause 
further provides that an appeal against any conviction for any offence 
thereunder ;may be made to the Supreme Court of India. 
Clau.se 22 provides for the puniahment for making wilful or mala-
cious complaints. 
Clause 23 provides for the bar of prosecution on allegation in cases 
where the Lokpal has held that any allegation made in the complaint 
have not been proved or substantiated. 
CLause 24 provides for the modified application of the provisions of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure for trial of an offence under sections 20 
and 21. 
Clatue 25 relates to conferment of certain additional functioaa on 
the Lokpal and is self-explanatory. 
Clause 26 provides for disposal of deposits made by the complain-
ants. 
Clause 27 provides for compensation or reward or both payable to 
complainant in the event of all or any of the allegations made in a com-
plaint bei.ng subr.tantiated. 
Clause 28 provides for protections from legal proceedings, etc. 
Clause 29 provides for delegation of powers by the Lokpal to certain 
officers or agencies. 
-Clause 30 provide& for the power of the President to make rules. 
Clause 31 seeks to make it clear that the Lokpal shall not have any 
jurisdiction to conduct any inquiry into any allegation against OJ' any 
act or conduct of the President, the Vice-President, or the Speaker of 
the Lok Sabha or the Chief Justice or any other Judge of the Supreme 
Court of India or the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or the 
Chief Election Commissioner or other Election Commissioner (if any) 
or the Chairman or any other meinber of the Union Public I Service 
Commission. 
Clause 32 provides that the provisions of this Bill shall not affect 
the constitution or the continuance of any commission of inquiry ap-
pointed unde;r the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 before the coming 
into force of the provisions of this Bill .. 
Clause 33 seeks to make a· consequential amendment in the Com-
.. ions of Inquiry Act, 1952. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause :i of the Bill provides for the establ:shment of an institution 
to be called the Lokpal, which shall consist of a Chairman and two other 
Member~ to be appointed by the President. Sub-clause (3) of clause 50 
of the Bill envisages that the salary, allowances and pension payable to 
and other conditions of serv.ce of the Chairman shall be the same as 
those of the Chief Justice of India, and of the other Members shall be the 
same as those of the Judge of the Supreme Court. 
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Lokpal, for 
the purpose of assisting it in the discharge of its functions, shall appoint a 
Secretary and such other officers and employees as the President may, 
in consultation with the Lokpal determine from time to time. Sub-
clause (2) of this clause empowers the Lokpal to ensure for the purpose 
of dealing with any com{>laints, or any classes of complaints the servires 
of any officer or employee or investigating agency of the Central Gov-
ernment or a State Government or the services of any other person or 
agency. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the terms and COD-
ditions of service of the ofticers and employees of the Lokpal and of the 
GlJIllClh, . employees, . agencies and persons referred to in sub-elaulile (2) 
shall be such as the PreSident may determine in consultation with the 
Lokpal. 
3. Clause 17 of the Bill provides, that the salaries, allowances and 
'\ pension payable to, or in respect of Members, shall be expenditure charged 
OD the Consolidated Fund of India. 
4. Clause 27 of the Bill provides for payment of compensation or 
reward to a complainant as determined by the LokpaL by the Central 
Government. 
5. At this stage it is not possible to give preci1le details of the expendi-
ture to be incurred on the institution of Lokpal. It is, however, expected 
that the BUl, when enacted, will involve a non-recurring expenditure of 
Rs. 7.5 lakhs and a recurring expenditure of' Rs. 35 lakhs per year. In 
case it becomes necessary to construct a building to house the institution 
of the Lokpal, additional e~nditure of a non-recurring nature of the 
order of RB. 75 lakhs may also be necessary . 
... ,", ., 
20 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 30 of the Bill empowe.rs the Central Government to make rules 
for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the proposed enact-
ment. The various matters in relation to which Buch rules may be made 
have been enumerated in detail under various items of sub-clause (3) of 
clause 30 and relate mainly to the manner in which the President shall 
obtain the opinion of the Chief Justice of India under clause 9, the form 
in which ~omplaints may be made., the form of certificate which shall 
accompany such complaints, the manner in which and the authorit:es 
and the agencies with whom the deposits shall be made under sub-clauae 
(3) of clause 10, and the additional matters in respect of which powers 
of a civil Court may be exercised by the Lokpal. 
These are matters of detan necessary for effective administration of 
the prOvisions of the Bill and it is difficult to provide for all the situa-
tions in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore. 
of a normal character. 
21 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT, 1952 
(60 OF 1952) , 
• * * • 
3. (1) The appropriate Government may, if it is of opinion that it is 
necessary so to do, and shall, if a resolution in this behalf is passed by 
the House of the People or, as the case may be, the Legislative Assembly 
of the State, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a Commis-' 
sian of Inquiry for the pUrpose of making an inquiry into any definite 
matter of public importance and performIng such functions and within 
such time as may be specified in the notification, and the Commission 80 
appointed shall make the inquiry and perform th~ fUnctions Clccordingly: 
Provided that where any such Commission has been nppointed to 
inquire into any matter-
(a) by the Central Government, no State Government shall, 
~cept with the approval of the Central Government, appoint ano-
ther Commission to inquire into the same ma~ter for so long as the 
Commission appointed by the Central Gcvf!l'nment is functioning; 
(b) by a State Government, the Central Government shall not 
appoint another Commission to inquire into the same matter for 
so long as the Commission appointed by the State Government is 
functioning, unless the Centra] Government is of opinion that the 
scope of the inquiry should be extended t(7 two or more States. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of the institution of Lokpal to inquire 
into allegations of corruption against public functionaries and for 
matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Dinesh G08'U.'ami, Minister of Law and Justice) 