30 of 1978. 
, I 
",. 
Bin No .• of 1171. 
TIIE HOUSE OF TIlE PEOPLE (EXTENSION OF DURATION) 
. AMENDMENT BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
to pTovide for the furt'Mr exten3'icm of the duration of the present House 
of the People. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the House of ,the People (Extension of Shore 
Duration) Amendment Act. lsr1S. title. 
S Z. The duratiOJl of the present House of the People which was extended Further 
extensioD! 
of 
duration 
of the 
present 
House of 
the People. 10 
IS 
for a period of one year by the House of the People (Extension of Duration) 
Act, 1976, is hereby ex'tended for a further period of one year and accord-
ingly, in section 2 Off that Act,-
(1) in the opening paragraph, for the words "one year", the 
words ".two years" shall be substituted; 
(2) for the proviso, thefollowin£ pl'ovio;o shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"Provided that if both or either of the said Proclamations 
cease or ceases to operate before the expiration of the said period 
of two years, the present House of the People shall, unless previ-
ously dissolved under clause (2) of article 85 of the Constitution. 
continue until six months altef the cesser of operation of the said 
Proclamations or Proclamation but not beyond the said period 
of twO! years. ... 

,STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The duration of ,the present House of the People which was extended 
for a period of one year by the HoUSe of the People (Extension of 
Duration) Act, 1976 (30 Qf 1006), is due to expire on the 18th March, 1977. 
Having regaro. to the continued operation of the two Proclamations of 
Emergency and the fact that the conditions which led to the extension of 
,the duration Qf the present House of the Peopl~ by one year also continue 
10 prevail, it is felt that it will nQt be in the larger interests of the country 
,to have ~ral elections to the House before its present term expires. It 
is proposed that the duration of the present House of the People should 
be extended for a further period of one year. Under the proviso to 
dause (2) of article 83 of ,the Constituti~, while a Proclamation of Emer-
gency is in operation, Parliament bas Ithe pqwer to extend by law the 
duration of the House of the People for a period not exceeding one year 
~t a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months 
after ,the Pro.clamation has ceased to operate. 
The Bill seeks to give effect to the above proposal. 
NEW DELHI; H. R. GOKHALE. 
The 1st November, 1976. 
2 

"EXTRACT FROM THE HOUSE OF THE PEoPLE (EXTENSION OF DURATION) 
Ar:r,1976 
(30 OF 1976) 
• • • • • 
Z. The period of five years (being the period for which the House of 
1:he People may, under clause' (2) of article 83 of the Constitution, 
-continue from the date appoinrted for its first meeting] in relation to the 
present HQUSe of the People shall, while the Proclamations of Emergency 
issued on the 3rd. day of December, 1971 and on the 25th day of June, 
1975, are both in ope!ation, be eX'feiided for a period of one year: 
Provided that if both or either of Ithe said Proc1amatior.s cease or 
. ceases to operate before the expiration of the said period of one year, 
the present HoUse of the People shall, unless previously dissolved under 
'clause (2) of ar.t.icle 83 of the Constitution, continue until six months 
-after the cesser of operation ot the said Proclamations or Proclamation 
Abut ndt beyond the said period of one year. 
s 
Extension 
of dura-
tion of the 
present 
House of 
the People. 

A 
BILL 
to provide for the further extension of the duration of the present House-
of the Peo'p1e. 
~. 
(Shri H. R. Gokhalt t -
Minister oJ Law, Juatice 
and Company Affairs.) 