As intRopucep In Lox SABHA ON

है 23॥/01900॥

Bill No. 98 of 1990
aa

= ower
‘THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTY-EIGHTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990
A
" BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

| it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —
1, (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Sixty-eighth Amend-
‘men:) Act, 1990.
__(2) 1६ shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by. notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In article 338 of the Constitution,—
हि (a) for the marginal heading, the following marginal, heading
> shall be substituted, namely:—
0 “National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
‘ibes.”; i
+ (b) for clauses (1) and (2), the following clauses shall be sub-
stituted, namely:— |
(1),There shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled: Tribes to be known as the National Commission for
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 3
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
Parliament, the Commission sbali consist of a Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of ser-
_ vice and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by
rule determine.
“(8) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of
the Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under
his hand and seal.

Short
title

and com-
mence-
ment.

Amend-
ment of

338.



2

(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own
procedure,

(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—

(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the

safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 5

Tribes under this Constitution or under any other law for the
time being in force or under any order of the Government and to
evaluate the working of such safeguards;

(०) to examine specific complaints with respect to the de-
privation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled, Castes and 10
Scheduled Tribes; “

(c) to present to the President, annually and at such other
times as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working
of those safeguards;

(व) to make in such reports recommendations as to 15
the measures that should be taken by the Union or any State
for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other
measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic develop-
ment of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes; and

(०) to discharge such other functions in relation to the pro-
tection, welfare and development and advancement of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as the President may,
subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule
specify.

y

0

(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before 25
each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the
action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relat-
ing to the Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of
any of such recommendations,

(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any 30
matter with which any State Government is concerned, a copy of
such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of the State who
shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along
with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be
taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons 35
for the non-aeceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.”;

(c) existing clause (3) shall be renumbered as clause (8),


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 338 of the Constitution provides for a Special Officer fon the
| ‘Castes and Scheduled Tribes to imvestigate all matters relat»
ing to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes under the Constitution and to report to the President on their
working. It is felt that a high level fivemember Commission under
article 338 will be a more effective arrangement in respect of the cons-
titutional safeguards for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes than
a single Special Officer as at present. It is also felt that it is necessary
to elaborate the functions of the said Commission so as to cover measur-
@s that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective im-
plementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection,
welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes ang to entrust to the Commission such other functions
in relation to the protection, welfare and development and. advancement
of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduleq Tribes as the President may,
subject to any law made by Parliament, by rule specify, It is also felt
that the reports of the said Commission shall be laid before Parliament
and the Legislatures of the States.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

New DEH;
The 21st May, 1990 RAM VILAS PASWAN.


FINANCIAL : MEMORANDUM

. | Clause: 2. of ‘the Bill seeks: to amend article 338 of «the Constitu-
tion. ! f कु
. 53. Fhe:proposed amendments provides for.a ‘Commission for the Sche-
duled Castes andScheduleq Tribes to-be known as the National Commis-
sion for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in. place of a
Special. Officer for the Scheduled Castes and. ‘Scheduled “Tribes. 16 15 pro-
posed: dosmerge the existing organisation. of the: said Special Officer and
the-existing National Commission for the Scheduled Castes.and Scheduled
Tribes created by virtue of a Resolution of the Government.of India. with
the: proposeg, new National Commission-for: the Scheduled - Castes .and
Scheduled 'Tribes.»In-view of the said»merger, there »may not be:
increase inoexpenditure. “However, the new responsibilities which will
devolve upon the said Commission will-entail. some: additional.expendi-
ture. ©Since: the additional expenditure -will depend upon: the activities
to: be undertaken’ by the said Commission, it is not possible at this stage

. to-estimate the said expenditure.

3. The provisions of the Bill do not involve any other expenditure
of a recurring or a~non-recurring nature.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CoNsiTTUTION or Inpra

* * * * *

338. (1) There shall be a Special Officer for the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes to be appointed by the President,

(2) It shall be the duty of the Special Officer to investigate
all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes under this Constitution and report to the President
upon the working of those safeguards at such intervals as the President

y direct, and the President shall cause all such reports to be laid before
h House of Parliament.

(8) In this article, references to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
ibes shall be construed as including references to such other backward
lasses as the President may, on receipt of the report of a Commission
pointed under clause (1) of article 340, by order specify and also to
e Anglo-Indian community.

* * * * *

Special
Officer

for Sche~
duled
Castes,
Sche~

Tribes,
ete.


FRASER O™