Bill No. 98 of 1963 
THE DELIMIT A TION COMMISSION 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABRA 
ON 16m NOVEMBER, 1962) 

Bill No. 98 or 196a 
THE DELIMITATION COMMISSION BnL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoIC SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide fen- the readjwtment of the allocation of seats in the Howe 
of the People to the States. the total number of seats in the Legis-
lative Assembly of each State. the division of each State into 
territorial constitueftCies for elections to the House of the People 
aM Legislative Assemblies of the States and for matters connect-
ed theTewith. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962. Short tide. 
I. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
5 (a) "article" means an article of the Constitution; 
(b) "associate member" means a member nominated under 
aection 5; 
(c) "Commission" means the Delimitation Commission 
constituted under section 3; 
10 (d) "latest census figures" mean "the census figures as 
ascertained at the census held in 1961; 
(e) "member" means a member of the Commission and 
includes the Chairman; 
<I> "State" does not include the State of Jammu and 
IS Kashmir and the State of Nagaland. 
Definitions. 

2 
Constitution 3. (1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Ad, of Dellmi-tatioa the Central Government shall constitute a Commission to be called 
Commiuion. the Delimitation Commission which shall consist of three members 
AIIociate 
JDCmbeR. 
as follows:-
(4) two members, each of whom shall be a person who is 5 
or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court Or of a High Court, 
to be appointed by the Central Government, and 
(b) the Chief Election Commissioner, ex officio. 
(2) The Central Government shall nominate one of the members 
appointed under clause (a) of sub-section (1) to be the Chairman of 10 
the Commission. 
4. It shall be the duty of the Commission to readjust on the basis 
of the latest census figures the allocation of seats in the House of 
the People to the several States, the total number of seats in the 
Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of each StM' IS 
into territorial constituencies for the purpose of elections to the 
House of the People and to the State Legislative Assembly. 
5. (1) The Commission shall associate with itseli for the purpose 
of assisting it in its duties in respect of each State, seven penGIlli 
three of whom shall be members of the House of the People repre- 20 
senting that State and four shan be members of the Legislative 
Assembly of that State. 
(2) The persons to be so associated from each State shall be 
nominated, in the case of members of the House of the People, by 
the Speaker of that House, and in the case of members of a Legis- 25 
lative Assembly, by the Speaker of that Assembly, having due 
regard to the composition of the House or, as the case may be, of 
the Assembly. 
(3) The first nominations to be made under sub-section (2)-
(4) shall be made by the Speakers of the several Legis- 30 
lative Assemblies within one month, and by the Speaker of the 
House of the People within two months, of the commencement 
of this Act, and 
(b) shall be communicated to the Chief Election Commis-
sioner, and where the nominations are made by the Speaker of 35 
a Legislative Assembly, also to the Speaker of the House of the 
People. 
(4) None of the associate members shall have a right to vote or 
to sign any decision of the Commission. ' " 

s of 1908. 
t. If owing to death or resignation the office of the Chairman' or c-1. 
of. a member or of an associate member falls vacant, it shall be 'ftCaDc:teI. 
ftlled as soon as may be practicable by the Central Government or 
the Speaker concerned under and in accordance with the provisions 
5 of section 3 or, as the case may be, of section 5. 
7. (1) The Commission shall de~ermine its procedure and shall ~=ra 
in the performance of its functions have all the powers, of a civil ~!,,~jas1oD. 
court under the Code of Civil Pro~edure, 1908, while trying a suit, 
in respect of the following matt~rs, namely:-
10 (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses; 
(b) requiring the production of any document; and. 
(c) requisitioning any public record from any court or 
oftlce. 
(2) The Commission shall have power to require any person to 
15 furnish any information on such pOints or matters as in the opinion 
of the Commission may be useful for, or relevant to, any matter 
under the consideration of the Commission. 
(3) The Commission may authorise any of its members to exer-
cise any of the powers conferred on it .by clauses (a) to (c) of sub-
20 section (1) and sub-section (2), and any order made or act done in 
exercise of any of those powers by the member authorised by the 
Commissiorl in that behalf shall be deemed to be the order or act, 
as the case may be, of the Commission. 
(4) If there is a difference of opinion among the members, the 
25 opinion of the majority shall prevail, and acts and orders of the 
Commission shall.be expressed in terms of the views of the majority. 
(5) The Commission as well as any group of associate members 
shall have power to act notwithstanding the temporary absence of a 
member or associate member or the existence of a vacancy in the 
30 COmmission or in that or any other group of associate members; and 
no act or proceeding of the Commission or of any group of associate 
members shall be invalid or called in question on the ground merely 
of such temporary absence or of the existence of such vacancy. 
(6) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the 
35 purposes of sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
S of 18518. 1898. 
Expla:nation.-For the purposes of enforcing the attendance of 
witnesses the lQcal limits of the jurisdiction of the Commission shall 
be the limits of the territory of India. 

Readjust-
meDt of 
nUmber of 
Beats. 
4 
8. The Commission shall, on the basis of the latest census figures 
and having regard to the provisions of articles 81,170,.330 and 332, 
by order determine-
(a) the number of seats in the House of the ~eople to be 
allocated to each Stat~ and number of seats, if any, to be reserv- S 
ed for the Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes of the 
State: and 
(b) the total number of seats to be assigned to the Legisla-
tive Assembly of each State and the number of seats, if any, to 
be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled 10 
Tribes of the State: 
Provided that the total number of seats assigned to the Legislative 
Assembly of any State under clause (b) shall be an integral multiple 
of the number of seats in the House of the People allocated to that 
State under clause (a). IS 
De1iJni.tatiOD 9. (1) The Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, 
of COI1sti· then distribute the seats in the House of the People allocated to each 
tuencies. State and the seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of each 
State to single-member territorial constituencies and delimit them 
on the basis of the latest census figures, having regard to the provi- 20 
sions of the Constitution and to the following provisions, namely:-
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geogra-
phically compact areas, and in delimiting them regard shall be 
had to physical features, existing boundaries of administrative 
units, facilities of communication and public convenience; 25 
(b) every assembly constituency shall be so delimited as to 
fall wholly within one parliamentary constituency; 
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes shall be distributed in different parts of the 
'State and located, as far as practicable, in those areas where the 30 
proportion of their population to the total is . comparatively 
large; and 
(d) cons.tituencies in which seats are reserved for the 
Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas 
where the proportion of their population to the total is the 35 
largest. 
(2) The Commission shall-
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation. of constituen-
cies, together with the dissenting proposals, if any, of an 

s 
associate member who desires publication thereof, in the Gazette 
of India and Official Gazettes of all the States concerned and 
also in such other manner as it thinks fit; 
(b) specify a date on or after which the proposals will be 
further considered by it; 
(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may have 
been received by it before the date so specified, and for the pur-
pose of such consideration, hold one or more public sittings at 
such place or places as it thinks fit; and 
10 (d) thereafter by one or more orders determine-
(i) the delimitation of parliamentary constituencies, and 
(ii) the delimitation of assembly constituencies of each 
State. 
10. (1) The Commission shall cause each of its orders made under PUblic:atiOD 
IS section 8 or section 9 to be published in the Gazette of India and in of order~ 
the Official Gazettes of the States concerned. ~:'e ~;ar -
(2) Upon publication in the Gazette of India, every such order operatioD. 
shall have the full force of law and shall not be called in question in 
any court. 
20 (3) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order 
shall be laid before the House of the People and the Legislative 
Assemblies of the States concerned. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), the readjustment 
of representation of the several territorial constituencies in the 
2s House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State and 
the delimitation of those constituencies provided for in any such 
order shall apply in relation to every election to the House or to the 
Assembly, as the case may be, held after the publication in the 
Gazette of India of that order and shall so apply in supersession of 
30 the provisions relating to such representation and delimitation con-
43 of 1950. tained in the Representation of the People Act, 1950, and the Delimi-
tation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1961. 
(5) Nothing in this section shall affect the representation in the 
House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until 
3S the dissolution of the House or of the Assembly, as the case may be, 
existing on the date of publication in the Gazette of India of the 
final order of the Commission relating to the delimitation of parlia-
mentary constituencies or, as the case may be, of the assembly 
constituencies of that State. 

PO!er ~ 11. The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notiftca-
==a:tiOA tion in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the State 
ord~ .. _ concerned,-Up-t""""'te. 
(a) correct any printing mistake in any of the orders 
made by the Delimitation Commission under section 9 or any S 
error arising therein from an inadvertent slip or omissioni and 
(b) where the boundaries or name of any district or any 
territorial division mentioned in any of the said orders are or is 
altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary 
or ~ent for bringing the orders up-to-date. 10 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Articles 82 and 170 (3) of the Constitution provide that upon the 
completion of each census-
(a) the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the 
States, 
(b) the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly 
of each State, 
(c) the div~sion of each State into territorial constituencies 
for electing members to the House of the People and the Legis-
lative Assembly, 
shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parlia-
ment may by law determine. 
2. The present delimitation of parliamentary and assembly consti-
tuencies is based on the population figures of the 1951-census. As 
the 1961-census has been completed, a readjustment of the several 
matters specified above is, therefore, necessary. The object of the 
Bill is to set up a Delimitation Commission for the purpose of effect-
Ing such readjustment on the basis of the population as ascertained 
at the census of 1961. The Bill also seeks to lay down certain ins-
tructions as to the manner in which such readjustment will be made 
for the guidance of the Delimitation Commission. These instruc-
tions are generally based on the provisions of articles 81 and 170 of 
the Constitution and the procedure followed in delimitation of 
parliamentary and assembly constituencies under the Delimitation 
Commission Act of 1952. It has also been provided in the Bill that 
the readjustment which will be made by the Delimitation Commis-
sion will apply to every general election to the House of the People 
or to a State Legislative Assembly held after the final orders of the 
Commission have been published and to every bye-election arising 
from such general election. 
NEW DELm: A. K. SEN. 
The 6th November, 1962. 
7 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Delimitation Commission Bill contemplates the setting up of 
a Delimitation Commission for the purpose of effecting readjustment 
of the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States, 
the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State 
and the division of each State into territorial constituencies for 
electing members to the House of the People and the Legislative 
Assembly on the basis of the population ascertained at the census 
held in 1961 as required by articles 82 and 170 (3) of the Constitution. 
2. The Commission is to consist of three members of whom two 
shall be appointed from among persons who are or have been Judges 
of the Supreme Court or of a High Court and the Chief Election 
Commissioner shall be an ex officio member of the Commission. The 
Commission shall also associate with itself for the purpose of assist-
ing it in its duties in respect of each State seven persons, three of 
whom shall be members of the House of the People representing that 
State nominated by the ~peaker of that House and four shall be 
members of the Legislative Assembly of that State nominated by 
the Speaker of that Assembly. The Commission will also have a 
small office staff. As far as can be anticipated, the cost involved will 
be about Rs. 1,50,000 (non-recurring) for a period of about six months. 
The estimate is necessarily a rough one. 
8 

LOK SABHA 
A 
HaL 
to provide for the readjustment of the allocation of seats in the 
House of the People to the States, the tota] number of seats 
in the Legislative Assembly of each State, the division of 
each State into territorial constituencies for elections to the 
House of the People and Legislative Assemblies of the State s 
and for matters connected therewith . 
• 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, 
Minister 0/ Law.) 