AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

™ Bill No. 98 of 1999

THE INVESTORS’ PROTECTION BILL, 1999
By

Suet Kirt Somarya, M_P.

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

title, extent annd commencement.
Definitions.

Prohibition of acceptance of deposits.

Constitution of Investors’ Protection Regulation Authority.
Certificate of Registration.

Validation of Certificate.

Cancellation of Certificate.

Requirement of minimum capital.

Power to collect information and to give direction.
Prior approval for amalgamation.

Appointment of Recovery Officer.

Winding up of financial establishment.
Exemption.

Penalties.

Offences by companies.

Offences to be cognizable,

Protection of action taken in good faith.

Act to have over-riding effect.

Power to frame regulations.


Bill No. 98 of 1999

THE INVESTORS’ PROTECTION BILL, 1999
By

‘Suri Kirrr Somatya, M.P.
A
BILL

: ide for protection of interests of depositors in the financial establishments.

jt enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as

(J) This Act may be called the Investors’ Protection Act, 1999, Short title,

4 extent and
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commence-
ment.
(8) The provisions of this Act shall come into force on such date as the Central fe
eat may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf:
“Provided that the Central Government may appoint different dates for commencement
it provisions of the Act as the expediency requires.
2, In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(a) “Authority” means Investors’ Protection Regulatory Authority constituted
under section 4;

(0) “Certificate” meahs Certificate of Registration to a financial establishment
by the Investors’ Protection Regulatory Authority;


2

(०) “Financial Establishment” means and includes any financial establishmer
or any person accepting deposit under any scheme or arrangement or in any 0
manner but does not include a corporation or 8 co-operative society owned or
trolled by any State Government or the Central Government or a banking comp
defined under clause (०) section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;

(9) “public deposit” includes and shall always be deemed to have includ
any receipt of money or acceptance of any valuable commodity by any
Establishment and that money or commodity, as the case may be, and which shi
be returned to an investor after a specific period either in cash or kind or it
form of a specified service with or without any benefit in the form of interest,
profit or in any other form, but does not include—
(0) amount raised by way of share capital or by way of debenture, bond
any other instrument covered under the guidelines given, and regulations |
by the Securities and Exchange Board of India, established under the Se
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992;

(i amounts contributed as capital by partners of a firm;

(iii) amounts received from a scheduled bank or a co-operative
any other banking company as defined in clause (c) of section 5 of the
Regulation Act, 1949;

10 of 1949.

15 of 1992.

10 of 1949,
(iv) any amount received from,—

(a) the Industrial Development Bank of India;
(0) a State Financial Corporation;

(6) any financial institution specified in or under section
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964; or

(d) any other institution that may be specified by the Ce
Government in this behalf;

(0) amounts received in the ordinary course of business by wi

18 of 1964,

(a) security deposit;

(b) dealership deposit;

(c) earnest money; and

(@ advance against order for goods or services;

(vi) any amount received from an individual or a firm or an
of individuals not being a body corporate registered under any
relating to money lending which is for the time being in force in th
(vii) any amouit received by way of subscriptions in respect
(viii) any amount received from the Central Government oF
Government or any amount received from any other source
repayment is guaranteed by the Central Government or a State Gor
any amount received from a local authority or a foreign Govern
foreign citizen, authority or person;

(ix) any amount received from the Industrial Development 8;
established under the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 196
Life Insurance Corporation of India established under the Life 11808
31 of 1956. poration Act, 1956, or the General Insurance Corporation 0|

subsidiaries established in pursuance of the provisions of se i

57 of 1972. General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 or the
Development Bank of India established under the Small

18 of 1964.



3

ment Bank of India Act, 1989, or the Unit Trust of India established under the 39 of 1989.
Unit Trust of India Act, 1963, or National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 52 of 1963.
) Development established under the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development Act, 1981 or an Electricity Board constituted under the Elec- 61 of 1981.
tricity (Supply) Act, 1948, or the Tamil Nadu Industrial Investment Corporation 54 of 1948
Limited, or the National Industrial Development Corporation of India Limited,
or the Rehabilitation Industries Corporation of India Limited, or the Industrial
Credit & Investment Corporation of India Limited, or the Industrial Finance
Corporation of India ited, or the Industrial Investment Bank of India
Limited, or the State Trading Corporation of India Limited or the Rural Elec-
trification Corporation Limited, or the Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation
of India Limited, or the Agricultural Finance Corporation Limited, or the State
Industrial and Investment Corporation of Maharashtra Limited or the Gujarat
Industrial Investment Corporation Limited or Asian Development Bank or
International Finance Corporation or any other institution that may be specified
by the Reserve Bank of India in this behalf.

(x) any amount received hy a company from any other company.

(xi) any amount received by way of subscriptions to any shares, stock,
bonds or debentures pending the allotment of the said shares, stock, bonds on
debentures and any amount received by way of calls in advance on shares, in
‘accordance with the articles of association of the company so long as such amount
is not repayable to the members under the articles of association of the com-
pany;

(xii) any amount received from a person who at the time of receipt of the
amount was a director of the company or any amount received from its share-
holders by a private company or by a private company which has become a
public company under section 43A of the Companies Act, 1956, and continues 1 of 1956,
to include in its articles of ass ion provisions relating to the matters speci-
fied in clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956:

Provided that the director or sharcholder, as the case may be, कप whom,
the money is received furnishes to the company at the time of giving the money,
a declaration in writing to the effect that the amount is not being given out of
funds acquired by him by borrowing or accepting from others

(xiii) any amount raised by the issue of bonds or debentures secured by
the mortgage of any immovable property of the company; or by any other asset
or with an option to convert them into shares in the company provided that in
the case of such bonds or debentures secured by the mortgage of any immov-
able property or secured by other assets, the amount of such bonds or deben-
tures shall not exceed the market value of such immovable property or other
assets;

(xiv) any amount brought in by the promoters by way of unsecured loan in
pursuance of stipulations of lending institutions subject to the fulfilment of the
following conditions, namely:—

(@ the loan is brought in pursuance of the stipulation imposed by
the lending public financial institution in fulfilment of the obligation of
the promoters to contribute such finance,

(ji) the loan is provided by the promoters themselves and/or by their
relatives, and not from their friends and business associates, and

(iii) the exemption under this sub-clause shall be available only till
the loan of financial institution is repaid and not thereafter.


4

Explanation I—“Chit” has the meaning as assigned to it in section
the Chit Funds Act, 1982.

Explanation I/—Any credit given by a seller to a buyer on the
any property (whether movable or immovable) shall not be deemed to
deposit for the purposes of this clause;

(e) Any word or expression used in this Act and which is not specificall
fined or explained under this Act but defined or explained in the Reserve 8;
India Act, 1934 or in the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 or
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) or in the Industrial Development Bat
India Act, 1964 shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the respe
Acts.

Prohibition of 3. (1) Except as provided under this Act, no financial establishment shall accept al
acceptance of deposit in any form from any person.

deposits.

(2) Receipt of any cash or commodity or article or animal under any scheme or
wise for return either in case or in kind, with or without any benefit shall be deemed to!
acceptance of deposit for the purposes of this Act.

Constitution of 4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
Investors’ stitute an Authority to be called the Investors’ Protection Regulatory Authorit
Protection

Regulatory (2) The Authority shall consist of a Chairman and such other number of
Authority. bers as may be prescribed.

(3) The Central Government may set up such number of branches as
deem fit.

(4) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and
may be necessary to enable authority to exercise its powers and perform its fur
effectively.

Ccilibicde of 5. (1) Any Financial Establishment or a person, as the case may be, shall mi

Registration. application for Certificate of Registration to this effect to the Authority in such form
with such information as may be specified by the Authority from time to time.

(2) On receipt of an application for issue of Certificate, the Authority shall cond
such enquiry or make inspection of the books of account and other registers or examil
persons or authorities as the Authority may deem necessary, and take into account th
lowing aspects before issuing of certificate:—

(a) that the capital of the financial cstablishment is sufficient as to pru
conduct the business of such financial establishment accepting deposits by
itself with all the norms of’ prudence for conducting such business.

(b) that the antecedents of the promoter or the organiser or the person
sible for the conduct of the business of such financial establishment are such
are sufficient reasons to believe that the interests of the depositors shall not
diciaily jeopardized;

(c) that the general character of the management or the proposed man:
of such financial establishment accepting the deposit is not prejudicially 101
interest or the interests of the depositors;

(d) that the public interest shall be served by the grant of Certi te te
applicant to commence or carry on accepting deposit;

(०) that the grant of Certificate shall not be prejudicial to the o
consolidation of the financial sector or not inconsistent with monetary stak
economic growth of the country; and


5

(f any other condition, fulfilment of which, in the opinion of the Authority
shall be necessary to ensure that the commencement or carrying on any business by
such financial establishment accepting deposit shall not be prudential to the public
interest.

(3) The Authority may, after being satisfied that the conditions specified in sub-
ction (2) are fulfilled, grant a Certificate subject to such conditions as the Authority
n fit to impose and such conditions may be imposed at any time or from time
as the situation requires:

Provided that it shall not reject any application for issue of Certificate or cancel any
ite issued under this Act without giving a reasonable opportunity to the applicant
financial establishment, as the case may be, for making its submissions for the
sed rejection or cancellation as the case may be:

Provided further that an order of rejection or cancellation of a Certificate passed
this provision shall be final and no suit against the order shall lie in any court of law.

6. The Certificate issued under this Act shall be valid until the promoters or the
or the persons responsible for conduct of the business of the financial establish-
at the time of issue of Certificate remain the same:

Provided that, if the Authority is satisfied that any change in the management
is made with the prior approval of Authority and that such change of management
shall not adversely affect the character of the management of the financial
establishment to whom the certificate was issued, may, renew the same subject to
such conditions as it may deem fit.

7. The Authority may cancel the Certificate granted under this Act if such financial
i ment—

(i) ceases to carry on the business; or

(ii) has failed to comply with any condition subject to which the Certificate
‘was issued to it; or

(iii) at any time fails to fulfil any of the conditions referred to in section 5;

(iv) fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Act or any direction or
order issued by the-Authority under the provisions of this Act or to maintain accounts
in accordance with the requirement of any direction or order issued by the Authority
under the provisions of this Act; or

(7) has failed to submit or offer for inspection of its Books of Accounts and
other relevant documents when so demanded by the Authority.

8. (1) No Certificate under section 5 shall be issued unless the paid up capital and
& of the applicant is not less than rupees five crore or such other sum as may be
cified by the Authority:

Provided that the paid up capital and reserves of the applicant shall not be more than
s ten crore.

(2) The Authority may, specify different sum of capital and reserves for different
es of financial establishments within the ceilings as specified in sub-section (1).

(3) A financial establishment accepting deposits on the date of the coming into force
ff this Act may, continue to do so for a period not exceeding three years so as to enable such
ancial establishment to have the required minimum capital and reserves, as contemplated
sub-section (1).

9. The Authority may, in the public interest or to protect the interests of the depositors
or to prevent the mismanagement of any financial establishment,—
(@ direct to submit to the Authority such information in such form, and in
such manner, at such intervals as the Authority specify from time to time;

Validation of
Certificate.

Cancellation
of Certificate.

Requirement
of minimom

Power to

information
and to give
direction.


Prior approval
for amalga-
mation

‘Appointment
‘of Recovery
Officer.

Winding up of
establishment

6

(0) direct any financial establishment or class of financial establishment to
comply with such requirements as it deems necessary for, the aforesaid purpose;

(©) direct to maintain its books of accounts in such form, as it deems fit, so asto
ensure proper and complete disclosure of information;

(d) direct to appoint its auditors with the prior approval of the Authority,

(6) issue directions specifying the terms and conditions subject to which de-
posits may be accepted;

(0 direct and specify the extent of investment to be made by such fin:
establishment in any particular manner;

(g) direct not to extend financial or non-financial facilities to any person 0
any group of persons not exceeding such limit as the Authority deems fit;

(A) prohibit acceptance of deposit for such period as it deems fit;

(i) prohibit sale, mortgage or transfer in any form of its monies or other a
without the prior approval of the Authority; and

(0) inspect the premises at such intervals as it may deem fit to ensure the
compliance of the provisions of this Act,

10. (7) No financial establishment shall amalgamate or take any steps for amalg
ation with any other establishment without the prior approval of the Authority.

(2) No financial establishment, having deposit shall be allowed to amalgamate
any other establishment unless the financial establishment makes necessary arrangement
repayment of the deposit held by it.

वा, (1) The Authority on being satisfied that the financial establishment has
to repay its matured deposit or is likely to fail to repay its matured deposit or has re
to believe that such financial establishment is conducting its affairs in the
detrimental to the interests of the depositors, shall appoint a Recovery Officer to re
the dues of the financial establishment or to sell any property of the financial establis!
expeditiously, 50 as to meet the liability in respect of the matured public deposit.

(2) The Recovery Officer shall have all the powers of a Receiver appointed by
Court of Law, under the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for realising th
assets of the financial establishment for the distribution thereof to the depositors.

(3) A financial establishment, in respect of which a Recovery Officer is appoint
shall be bound to extend all the’ necessary information, papers and documents and
operate with the Recovery Officer to sell or transfer or dispose in any manner any Pro
of the financial establishment or to recover the dues of the financial establishment to th
extent to meet the requirements of the matured deposits.

(4) The Recovery Officer may, if necessary, seek such assistance as itis necessary [0
discharge his duties from any police authority or other enforcement, authority as the situa:
tion demands,

12. (J) The Authority may, if satisfied that it would be necessary to protect the inter:
ests of the depositors or in public interest or for the purpose of preventing any fini
establishment from conducting its affairs detrimental to the interests of the depositors,
a petition for winding up of such financial establishment.

(2) On an application being made by the Authority under sub-section (1) the
shall pass an order of winding up and appoint the Liquidator for completion of the winding
up of the financial establishment.

(3) The Court may, appoint such person as the Liquidator to complete the windi
up of the findncial establishment as is suzgested by the Authority or in the absence of suc



है

may, appoint either the Official Liquidator or any such person as the Court
essary, as the Liquidator.

(4) The Authority may, with the concurrence of the Central Government, frame regu-
mms for speedy winding up of the financial establishment and the procedure prescribed
shall be applicable for the winding up of such financial establishment.

The Authority, on being satisfied that it is necessary to do so may, declare, by
ion in the Official Gazette, that any or all of the provisions of this Act shall not
yy toa financial establishment or a class of financial establishments either generally or
period as may be specified, subject to such conditions, limitations or restrictions as
think fit to impose.

4. Any financial establishment which contravenes any of the provisions of the Act
punishable with imprisonment which may extend upto ten years and with fine which
tend to rupees fifty lakh or with both:

5

Provided that, except for the exceptional circumstances or reasons to be recorded in
the imprisonment shall not be less than for one year and the fine shall not be less
ipees ten thousand.

15. (1) Where financial establishment committing a contravention or default referred
nsection 14, is a company, every person who, at the time the contravention or default was
itted, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the financial establishment for the
of the business of the financial establishment, as well as the financial establish-
shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention or default and shall be liable to be
ded against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in the sub-section (1) shall render any such
person liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention of default was com-
mitted without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the
contravention or default.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under
‘Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the same was committed
‘the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any
tor, manager, secretary, or other officer or employee of the company, such director,
r, secretary, other officer or employee shall also be deemed to be guilty of the
fence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

16. (1) The violation of any provision of this Act shall be deemed to be a cognizable
nce.

(2) A Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class or a Court
ior thereof, within whose jurisdiction the offence was committed shall try such

(3) Notwithstanding contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a Court or
fagistrate trying any offence under this Act shall have the powers to impose the penalty
s an order of imprisonment as provided under section 14.

17. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Author-
ity or any other person in respect of anything which is done in good faith or intended to be

6 under this Act or in pursuance of any order, regulation or direction made or given
sreunder.

(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Authority or any person
‘acting in pursuance of the provisions of this Act for any damage caused or likely 10 be
sed by anything which is done in good faith or intended to be done under this Act or in
ursuance of any order, regulation or direction made or given therein.

Exemption.

Penalties.

Offences by
companies.

Offence to be
cognizable

Protection of
action taken in
‘good faith.


Act to have
over-riding
effect.

Power to frame
regulations.

18, The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsis
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument hay
effect by virtue of any such law.

19, (1) The Authority may, after consultation with the Central Government 0910
cation in the Official Gazette, make regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions
‘Act for all matters for which provision is expedient for the purpose of giving effect
provisions of this Act. है

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power the regulations
provide for all or any of the following matters,—

(a) the procedure for, making application for Certificate;

(b) procedure for rejection of Certificate;

(c) procedure for cancellation of Certificate;

(d) procedure for speedy winding up of a financial establishment;

(e) the manner in which the books of accounts and the registers should
tained by the financial establishment; and क

(f) generally for giving effect to any provision of the Act.

(3) Every regulation, as soon as may be, after it is made shall be forwarde
Central Government and shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall be sub)

condition of previous publication.

(4) Every regulation made by the Authority under this section shall be
as may be after it is made, before cach House of the Parliament, while itis in
a total period, of thirty days which may be comprised in one or more successive
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session oF the 50९५
sesssions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the reguk
both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall th
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the |
anything previously done under that regulation.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

During the last four-five years, there has been an alarming rise in the instances of
s financial intermediaries like companies, unincorporated bodies, associations, etc.
8 the general public. Various financial intermediaries are luring the gullible public,
viting deposits by promising attractive return and incentives. The gullible public, with
ह hope of getting attractive returns and incentives part with their life savings to such
icial intermediaries. Most of such financial intermediaries either disappear or fail to
n the deposit as per their promises. As a result, millions of public depositors are
ing the unbearable financial ruin caused by such financial intermediaries. The rules
gulations and the regulatory mechanism existing under the present legal framework

very much inadequate. Various regulatory authorities like Department of Company
ffairs, Reserve Bank of India, Securities and Exchange Board of India, Register of
nies, etc. have proved to be ineffective to curb such a menace in the society. The
al law of the country also is not adequate to protect the interests of the depositors
ad to bring the culprits to books. This menace is growing day by day which has necessitated
t attention of the Government to provide very stringent and effective legislative
sures to protect the depositors’ interests.

Another aspect is that the gullible public is being exploited by different types of
ncial intermediaries in the form of acceptance of deposit of money, deposit in kinds
Gold Coins Schemes, Plantation Schemes, Sheep Breeding Scheme, Piggery Scheme
hundreds of other imaginary schemes floated by unscrupulous promoters/companies
other financial intermediaries. Though such schemes are apparently very attractive,
intention behind such schemes has been proved to be almost invariably with the mala
intention of fraudulent enrichment of such promoters at the cost of millions of gullible
s/depositors of their life savings. It would be necessary to.frame comprehensive
itive measures to effectively, combat the menace at the earliest so as to save millions
ible public from being ruined.

For achieving the above objects, it would be necessary to take emergent statutory
sures by providing efficacious machinery to prevent and control such menace at the

New DeLut; KIRIT SOMAIYA
Jetober 25, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Investors’ Protection Regulat
Authority consisting of a Chairman and other members. Provision has also been made
appointment of officers and staff to assist the Authority. Clause 5 provides for grant
Certificate of Registration and clause 11 provides for appointment of Recovery officer. Th
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
‘An annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is likely to be incurred from
Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

19 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to frame regulations
out the purposes of the Bill. The regulations will relate to matters of detail
| the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

ii



LOK SABHA

A

BILL
to provide for the protection of interests of depositors in the financial estab! | h

(Shri Kirit Somaiya, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1830LS—22. 11.1999.