Short title, 
extent, application 
and 
commencement.
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
 
Bill No. 98 of 2023
THE HEALTHCARE SERVICE PROVIDERS AND FACILITIES 
(PREVENTION OF VIOLENCE AND DAMAGE TO PROPERTY) 
BILL, 2023
By
Dඋ. Mඈඁൺආආൺൽ Jൺඐൾൽ, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit violence against healthcare service providers, patients, and their attendants 
and to prevent damage or loss to property in healthcare service facilities and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
CHAPTER-I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Healthcare Service Providers and Facilities (Prevention 
of Violence and Damage to Property) Act, 2023.

(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
(3) It applies to clinical establishments defined and registered under the Clinical 
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 or under any State Act for the time 
being in force.
(4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in other cases, the Central Government.
(b) “arms” means arms as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of the Arms Act, 1959;
(c) “damage” includes loss or harm to property, whether in whole or in part, with 
or without taking possession of the property that renders it inadequate for its designated 
purpose or wholly or partially incapable of performing its function;
(d) “healthcare services” means the administrative, curative, rehabilitative, 
preventive, promotive, and supportive services for the control of diseases, injuries, or 
disabilities as well as measures ensuring the health of persons and include activities that 
ensure or provide support or access for persons in need of these healthcare services or 
activities such as searching for, collecting, treating or transporting persons in need of 
healthcare or the administration of healthcare service facilities;
(e) “healthcare service facilities” include healthcare centres, hospitals, healthcare 
teaching facilities, diagnostic centres, blood banks, medical clinics, nursing homes, 
maternity homes, dental clinics, all registered alternative medicine healthcare facilities, 
physiotherapy clinics, medical camps, first-aid posts, or any other premises or 
conveyance that is wholly or partly used for providing healthcare services in the public 
and private sectors;
(f) “healthcare service providers” in relation to a healthcare service facility means 
the administrative, clinical, support, and auxiliary staff including students in healthcare, 
and includes the following— 
(i) registered medical and dental or alternative medicine practitioners including 
those having provisional registration;
(ii) registered nurses;
(iii) medical students; 
(iv) nursing students;
(v) paramedics;
(vi) all registered alternative medicine’s practitioners
(vii) paramedical students;
(viii) pharmacists;
(ix) Lady Health Workers;
(x) polio workers;
(xi) volunteers;
Deﬁnitions.
23 of 2010.
54 of 1959.

(xii) management staff; and
(xiii) non-clinical staff;
(g) “mental anguish” means extreme pain, distress of mind, severe misery or 
mental suffering;
(h) “mental illness” means a mental illness as defined in clause (s) of section 2 the 
Mental Healthcare Act, 2017;
(i) “obstruction” means any act that hinders the provision of healthcare services;
(j) “patient” means any recipient of healthcare services;
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed rules made under this Act;
(l) “property” means any property, movable or immovable in possession of or 
under the control of any healthcare service facility or healthcare service provider in 
relation to his professional duty;
(m) “relevant authority” means a competent authority in relation to healthcare 
services facilitates or healthcare services providers as provided in any other laws, rules, 
and regulations of the State Government, as the case may be;
(n) “violence” means and includes harassment, provocation, or use of force against 
a person, group or community, or healthcare service facility which results in mental 
anguish, physical injury, or death to the healthcare service providers or beneficiary of 
healthcare services, or results in interruption of healthcare services provision or damage 
to such property and shall not include—
(i) collateral or defensive violence, if any, caused by the law; and
(ii) enforcing agencies or security personnel of the healthcare service facility 
on duty.
CHAPTER-II
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
3. No person shall use violence against a healthcare service provider, patient or his 
attendants, or any other person within a healthcare service facility.
4. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3, shall be punished under the 
relevant provisions of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(2) Where an act, in contravention of section 3, causes bodily injury or death or which 
in the ordinary course of nature is likely to cause injury or death, such person shall be liable 
to punishment under the relevant provisions of the Indian Penal Code, 1860:
Provided that in case of injury to a healthcare service provider or to the patient or his 
attendant, as the case may be, in addition to the punishment specified above, the accused 
shall also be liable to pay compensation to such healthcare service provider, patient, or his 
attendant, as the case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) If an act, in violation of section 3, causes mental anguish without causing any 
bodily injury or harm to a healthcare service provider, patient, or his attendants, as the case 
maybe, the person to whom mental anguish has been caused may apply for mediation and 
settlement with the person or persons causing such mental anguish in such manner and 
procedure as may be prescribed.
Prohibition of 
violence.
Punishment.
Institutional 
Mediation and 
Settlement.
10 of 2017.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.

(2) The Central Government may, by notification, authorize the Authorities constituted 
under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, for the purposes of institution mediation 
under this Act.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, the 
Authority authorized by the Central Government under sub-section (2) shall complete the 
process of mediation within a period of three months from the date of application made by 
the plaintiff under sub-section (1):
Provided that the period of mediation may be extended for a further period of two 
months with the consent of the parties:
Provided further that, the period during which the parties remained occupied with the 
institution mediation, such period shall not be computed for the purpose of limitation under 
the Limitation Act, 1963.
(4) If the parties arrive at a settlement, the same shall be reduced into writing and shall 
be signed by the parties to the dispute and the mediator.
(5) The settlement arrived at under this section shall have the same status and effect as if 
it is an arbitral award on agreed terms under sub-section (4) of section 30 of the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 1996:
Provided that if the parties fail to arrive at a settlement for any reason, section 4 of the 
Act shall be applied.
6. No person shall cause damage or loss to property owned by or under the care of 
healthcare service providers or healthcare facilities in connection with or incidental to their 
activities in healthcare service facilities.
7. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 6, shall be punished with—
(a) imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years or with a fine 
equivalent to double the market value of the property damaged or lost at the time of the 
commission of the offence or with both, if an act causes irreparable wrongful damage or 
loss to the property having value equivalent to or exceeding one lakh rupees; or
(b) imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one year or with a fine equal 
to double the cost of repairing the damaged property including the cost of deprivation 
of healthcare services to the public or with both, if an act causes reparable wrongful 
damage or loss to property the value of which is equivalent to or exceeding one lakh 
rupees; or
(c) imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one month or with the fine or 
with both, if an act which causes wrongful damage or loss to property having value less 
than one lakh rupees:
Provided that where loss to property constitutes other offences to property, it shall 
be dealt with under the relevant provisions of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
8. No person shall cause disruption or obstruction of healthcare services in a healthcare 
facility.
39 of 1987.
39 of 1987.
36 of 1963.
26 of 1966.
45 of 1860.
Prohibition 
of damage to 
Property.
Penalty for 
contravention 
of section 6.
Prohibition 
of obstruction 
or disruption 
of healthcare 
service. 

9. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 8 shall be punished with–
(a) imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years or with fine which 
may extend to three lakh rupees but shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees or with 
both, if an act causes obstruction of healthcare services; or
(b) imprisonment for a term which may extend upto one year or with fine which 
may extend to one lakh rupees but shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees or with 
both, if an act which in the ordinary course of nature is likely to cause interruption in 
the provision of healthcare services.
10. No person shall keep, carry or display arms of any kind, including licensed weapons, 
within the premises of a healthcare service facility:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the carrying of arms 
officially allowed for security purposes to the law enforcing agencies or security personnel 
of a healthcare service facility on duty.
11. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 10 shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend upto six months but shall not be less than one 
month or with a fine which may extend to three lakh rupees but shall not be less than fifty 
thousand rupees or with both.
12. Any registered medical and dental or alternative medicine practitioners, including 
those having provisional registration in a healthcare facility, are of the opinion that any 
person is imminent to act in contravention of the provisions of this act may document, report 
the behaviour, and refuse to treat the patient:
Provided that if the person suffers from a fatal or life-threatening disease or is in dire 
need of immediate medical assistance, the provision of this section shall not be applicable 
on such person.
13. If the registered medical and dental or alternative medicine practitioners, including 
those having provisional registration, refuses to treat someone for any reason which is 
not medically justified, which includes but are not limited to race, gender, caste, religion, 
sexual orientation, disability, and income, and fail to provide a reasonable cause for refusal 
to treatment, the license of such registered medical and dental or alternative medicine 
practitioners shall be suspended for a minimum period of two years.
14. Where it is proved at any stage that no violation of the provisions of this Act was 
committed and the charge levied against the accused was false and malicious, the person 
levelling such false charge shall be prosecuted under the relevant provisions of the Indian 
Penal Code, 1860.
CHAPTER-III
RESPONSIBILITIES
15. (1) In addition to any other responsibility of a healthcare service facility or a 
healthcare service provider under any law for the time being in force, it shall be the 
responsibility of each healthcare service facility to,—
(a) ensure that the healthcare service providers explain the procedures of treatment 
before and during the treatment to the complete understanding of the patients or their 
designated attendants in a presentable and comprehensible manner;
Penalty for 
contravention 
of section 8.
Prohibition 
of carrying 
weapons into 
a healthcare 
facility.
Penalty for 
contravention 
of section 10.
Refusal to 
treatment.
Refusal to treat 
on malicious 
grounds.
Punishment for 
False charge.
Responsibilities of 
healthcare service 
facilities and 
healthcare service 
providers.
45 of 1860.

(b) furnish in writing, the complete information about medical treatment provided 
by such healthcare service facility, to the patients or his designated attendants who seek 
treatment in the said facility in a presentable and comprehensible manner;
(c) safeguard patient confidentiality and to maintain the highest standards of ethical 
conduct and not discriminate amongst patients except on the basis of medical need, and 
to provide emergency care as a humanitarian duty;
(d) provide a copy of the whole or part of the patient’s information sheet or medical 
record on demand to the patient concerned or his designated attendant. 
(e) ensure that the healthcare service providers adhere to the responsibilities 
specified in clause (a), (b), (c) and (d) or in any other law for the time being in force 
and also to address complaints of any violation in respect of the same, followed by 
appropriate action against the concerned healthcare service provider or the concerned 
person in the healthcare service facility, as the case may be, by the relevant authority.
Explanation: For the purposes of this section “appropriate action” means 
disciplinary action, suspension, cancellation or revocation of license for medical 
practice, profession, sealing of the healthcare facility or any other suitable action 
prescribed in laws, rules, regulations and standard operating procedures of the State 
Government, as the case may be.
CHAPTER-IV
MISCELLANEOUS
16. (1) Whenever the Sub-Divisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate or 
any police officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector of Police receives information from 
any person or upon his own knowledge that an offence has been committed in contravention 
of this act within his jurisdiction, he shall immediately himself visit the place of occurrence 
to assess the extent of violence, obstruction, loss and damage to the property and submit a 
report forthwith to the appropriate Government.
(2) The Sub-Divisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate and any police 
officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector of Police after inspecting the place or area shall, 
on the spot,—
(i) draw a list of victim healthcare provider(s) or healthcare facilities or patient(s) 
or attendant(s); 
(ii) prepare a detailed report on the extent of violence, obstruction, loss, and damage 
to the property of victim(s), which may be categorized in the following form: -
(a) Category A– Abusive language; minor scuffle
(b) Category B– Verbal threat to life, property or family; obstruction of 
emergency vehicle leading to interference with healthcare services
(c) Category C– Acts that cause damage to property; damage to medical 
equipment
(d) Category D– Threat or actual use of criminal force; armed interference 
in performance of duties; armed assault; theft of medical equipment or medical 
transport
Spot Inspection 
by oﬃcers.

(e) Category E– Threat or actual use of explosive device.
(iii) take effective and necessary steps to provide protection to the witnesses and other 
healthcare providers at the healthcare facility.
17. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up Health Committee under the charge 
of the concerned Health Secretary and depute an Additional Director General of Police for 
carrying out the functioning assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Health Committees set up under sub-section (1) shall,—
(a) conduct survey of the identified healthcare facilities where violence, 
obstruction, loss, or damage to the property has taken place;
(b) make inquiries about the investigation and spot inspections conducted by 
various officers;
(c) inform the nodal officer about the law and order situation in the identified 
healthcare facilities;
(d) make enquiries about the wilful negligence by a public servant;
(e) create awareness about mental health and illness and reducing the stigma 
associated with mental illness among healthcare providers;
(f) encourage healthcare providers to seek support and care for their mental health, 
to help such providers identify risk factors associated with suicide and mental health 
conditions, and to help such providers learn to respond to such risks, with the goal of 
preventing suicide and mental health conditions under the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017;
(g) set up peer support groups among healthcare providers and provide mental 
healthcare and follow-up services, as appropriate; 
(h) conduct a review on improving healthcare providers’ mental health and the 
outcomes of programs authorized under this Act;
(i) conduct awareness campaigns advocating the provisions of this act and further 
help in the deterrence of the same;
(j) review the position of cases registered under the Act; and
(k) submit a monthly report on or before the 20th day of each subsequent month to 
the State Government/nodal officer about the action taken and proposed to be taken in 
respect of the above.
18. (1) The appropriate Government shall nominate a nodal officer to coordinate the 
functioning of the Executive Magistrates and authorized police officers or other officers 
authorized by them, investigating officers, and other officers responsible for implementing 
the provisions of the Act.
(2) The nodal officer shall by the end of every quarter review,—
(i) the reports received by the appropriate Government under section 16;
(ii) the position of cases registered under the Act; and
(iii) various kinds of measures adopted for providing immediate relief in cash or 
kind or both to the healthcare provider(s) or healthcare facilities.
Setting up 
Health 
Committee.
10 of 2017.
Nomination of 
Nodal Oﬃcer.

19. The provisions of this Act, except as otherwise expressly provided, shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in 
force.
20. No court other than Magistrate of the First Class shall try an offence, punishable 
under this Act on the report of a Police Officer not below the rank of a sub-inspector.
21. The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall mutatis mutandis 
apply to the procedural matters including trials and bails under this Act.
22. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Application of 
other laws not 
barred.
Cognizance of 
oﬀence.
Application 
of the Code 
of Criminal 
Procedure, 
1973.
Power to make 
rules.
2 of 1974.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Healthcare Service Providers and Facilities (Prevention of Violence and Damage to 
Property) Bill, 2023 is an essential piece of legislation aimed at safeguarding the well-being 
of healthcare professionals, patients, and healthcare facilities. The primary purpose of this bill 
is to address the rising incidents of violence and damage to property that healthcare service 
providers and facilities are facing and to provide them with adequate protection and support. 
The Supreme Court, in Indian Medical Association v. Union of India, took cognizance of 
this issue and directed the Central Government to issue guidelines to protect doctors and 
healthcare workers from violence. The Court has also directed the State Governments to 
implement these guidelines and to take strict action against those who violate them.
According to the Indian Medical Association, over 75 per cent of healthcare providers in 
India have faced violence at some point in their careers. Furthermore, a survey conducted by 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare revealed that 45 per cent of healthcare facilities in 
the country have experienced some form of violence, ranging from verbal abuse to physical 
assaults. These statistics reflect the gravity of the situation and underscore the importance 
of this Bill. This Bill seeks to address these challenges by establishing comprehensive 
prevention, intervention, and accountability measures. The existing laws provide recourse 
to criminal litigation alone – a process most healthcare providers are reluctant to initiate. 
This Bill mandates arbitration as the first recourse in cases of minor offenses under the 
act, which would offer a much simpler and faster means of resolution and not burden the 
court at the same time. By implementing strict measures to prevent violence and damage 
to property within healthcare facilities, the Bill aims to create an atmosphere conducive to 
quality healthcare delivery. This includes the establishment of State Health Committees to 
deter potential acts of violence and collecting comprehensive data as well.
Furthermore, the Bill recognizes the importance of supporting healthcare professionals 
who have been victims of violence or damage to property. It proposes measures to ensure 
adequate psychological support and counseling for affected individuals. By addressing the 
aftermath of such incidents, the Bill acknowledges the importance of supporting the well-
being and recovery of healthcare professionals, thus promoting retention and job satisfaction 
within the sector.
By creating a framework that prevents violence, supports victims, and holds offenders 
accountable, this Bill not only enhances the quality of healthcare services but also protects 
the fundamental rights and safety of those working in the healthcare sector. It is a necessary 
step toward building a society where healthcare providers can perform their duties without 
fear, and patients can receive the care they need in a secure environment.
Hence this Bill.
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                     MOHAMMAD JAWED
July 03, 2023.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 17 of the Bill provides for setting up Health Committee by the appropriate 
Government for carrying out purposes of this Act. It further provides for conduct survey 
of the identified healthcare facilities where violence, obstruction, loss, or damage to the 
property has taken place and for creating awareness about mental health and illness and 
reducing the stigma associated with mental illness among healthcare providers by the 
Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees seven hundred 
crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore is also likely to be 
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
__________
A
BILL
to prohibit violence against healthcare service providers, patients, and their attendants and 
to prevent damage or loss to property in healthcare service facilities and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
_________
(Dr. Mohammad Jawed,  M.P .)