1
THE PROVISION OF HEALTH CARD (FOR PERSONS LIVING
BELOW POVERTY LINE) BILL, 2018
By
DR. SHRIKANT E. SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for issue of health card to citizens living below poverty line for availing
medical facilities free of cost and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Provision of Health Card (For Persons Living Below
Poverty Line) Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  98  of  2018
5

2
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “medical store” means a registered pharmacy/drug store;
(b) “person living below poverty line” means a person, whose annual income
from all sources is less than rupees fifty thousand; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall formulate a compulsory health insurance scheme
for persons living below poverty line.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, through the State Government or the Union
territory Administration, as the case may be, issue a health card to every citizen living
below poverty line.
(2) The health card shall contain the details such as name and age, address, details of
family members, annual income and such other information as may be prescribed.
(3) the compulsory health insurance scheme made under this Act shall cover head of
the family, his spouse, dependent parents and dependent children.
5. Any citizen who is entitled to a health card but has not been issued the same, may
approach the district administration, which shall, after necessary verification, issue the health
card.
6. (1) Any citizen, who has been issued a health card, may approach any hospital,
including a privately run hospital for treatment of self or any of his family members, whose
name has been included in the health card.
(2) The hospital shall not charge any fees from the cardholder for his treatment or
treatment of any member of his family and shall also provide the prescribed medicines free of
cost:
Provided that where medicines are unavailable in the hospital, it shall be procured from
a medical store by the Hospital and made available to the citizens within the stipulated time
as may be prescribed.
(4) The hospital shall make entires in the health card regarding the total expenditure
incurred by it in the treatment of the cardholder or his family members and send a copy of the
detailed expenses to the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The total expenditure on the treatment in respect of a health cardholder and his
family members shall not excced rupees twenty-five thousand per year:
Provided that the cardholder may submit an application in the form as may be prescribed
to the Central Government for enhancing the limit in case of any critical illness and the
Central Government may allow an enhanced expenditure for the treatment of the particular
disease.
8. Subject to the provisions of section 7, no hospital shall refuse treatment of any
cardholder, on the ground that the cardholder has not made any advance deposit with the
hospital for treatment.
9. The hospital shall make its claim for reimbursement of expenses in connection with
treatment of a cardholder or a member of his family to the Central Government in such manner
as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Formulation
of
compulsory
health
insurance
scheme.
Limit of
expenditure
on the
treatment of
cardholders.
Hospitals not
to refuse
treatment to
cardholders.
Insuance of
health cards to
persons living
below poverty
line.
Citizens to
approach
district
administration
for non-
issuance of
health card.
Right of health
cardholders to
get treatment
from hospitals.
Procedure for
reimbursement.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
10. The Central Government on receipt of a claim under section 9 shall process the
same and reimburse the expense within a month of receipt of the claim to the hospital
concerned.
11. If any hospital refuses to treat any cardholder or member of his family without any
valid reason, the Central  Government shall issue directions for cancellation of the licence of
the hospital.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Reimbursement
to be made
within a
month.
Penalty for
violation.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country is facing the problem of shortage of manpower in the health sector. Below
Poverty Line sectors cannot afford to seek any treatment from the private hospitals in our
country due to high fees. The Government hospitals and Health Centres either lack medicine
stock or have absentee doctors, especially in the rural areas. Healthcare on the other hand is
extremely expensive in private sectors. Hence, high percentages of the population here
cannot afford healthcare in private hospitals.
India, being a welfare State, care has to be taken by the Government for the under
privileged sections of the society. It is proposed to provide that persons living below poverty
line will be allowed to take free treatment in hospitals including private hospital.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIKANT E. SHINDE
February 15, 2018.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for a health insurance scheme for all persons living below
poverty line. Clause 4 provides for issuance of health cards to all persons living below
poverty line to enable them to take treatment in hospitals. Clause 10 provides for reimbursement
of expenses by the Central Government to the hospital concerned.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees Five hundred crore per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees  one thousand crore will also be involved
for issuing health cards from the Consolidated Fund of India.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for issue of health card to citizens living below poverty line for availing
medical facilities free of cost and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Shrikant E. Shinde, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4306LS(S3)—16-03-2018.