As INTRODUCED IN Lox Sauta.

Bill No 98 of 2004 i

THE STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA (PROHIBITION OF
IMPROPER USE) BILL, 2004

A
BILL

ta prohibit the improper use of State Emblem of india for professional and commercial
purposes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. :

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1.(/) This Act may be cailed the State Embiem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Short title,

Act, 2004. extent, applica-
tion and

(2) It extends to the whole of India, and also applies to citizens of India outside India. commencement.

5 (3) It shal! come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(a) "cornpetent authority” means any authority competent under any law for the
time being in force to register any company, firm, other bady of persons of any trade
10 mark or design or to grant a patent;



Probibition of
improper use of
embison,

Prohibition of
use of emblem
for wrongful
gain.

Prohibition of
registration of
certain compa-
nies, ete.

General
powers of
Central
Goverament to
regulate use of
emblem.

४४७४७४७४७४७४४४ ४:

(5) "emblem" means the State Emblem of India as described and specified in
the Schedule to be used as ar official seal of the Government.

3, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
person shall use the emblem or any colourable imitation thereof in any manner which tends
to create an impression that it relates to the Government or that itis an official document of 5
the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government, without the previous

permission of the Central Government or of such officer of that Gover
8 it
authorised by it in this behalf. Tunak a5 may be

Explanation —For the purposes of this section, “person” includes a former functionary
of the Central Government or the State Governments. ° 10

4. No person shall use the emblem for the purpose of any trade, business, calling or
profession or in the title of any patent, or in any Gade mark or design, except in such cases
and under such conditions as may be prescribed.

5. (4) Netwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the ¢i ing i
no competent authority shali,— ¥ fine being in free, 15

(a) register a trade mark or design which bears the emblem, or

(8) grant a patent in respect of an invention which bears a title containing the
emblem.

(2) If any question arises before a competent authority whether any i
any question ari ay emblem is an
emblem specified in the Schédule or a colourable imitation thereof, the competent authority 20

shall refer the question to the Central Government and the decision of the G
ment thereon shall be final. son onthe Central Govern

है 6. (1) The Central Government may make such provision by rules as appears to
it to be necessary, to regulate the use of the emblem in official seal that is used in
offices of the Central Government and the State Governments and their organisations 25

including diplomatic missions abroad, subject to such restrictions and-conditions as
may be prescribed.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government shall have
powers—

हे (०) ७9 notify the use of emblem on stationery, the method of, printing or embossing 39
it on demi-official stationery by the constitutional authorities, Ministers, Members of

Parliament, Members of Legislative Assemblies, officers of the Central Government
and the State Governments;

(b) to specify the design of the official seal consisting of the emblem;

हे (00७ restrict the display of emblem on vehicles. of constitutional authorities, 35
foreign dignitaries, Ministers of the Central Government and the State Governments;
3

हु (ato Provide for guidelines for display of emblem on public buildings in India,
the diplomatic missions and on the buildings occupied by India's consulates abroad:

{e) to specify conditions for the use of emblem for variou:
हे ( 1 s other purposes
including the use for educational purposes and the armed forces personnel; ° 40

है (f) to do all such things (including the specification of. ‘design of the emblem and
its use in the manner whatsoever) as the Centrat Government considers necessary or
expedient for the exercise of the foregoing powers.

20

“25

30

35

3

9. (3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable Penaity.

with imprisonment far a term which may extend to two years, छा with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, or if having been previously convicted of
an offence under this section, is again convicted of any such offence, he shall be
punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence with imprisonment for a
terma which skal} sot be less than six months, which may extend to two years and with
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.

(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 4 for any wrongful
gain shall be punishable for such offence with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than six months, which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees.

8. No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be instituted,
except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of any officer authorised
in this behalf by general or special order of the Central Government,

9, Nothing in this Act shall exempt any person from any suit or other proceedings
which might be brought against him under any other law for the time being in force.

10, The provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other enactment or
instrument having effect by virtue of such enactment.

11. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—~

(०) cases and conditions regulating the use of emblem under section 4;

(6) making rules to regulate the use of the emblem in official seal of the
Government and specifying restrictions and conditions relating thereto under sub-
section (/) of section 6;

(c) the use of emblem on stationery, design of official seal consisting of
emblem, and other matters under sub-section (2) of section 6;

(d@) authorising officer by general or special order for giving previous
sanction for instituting prosecution under section 8; and

(९) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shal! thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.

Previous
sanction for
prosecution.

Savings

Actio have
overriding,
effect,

Power fo make
rules,



THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2(4)]
STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA
DESCRIPTION AND DESIGN

The State Emblem of India is an adaptation from the Sarnath Lion Capital of Asoka
which is preserved in the Sarnath Museum. ‘The Lion Capitai has four lions mounted back to
back on a circular abacus. The frieze of the abacus is adorned with sculptures in high relief
ofan elephant, a galloping horse, a bull and a lion separated by intervening Dharma Chakras.
‘The abacus rests on a bell-shaped lotus.

‘The profile of the Lion Capital showing three lions mounted on the abacus with a
Dharma Chakra in the centre, a bull on the right and a galloping horse on the left, and
outlines of Dharma Chakras on the extreme right and left has been adopted as the State
Embtem of India. The Bell-shaped lotus has been omitted.

‘Phe motto "Satyameva Jayate—Truth alone trimmphs—written in Devanagari script
below the profile of the Lion Capital is part of the Siate Emblem of India.

The State Emblem of India shall conform to the designs as set out in Appendix } or
Appendix I.

APPENDIX 1

सद्यमेब Sd

Note.—- This design is in simplifi

small sizes,

such as for use in stationery,

ed form and meant for reproduction in

seals and die-printing.



Note.—

APPENDIX 1

सत्यमेव wad

This design is more detailed and meant for reproduction in bigger
sizes.

era et,

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The use of State Emblem of Indin is presently governed by a set of executive instructions,
which cover various aspects, such as, standard design of the State Emblem of India, its
adoption by the State Governments, its use in the official seals and on stationery, design of
official seal, display on vehicles and on public buildings, use for educational and various
other purposes, etc, However, these instructions or orders do not have any legal sanction.
‘The State Emblem of India being the official seal ofthe Governmentt, its uso on any document,
or thing tends to create an impression that it is an official document or thing of the Government.
Therefore, there is a need to prevent ils misuse by unauthorised persons.

2. In order to regulate the use of State Emblem of India with a view to (1) prohibiting
the use of the State Emblem of India by members of the public, including retired/former
Government officials/public servants, etc., unless specifically authorised by the Central
Government; (12) prohibiting the improper use of State Emblem of India for professional
and commercial purposes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto; and (113)
regulating its use by Government functionaries, it is proposed to enact 8 self-contained
legislation.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

SHIVRAJ ५. PATIL.

New Deu;
The 26th August, 2004.



«

गत TTT ES nT ES SS  ्ंऑऑ at

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to regulate the
use of State emblem of india in official seal of the Central Government and the State
Governments and their organisations including diplomatic missions abroad.

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 10 carry out the
purposes of the Bill. Without prejudice to the generality of such rule making powers, they
include regulating the use of State Emblem of India for professional and commercial pur-
poses, in the official seal used by the Central Government, the State Governments and their
organizations: on stationery, vehicles, public buildings, etc., and authorizing an officer for
giving previous’sanction for instituting prosecution against the offenders.

The rules are confined to matters of procedure and details and the delegation of tegis-
lative powers is of a normal character.

|

]
|
|



SABHA

A

BILL

to prohibit the improper use of State Emblem of India for professional and commercial
Purposes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Shivraj V. Patil, Minister of Home Affairs)

MGIPMRND—3109LS—-3, 12.2004.