1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI P. KARUNAKARAN , M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment)  Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 shall be omitted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 98 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Omission of
section 124A.
45 of 1860.
5

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Section 124A of Indian Penal Code, 1860, more popularly known as the sedition law,
has for long been in the period of obsolescence. The scrapping of the law has been long
overdue. The law which was framed during the period of British rule in India is no more
durable as other laws are available to clamp down the real threat to the nation. Even the
Supreme Court has interpreted this section to ensure that it applies only to actions that
have a direct and unambiguous connection to violence or public disorder. The sedition law
is no more of real use in the democratic framework as it exists in the country. The democratic
principles are more mature in handling the criticism against it. The democratic principles
stand for free speech which is the essence of any democracy and use the sedition law to
suppress the freedom of speech is in itself is not right.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to omit section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P. KARUNAKARAN
July 5, 2016.

3
ANNEXURE
(EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860)
* * *
124A. Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by sign, or by visible
representation, or otherwise brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites
or attempts to excite disaffection towards the Government established by law in India, shall
be punished with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment
which may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
Explanation 1.—The expresssion "disaffection" includes disloyalty and all feelings
of enmity.
Explanation 2. —Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures of the
attempt to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under
this section.
Explanation 3. —Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or
other action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt
or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.
* * *
Sedition.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri P . Karunakaran, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4245LS(S3)—10-07-2017.