Bill No.  98 of  2015
THE COW AND OTHER MILCH ANIMALS (PROHIBITION OF
SLAUGHTER, CRUELTY AND OTHER PROVISIONS)
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI  NISHIKANT  DUBEY , MP
A
BILL
to provide for the prohibition of slaughter of cow and its progeny and other milch
animals for consumption of meat or its export or for any other purpose, prevention
from cruelty and infliction of trauma, pain or suffering on animals
and for humane approach towards them through welfare
measures and the well being of animals and for
matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth  year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cow and other Milch Animals (Prohibition of Slaughter,
Cruelty and other Provisions) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States and
for different provisions of this Act.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "animal" includes all domestic animals such as cow and its progeny, buffalo,
goat, sheep, camel, horse etc. and captive animals or performing animals and stray
animals;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "appropriate  Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "local authority" includes a municipal committee, corporation, council by
whatever name called, district board, cantonment board or any authority for the time
being entrusted by law with the control and administration of any matters within a
specified local area;
(d) "owner" used with reference to an animal includes not only the owner of the
animal but also any other person for the time being in possession or custody of the
animal whether with or without the consent of the owner;
(e) "performing animal" means an animal which is used at or for the purpose of
any entertainment, display, sport, cinematograph film and animal shows like equine
events, dog shows, etc.;
(f) "phooka or doomdev" includes any process of introducing air or any substance
into the female organ of a milch animal with intention of drawing off from the animal
any secretion of milk;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) "society" means a society established for animal welfare and for the prevention
of cruelty, pain or suffering to animals and recognised by the appropriate Government
under this Act;
(i) "street" includes any way, road, lane, square, court, alley, passage or open
space, whether a thoroughfare or not to which the general public have access; and
(j) "welfare organization" means an animal welfare organization which is registered
with and recognised by the appropriate Government.
3.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
or contrary to food habits or religious belief, the slaugthter of cow and its progeny and all
other milch animals is hereby prohibited in any manner whatsoever.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of every person having the care or charge of any animal,
whether as owner or otherwise, to ensure the welfare and well being of such animal and to
prevent the infliction of trauma, pain or suffering upon such animal and in particular shall
ensure that the animal in his care or under his charge,—
(a) does not face thirst, hunger and malnutrition;
(b) does not face discomfort due to vagaries of nature and environment;
(c) does not suffer from pain, injury and disease;
(d) is free to express normal behaviour including reproduction of the species;
and
(e) is free from fear and distress.
(2) It shall be the duty of the general public not to inflict injury and pain to any animal in
any manner whatsoever and bring to the notice of the Board or society or welfare organization
about any injured, ill or incurably ill animal in the street for taking care of such animal.
(3) The practice of phooka or doomdev or by whatever name called and giving injection
of oxytocin or any other medicine to a milch animal for drawing secretion of milk from such
animal is hereby prohibited.
(4) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (3) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
Prohibition of
slaughter of
cow and its
progeny and
other milch
animals.
Duties of
persons having
charge of
animals or
otherwise.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. (1) Whoever,—
(i) kills or slaughter a cow or its progeny or any other milch animal either for
consumption of its meat or to export its meat or for any other purpose including rituals
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years
but may extend to ten years and also with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees;
(ii) beats, kicks, overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures or otherwise treats
any animal so as to subject it to trauma, pain or suffering or employs the animal in any
work or labour or for any purpose without adequate rest, food or water or the animal by
reason of its age or any disease, infirmity, wound, sore or other cause is unfit to be so
employed or wilfully administers any injurious drug or injurious substance to any
animal or keeps any animal chained or tethered with a short or heavy chain or cord, or
hobbles the legs of the animal or confines in a cage or other receptacle or mutilates an
animal in any manner including ear cropping, tail docking, defanging, declawning,
branding, piercing in any manner shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall
not be less than two years but may extend to five years and also with fine which may
extend to rupees one lakh;
(iii) being the owner of an animal,—
(a) neglects to exercise or cause to be exercised or keeps the animal
habitually chained up or in close confinement; or
(b) fails to provide such animal with sufficient food, drinking water or
shelter; or
(c) abandons the animal in circumstances which render it likely that it will
suffer trauma, pain or suffering by reason of relocation, starvation, thirst, injury
or illness; or
(d) wilfully or negligently permits any animal to go at large in any street or
permits any diseased or disabled or injured animal to die in any street;
shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than one year but may
extend to three years and also with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupee;
(iv) solely with a view to provide entertainment,—
(a) confines or causes to be confined any animal including tying of an
animal as a bait so as to make it an object of prey for any other animal; or
(b) incites any animal to fight any other animal or any human being or
organizes or participates or acts in the management of animal figting; or
(c) promotes or takes part in any shooting match or competition wherein
animals are released from captivity for the purpose of such shooting; or
(d) organizes, participates, promotes or in any manner is associated with
any sport or activity involving the use of animals where such animals are
subjected to cruetly either during the sport or activity itself or while in training;
shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than three years but
may extend to five years and also with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees;
(v) skins or roasts or kills for superstition or extracts parts of any live animal
through a procedure that causes pain and suffering, for the purpose of getting skins,
oils or other animal products or dynamites or electrifies stream, river or other waterbody
or a fence for catching or killing an animal shall be punishable with imprisonment
which shall not be less than two years but may extend to five years and also with fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees;
(vi) performs upon any cow or other milch animal the operation phooka or
doomdev or any other operation including injection of oxytocin or of any substance to
Penalty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
improve lactation which is injurious to the health or the animal, or permits such operation
being performed upon any such animal in his possession or under his control shall be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year and also with fine which
may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to,—
(a)  the  dehorning  or, nose roping castration of any animal provided it is
performed by a veterinary surgeon in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) the extermination or destruction of an incurable ill animal in such manner as
may be prescribed.
6. Where an offence under this Act or rules framed thereunder is  committed by a
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was incharge of, and
was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as
the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of one offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing in this section shall render any such person liable to any
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
7. The appropriate Government shall recognize societies, Gaushalas, welfare
organization etc. for the treatment and care of animals and work as a bridge between the
appropriate Government, local authority and other authorities concerned with the animals in
such manner as may be prescribed.
8. (1) No person shall carry on the business of breeding or selling of any animal other
than in the manner prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
(2) No person or institution shall perform an experiment on animals unless permitted
by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Any Police Officer above the rank of head constable or any person authorized by
the appropriate Government in this behalf, who has reason to believe that an offence under
this Act has been or is being committed in respect of any animal may, if in his opinion the
circumstances so require, seize the animal and produce the same for examination by the
nearest magistrate or by such veterinary officer as may be prescribed, and such Police
Officer or authorized person may, while seizing the animal, require the person incharge
thereof to accompany it to the place of examination.
(4) The appropriate  Government shall, by general or special order, authorise the
detention of animals in respect of which offences against this Act have been committed in
any Infirmaries, Society, Gaushalas, Animal Welfare  Organization, etc. pending its production
before a magistrate and the cost of transporting the animal thereto and of the maintenance
and treatment at such places shall be payable by the owner of the animal and any amount
payable by an owner may be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.
(5) Where in any proceedings for an offence against this Act it is established that a
person has in his possession, custody or control, an animal which is injured or wounded or
mutilated or being experimented upon or which has been killed or has in his possession the
skin of an animal or any part of the animal, it shall be presumed that such person has treated
the animal with cruelty until the contrary is proved and the burden of proving which shall lie
on the accused.
9. Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an
offence under this Act shall be a cognizable offence within the meaning of that code.
10. The provisions of this Act and of any rules and orders made thereunder shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force.
Offences by
Companies.
Recognition
of Societies,
Welfare
Organizations
etc.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Cognizability
of offences.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
11. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to prevent any person from being prosecuted
under any other law for the time being in force, for any act or omission which constitutes an
offence under this Act or from being liable under such other law to any higher punishment or
penalty than that provided by this Act.
12. Every person authorized by appropriate Government under this Act shall be deemed
to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and no
suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against him in respect of anything in
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
13. The Central Government shall,  after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
14.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, each House of the State Legislature,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, Parliament or, as the case may
be, the State Legislature agrees in making any modification in the rule or agrees that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Person
authorized to
be public
servant and
indemnity
provision.
Operation of
other laws not
barred.
Power to
make rules.
Central
Government
to provide
Funds.
45 of 1860
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our Country till recently had the largest number of animals in the world and it is one of
the largest producer of milk in the world. But the number of animals is going down rapidly
alongwith milch animals. As such there is a mismatch between the production of milk and per
capita consumption of milk in the country. Whereas the population of the country is increasing
manifold, the population of milch animals is on the decline. This mismatch has resulted in
short supply of milk and its prices have increased manifold in the recent past making this
commodity out of the reach of the poor people and the worst sufferers are children who are
not getting milk resulting in their malnutrition. Taking advantage of shortage of milk in the
country the unscrupulous and anti-social people are producing synthetic milk on a very
large scale and endangering the health and the lives of the unsuspecting people. This
situation has to be tackled on priority and one way to do this is to impose a blanket ban on
the slaughter of milch animals in the country which are slaughtered to consume their meat
and also to export the meat to earn foreign exchange at the cost of poor children who are not
getting milk essential for their health.
From the ancient times cow is called Goumata and is worshipped particularly by the
Hindus in the country. Not only the cows milk is consumed by the people and more so by the
children even the cows urine is used for medicinal purposes in various parts of the Country.
Its progeny when grows as bull helps the farmers in cultivating their fields and grow cereals
for the human consumption and the industry. Cow dung is used to make manure in rural
India. Since cow is worshipped there is a long pending demand of most of the Hindus in the
country to impose a blanket ban on the slaughter of cows and its progeny in the country.
Religious leaders sadhus, saints and various political parties have consistently demanded
ban on slaughter of cow and its progeny. Hence,  it has become necessary to ban the
slaughter of cows and its progeny throughout the country showing respect to the sentiments
of majority of the people.
Of late, cruelty against animals in the country has risen manifold. People do not hesitate
kicking and inflicting injuries on animals and more so on stray animals. Even the owners of
milch animals after extracting their milk leave them to roam on the streets and roads and these
hungry animals can be seen searching food in garbage and loitering on the roads causing
road accidents in which they too are hurt and wounded. In this Bill various forms of cruelty
have been elaborated. Cruelty against animals must be stopped with a heavy hand by
imposing tough penalties and fines on the offenders and humane approach should be adopted
towards the animals.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
March 24, 2015.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 13 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite
funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. At this stage, it is not possible to estimate the
amount to be incurred. However, the Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees ten thousand crore would be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees twenty five thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prohibition of slaughter of cow and its progeny and other milch
animals for consumption of meat or its export or for any other purpose, prevention
from cruelty and infliction of trauma, pain or suffering on animals
and for humane approach towards them through welfare
measures and the well being of animals and for
matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—70LS(S3)—16.04.2015.