THE SECURITISATION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF FINANCIAL
ASSETS AND ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY INTEREST
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
By
ADV. P.T. THOMAS, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets
and Enforcement of Security Interest (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 98 of  2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In section 14 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, after sub-section (1), the following provisos shall
be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the secured creditor, while making request to the Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate or the District Magistrate, as the case may be, for taking possession or control of
any secured asset, shall file an affidavit to the effect that the secured asset in question does
not fall within any of the exemptions provided under section 31:
Provided further that where the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magis-
trate, as the case may be, is of the view that the secured asset in question is an agricultural
property, he shall, before passing any order, afford an opportunity of being heard to the
parties interested in the matter.".
Amendment
of section 14. 54 of 2002.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest Act, 2002 was enacted for speedy recovery of loan amount by Banks and Financial
Institutions by making provisions for taking possession of secured assets by secured
creditors.
Section 14 of the Act provides that if the secured creditor approaches the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate for taking possession of a secured asset,
the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate shall, as the case may be, take
possession of such asset and documents relating thereto and forward such asset and
documents to the secured creditor.
Section 31 provides, inter alia, that the provisions of the Act shall not apply in cases
of any security interest created in agricultural land. However, in numerous cases agricultural
land has been attached by the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate and
the plea of the debtor that attachment of agriculture land is barred under section 31 are
rejected on the ground that under section 14 of the Act, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or
the District Magistrate has no choice except to take possession of the asset and hand it over
to the secured creditor.
The only remedy available to a debtor is to approach the Debt Recovery Tribunal. The
process for getting relief from the Debt Recovery Tribunal is time consuming and by the time
the relief is granted by the Debt Recovery Tribunal, irreparable loss is already caused to the
standing crops.
The Bill seeks to amend the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 with a view to provide that—
(1) the secured creditor while making a request to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or
the District Magistrate, as the case may be, for taking possession or control of any secured
asset shall file an affidavit that the secured asset does not fall within any of the exemptions
provided under section 31 of the Act; and
(2) Where the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate, as the case
may be, is of the view that the secured asset in question is an agricultural property, he shall
afford an opportunity of being heard to the parties interested in the matter before passing
any such order under the Act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P.T.  THOMAS
July 26, 2010.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE SECURITISATION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND
ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY INTEREST BILL, 2002
(ACT NO. 54 OF 2002)
* * * * * * * * * *
14. (I) Where the possession of any secured assets is required to be taken by the
secured creditor or if any of the secured assets is required to be sold or transferred by the
secured creditor under the provisions of this Act, the secured creditor may, for the purpose
of taking possession or control of any such secured assets, request, in writing, the
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate within whose jurisdiction any such
secured asset or other documents relating thereto may be situated or found, to take
possession thereof, and the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or as the case may be, the District
Magistrate shall, on such request being made to him—
(a) take possession of such asset and documents relating thereto; and
(b) forward such asset and documents to the secured creditor.
* * * * * * * * * *
Chief
Metropolitan
Magistrate or
District
Magistrate to
assist secured
creditor in
taking
possession of
secured asset.
4

GMGIPMRND—3812LS(S3)—18-08-2010.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002.
————
(Adv. P .T. Thomas, M.P.)