1
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SCHOOLS UPTO SENIOR
SECONDARY LEVEL BILL, 2012
By
SHRI J.P. AGARWAL, M.P .
A
BILL
to establish schools imparting education upto senior secondary level free of cost
to all children in the country.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Establishment of Schools Upto Senior Secondary
Level Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; and
(b) "child" means a boy or a girl who is below the age of eighteen years.
Bill No. 98 of  2012
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
10

2
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of schools upto
senior secondary level to impart education to children from classes first to twelfth standard.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government may, if it deems
necessary, upgrade any of the existing primary, middle or secondary school to senior
secondary level.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), there shall be at least one senior
secondary school per one thousand population in every area.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide the following facilities to every child
enrolled in a school established or upgraded under section 3:—
(i) cost of admission and all other expenditure including tuition fee shall be
borne by the appropriate Government;
(ii) books, notebooks and all other stationary items free of cost;
(iii) free hostel facilities, whenever necessary; and
(iv) scholarship in deserving cases.
5. (1) It shall be compulsory for every parent to admit their wards in school for the
purpose of education upto senior secondary level.
(2) No person shall employ any child in any job which prevents him from attending
school.
6. Whoever prevents any child from getting education upto senior secondary level,
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide to the State Governments by way of grants such sums of money as the
Central Government may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
8. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force in relation to any of the matters provided under this Act.
9. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.
Establishment
of schools
upto senior
secondary
level.
Facilities to
be provided to
the students
enrolled in
schools.
Duty of
parents to
send their
wards to
schools.
Penalty.
Grants by the
Central
Government.
Power to
make rules.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
While a large number of primary, middle and secondary schools have been established,
the students, especially in big cities, have to face hardships in securing admission to senior
secondary schools because, in most of the cases, the last attended school imparts education
upto primary, middle or secondary level. Students are compelled to run to district education
office, schools and other authorities to get recommendations or relevant certificates to fulfil
the formalities for admission in senior secondary schools. In such a situation, it is quite
natural that the children as well as parents have to suffer mental agony.
Therefore, it has become necessary in the public interest to provide for the establishment
of schools imparting education from classes first to twelfth or upgrade the existing primary,
middle or secondary level schools to senior secondary level.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; J.P. AGARWAL
July 31, 2012.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of adequate number of schools or
upgrade the existing primary, middle or secondary level schools upto senior secondary level.
Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government shall bear the cost of admission and all
other expenditure including providing of free of cost books, note books, stationary item,
hostel facility and scholarship to the students enrolled in schools. Clause 7 provides that the
Central Government shall provide funds to the State Governments for establishment of
schools. The expenditure in respect of the establishment of schools in Union territories
would also be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring
expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seventy five crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish schools imparting education upto senior secondary level free of cost
to all children in the country.
————
(Shri J.P .  Agarwal, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2562LS(S3)—30.08.2012.