1
THE PROHIBITION OF EXTRA V AGANT EXPENDITURE ON
MARRIAGES BILL, 2011
By
DR. MAHENDRASINH P. CHAUHAN,  M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit extravagant and wasteful expenditure on marriages and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of  Extravagant Expenditure on Marriages
Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No.98 of 2011
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "expenditure on marriage" included’s expenditure incurred during marriage
celebrations on invitation cards, decoration, tented pandals, illumination, fireworks,
luncheon, dinner, clothes, ornaments, gifts, hiring of a baraat ghar, banquet hall or
hotel or such other places for celebrating marriages; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything in any community, tribe or religion, all the marriages,
shall be solemnized in a simple ceremony without any extravagant expenditure on such
marriages.
(2) The appropriate Government shall fix the limit of guests and relatives who may be
invited to attend the solemnization of a marriage or reception held thereafter.
(3) The appropriate Government shall fix the limit of expenditure which can be incurred
on a marriage.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
appropriate Government shall prescribe necessary guidelines for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
5. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be liable for
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to
one lakh rupees.
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty, and
any such order or direction shall be final.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Prohibition of
extravagant
expenditure
on marriage.
Guidelines to be
framed by the
appropriate
Government.
Punishment.
Removal of
difficulties.
Power to make
rules.
Act not to be
in derogation
of any law.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Nowadays marriages are celebrated with pomp and show, people spend lavishly on
such celebrations. Lakhs of rupees are spent on shamianas and decorations followed by
sumptuous feasts. In addition to all these things, substantial cash and costly gifts are
exchanged. People use these occasions to spend their black money. It is unfortunate that
poor people are also affected by this pomp and show, this situation is creating unrest among
those who have no money to spend lavishly.
Since extravaganza during marriages has become the order of the day, those who are
poor become heavily indebted or are being forced to adopt corrupt practices to earn money.
As such corruption in all walks of life has acquired alarming proportions. It is very harmful
for the progress of the nation.
It is a fact that even after spending lakhs of rupees on marriages people are not happy.
This leads to bride burning and marital discords. Parents sometimes try to extract as much
money as possible through the marriage of their sons.
This ugly tendency has to be checked and deterrent punishment has to be provided so
that wasteful expenditure is curtailed on auspicious occasions like marriages. This will certainly
go a long way in cleansing our society from corruption.
N
EW DELHI; MAHENDRASINH  P.  CHAUHAN
November 9, 2011.
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
4

GMGIPMRND—2482LS(S3)—23-11-2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit extravagant and wasteful expenditure on marriages and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Mahendrasinh P . Chauhan, M.P.)