Short title.
THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS (REGULATION) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2007
A
BILL
 further to amend the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Amendment
Act, 2007.
2. In section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in clause (h), after sub-clause (id), the following sub-clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(ie) any certificate or instrument (by whatever name called), issued to an investor
by any issuer being a special purpose distinct entity which possesses any debt or
receivable, including mortgage debt, assigned to such entity,  and acknowledging
beneficial interest of such investor in such debt or receiveable including mortgage
debt, as the case may be,".
3.  After section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely: —
"17A. ( 1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Act or any
other law for the time being in force, no securities of the nature referred to in sub-
clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 2 shall be offered to the public or listed on any
recognised stock exchange unless the issuer fulfils such eligibility criteria and
complies with such other requirements as may be specified by regulations made by
the Securities and Exchange Board of India.
42 of 1956. Amendment
of section 2.
Insertion of
new section
17A.
Public issue
and listing of
securities
referred to in
sub-clause (ie)
of clause ( h)
of section 2.
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA ON 14.05.2007.
Bill No. 98-C of 2006.
5
10
15
20

2
(2) Every issuer referred to in sub-clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 2 intending
to offer the certificates or instruments referred therein to the public shall make an
application, before issuing the offer document to the public, to one or more recognised
stock exchanges for permission for such certificates or instruments to be listed on the
stock exchange or each such stock exchange.
(3)  Where the permission applied for under sub-section (2) for listing has  not
been granted or refused by the recognised stock exchanges or any of them, the issuer
shall forthwith repay all moneys, if any, received from applicants in pursuance of the
offer document, and if any such money is not repaid within eight days after the issuer
becomes liable to repay it, the issuer and every director or trustee thereof, as the case
may be, who is in default shall, on and from the expiry of the eighth day, be jointly and
severally liable to repay that money with interest at the rate of fifteen per cent. per
annum.
Explanation.—In reckoning the eighth day after another day, any intervening
day which is a public holiday under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, shall be
disregarded, and if the eighth day (as so reckoned) is itself such a public holiday, there
shall for the said purposes be substituted the first day thereafter which is not a
holiday.
(4) All the provisions of this Act relating to listing of securities of a public
company on a recognised stock exchange shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the listing
of the securities of the nature referred to in sub-clause (ie) of clause (h) of section 2
by the issuer, being a special purpose distinct entity.
4. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (c), for the word and
figures "section 17", the words,  figures and letter "section 17 or section 17A" shall be
substituted.
5. In section 31 of the principal Act, for sub-section  (2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —
(a) the manner, in which at least fifty-one per cent. of equity share capital
of a recognised stock exchange is held within twelve months from the date of
publication of the order under sub-section (7) of section 4B by the public other
than the shareholders having trading rights under sub-section (8) of that section;
(b) the eligibility criteria and other requirements under section 17A.’’.
26 of 1881.
Amendment
of section 23.
Amendment
of section 31.
5
10
15
20
25
30

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
MGIPMRND—2267LS(S-5)—14.05.2007.