1
THE BASIC AND PRIMARY EDUCATION (COMPULSORY
TEACHING IN MOTHER TONGUE) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI A.T. NANA PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory use of mother tongue in imparting basic and primary
education to children in all educational institutions and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Basic and Primary Education  (Compulsory Teaching
in Mother Tongue) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "basic education" means education provided in preparatory schools or
kindergarten schools or such other schools, by whatever name called;
(c) "educational institution" includes a school which is run by Government or
by any other authority designated by it or by a private institution, association or trust,
whether aided by Government or not, recognized or unrecognized, imparting education
to the children from primary level;
Short title
and extent.
Bill No. 98 of  2016
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(d) "mother tongue" means the language generally spoken in the family of a
child who learns it from his mother and other family members and which is one of the
languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) "primary education" means education up to the level of middle class or eighth
standard.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every educational institution shall impart basic and primary education to the children in their
mother tongue or dialect generally spoken in the region or State, as the case may be, where
such an institution is located, in addition to Hindi or English language, as the case may be,
so as to properly develop the faculties of the children.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government shall appoint
language teachers in all Government run or aided schools and provide requisite
infrastructure for that purpose.
(3) The appropriate Government shall derecognize the educational institutions not
complying with the provisions of this Act for such period as it may deem necessary and
impose such other sanctions as may be prescribed after giving such institutions a reasonable
opportunity to defend their cases.
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the States for appointing language teachers and for
providing other infrastructure required for the purposes of this Act.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall
apply to minority institutions only if the management of such institutions convey to the
appropriate Government their willingness for imparting basic and primary education to the
children in their mother tongue in their school curriculum.
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the diffulty:
Privided that no such order shall be made or direction be given after three years of the
commencement of this Act.
 7. (1) The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
(2) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
8. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, Parliament agrees in making any modification in the rule or
agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Compulsory
imparting of
basic and
primary
education in
mother
tongue of the
child.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to apply
to minority
educational
institutions in
certain
situations.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
For a child, the easiest language to acquire knowledge and understanding of worldly
affairs is his mother tongue. He learns to speak his mother tongue from his mother and family
members, who generally speak the language spoken from generations or the dialect of their
forefathers or of the area or region in which they reside. In major parts of our country, Hindi
is the main language with different dialects at different places but it is written in Devanagari
script and can be understood easily. Then, there are regional languages. A total of
twenty-two languages have been recognized by our Constitution. The mother tongue, no
doubt, is the most appropriate language for a child to develop his faculties. However, when
a child is admitted in the play school or Kindergarten or primary school, more so in the so
called elite or public schools, he has to switch over to English medium, which is the medium
of instruction in such schools. At this stage the real difficulty of the child begins. He speaks
and understands a particular language, i.e.,  his mother tongue, but the education is imparted
to him in a different language. This causes strain and in order to become a part of the system
he starts ignoring his own mother tongue. In the Hindi speaking areas, students of public
schools cannot count in Hindi and do not recognize Hindi alphabet because in their school
they cannot speak in their language and have to speak only in English. In many schools,
students are penalized if they speak in language other than English. Though the child learns
English under compulsion but he is not at ease with this language and on the other hand he
does not develop sufficient knowledge of his own language. It is, therefore, necessary that
a child should be imparted basic and primary education in his mother tongue, which is the
easiest language for him. Thereafter, the child can acquire the skills in other languages and
opt for the language of his choice for his further studies.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA PATIL
March 3, 2016.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint language
teachers and provide requisite infrastructure for it. The expenditure in respect of schools in
Union territories and those funded or aided by the Central Government shall be borne out of
the Consolidated Fund of India. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall provide
requisite funds to the States for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. This Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
sum of rupees one thousand crore per annum will be involved as recurring expenditure.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory use of mother tongue in imparting basic and primary
education to children in all educational institutions and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri A. T. Nana Patil, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5316LS(S3)—25-04-2016.