     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill  No.  98  of  2022
THE   EASTERN  REGION  TOURISM  PROMOTION  AUTHORITY
BILL, 2022
By
DR. SUKANTA MAJUMDAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Tourism Promotion Authority for the eastern
region of the country and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of  the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Eastern Region Tourism Promotion Authority
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title andcommencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Authority” means the Eastern Region Tourism Promotion Authority
established under section 3;
  (c)  “Eastern States” include West Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand and Odisha;
and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within one year from the date of
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an
Authority to be known as the Eastern Region Tourism Promotion Authority for
promotion of tourism in the Eastern States.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name
sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and a regional
office at Balurghat in the State of West Bengal and the Authority may, with the
previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices in the Eastern
States.
(4) The Authority shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson having vast knowledge and working experience
in tourism and hospitality sector to be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) one member each from the House of the People and the Council of
States representing each of the Eastern States to be nominated by the respective
Presiding Officers of each House of Parliament;
(c) seven members representing the Union Ministries of—
(i) Tourism;
(ii) Culture;
(iii)  Finance;
(iv) Information and Technology;
(v) Planning;
(vi) Road Transport and Highways;
(vii) Railways; and
(d) three members representing the tour operators, to be appointed
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The Authority shall elect from amongst its members, a
Vice-Chairperson who shall exercise such powers and perform such functions,
as may be prescribed.
(6) The term of the office of the Chairperson and members of the Authority and
the procedure to be followed by the Authority in discharge of its functions shall be
such as may be prescribed.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Definitions.
Constitution ofthe EasternRegion TourismPromotion
Authority.

(7) The Authority may associate with itself in such manner and for such purposes,
as may be prescribed, any person whose assistance or advice it may require and the
person so associated shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the Authority
relevant to the purposes for which he has been associated, but shall not have the right
to vote.
(8) The salary and allowances and conditions of service of the Chairperson
and members of the Authority shall be such as the Central Government may,
from time to time, determine.
4. (1) The Authority shall have a Secretariat consisting of a Secretary, a
Planning Advisor and such other officers and employees as the Central
Government may by order determine for efficient discharge of the functions of
the Authority.
(2) The Secretariat of the Authority shall function under the direction, supervision
and control of the Chairperson of the Authority.
(3) The Administrative expenses of the Secretariat including salaries and
allowances payable to the staff shall be borne by the Central Government.
5. (1) The Authority shall function as a planning and advisory body for the
accelerated and all round development and promotion of tourism in the Eastern States
and formulate various tourism related schemes for each of the Eastern State and address
the issues of common tourism interest of Eastern States in time bound manner.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of the
sub-section (1) the plans and schemes for development and promotion of tourism may
provide for—
(a) setting up of tourism facilitation centres at all entry points at
the borders of each State and at airports and railway stations with a view
to provide facilities such as reservation in air services, trains, buses, hotels,
motels and guest houses for tourists;
(b) inter-linking of all the places of tourist importance of all the
Eastern States by air, road and rail and extending communications,
telecommunication and Information Technology facilities at such places;
(c)  accelerated promotion of tourism in each Eastern State by way
of compilation of tourism related infrastructural requirement of each State
by deputing team of experts for making ground assessment of the tourism
related infrastructural requirements and making appropriate
recommendations;
 (d)  setting up of hotels, restaurants and motels at all tourism centres
with a view to catering to the needs of different categories of domestic and
international tourists and recognition of private sector hotels, motels and
restaurants for the benefit of tourists in such manner as may be prescribed.
(e)  recognizing and preparing a list of paying guest accommodations at
places with no facility of hotel or motel accommodation for tourists;
(f) conducting organized tours of different centres of tourism in all
the Eastern States;
(g)  organising cultural functions and events in consultation with
appropriate Government and other organisations concerned at various
tourist places in each of the Eastern States at regular intervals so as to
create awareness among domestic and foreign tourists and general public
about the Indian culture, customs and traditions and way of life of the
people;
5
10
15
3
Secretariat ofthe Authority.
Functions of theAuthority.
20
25
30
35
40
45

 (h) organising cultural functions in other countries in coordination
with Indian Embassies and High Commissions with a view to depicting
Indian Culture and Traditions and attracting the foreign tourists to Eastern
States;
(i) training programmes for tourist guides and tour operators about
historical importance of tourist places, traditions and culture of each of
the Eastern States and services to be extended to domestic and foreign
tourists;
(j)  recognizing transport and taxi operators and fixing fares to be charged
from the tourists in consultation with the appropriate Government;
(k) recognising shops, showrooms and stalls selling handicrafts, local
ornaments and other such articles in order to prevent fleecing of tourists by
unscrupulous traders and touts;
 (l) setting up of health resorts based on Indian system of medicines
at various tourist places in consultation with the appropriate Government;
(m) making arrangement for security of tourists particularly foreign
tourists at various tourist centres in consultation with the appropriate
Government;
(n) co-ordinating with the Archaeological Survey of India and tourism
departments of the State Governments of the Eastern States with a view to
protecting monuments and heritage sites; and
(o) making adequate arrangements of public conveniences and
amenities such as toilets, urinals, drinking water and sitting places at
tourist places in consultation with the appropriate Government.
6.  The Authority shall give wide publicity to its planning, policies, schemes
and programmes for development of tourism in the Eastern States through all
means of communications including hoardings, banners, posters, booklets and
print and electronic media in the country as well as abroad.
7. (1) The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial
year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a true and full accounts of its
activities during the previous financial year and submit a copy thereof to the
Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid, as soon
as may be after receipt of the report under sub-section (1), before each House of
Parliament.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide, from time to time, requisite and
adequate funds to the Authority as well as to the States covered under this Act
for implementation of tourism development and promotional plans and schemes
formulated by the Authority under this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Publicity of theprogrammes,policies andschemes fordevelopment of
tourism.
Annual Report.
Power to makerules.
CentralGovernment toprovide
requisite funds.
4
5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country has a vast tourism potential as we have a large number of
historical places, monuments, forts, historical and archaeological sites and remains,
national monuments, water bodies, beautiful beaches and coastal areas, desert places,
gardens, lagoons, etc.
The four Eastern States are the unique blend of scenic beauty and picturesque
locations having different cultures, traditions and many languages. These are located
on eastern bottleneck of India stretching from Himalayas to the Bay of Bengal,
presenting some marvelous landscape features and natural scenic beauty. Kolkata
enjoyed the privilege of being the capital of British India and witnessed overall
development and other parts couldn’t be developed so much.
Most of the tourist centres do not have adequate facilities for the tourists
and the State Governments are not in a position to spend money for providing the
requisite facilities. Air connectivity and rail services are inadequate. The road
network including Highways and National Highways either does not exist or
wherever it exists, it is in a dilapidated condition. The hospitality sector is in
doldrums with no worthy hotel accommodation and so is the travel sector with no
worthy fleets of good buses, taxi and other modes. There are no tourist facilitation
centres. The tourists get cheated by middlemen, touts and others. Such acts and lack
of facilities discourage the tourists from visiting these beautiful places.
Of late, the Central Government has started to promote tourism in the
Eastern States particularly in the States of West Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand  and Odisha
by giving incentives to its employees while availing leave travelling concessions to
visit tourist places in Eastern States.
Hence, it is proposed to set up a Tourism Promotion Authority exclusively
for the Eastern States to concentrate upon promoting tourism in that region of the
country.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                   SUKANTA  MAJUMDAR
 March 30, 2022.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Eastern Tourism
Promotion Authority. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall bear the
administrative expenses of the secretariat of the Authority. Clause 5 provides for
certain functions of the Authority for promotion of tourism in the Eastern States and
providing of certain facilities for tourists. Clause 6 provides that programmes, policies
and schemes for development of tourism in the Eastern States shall be given wide
publicity. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite
funds to the Authority and the State Government concerned for implementation of
schemes for promotion of tourism. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
five hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two thousand crore may also be
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Tourism Promotion Authority for the eastern
region of the country and for matters connected therewith and
 incidental thereto.
————
(Dr.  Sukanta Majumdar, M.P .)