REPRINT

As introbuceD I Lox Sapa

25 आए 1६

Bill No, 98 of 2000
aaa led

THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION BILL, 2000
A

BILL

to provide for freedom to every citizen-ta securé access to information under the control of
public authorities, consistent with public interest, in order to promote openness, trans-
_ parency and accountability in administration and in relation to matters- connected
therewith or incidental thereto. :

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
| CHAPTER I
~ PREEIMINARY
1. (7) This Act may be called the Freedom of Information Act, 2000. हि
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir,

(3) It shail come into force on such date a3 the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Vs

Short title,

extent and

commence-
ment.



Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless fhe context otherwise requires, —

(a) “appropriate Government" means in relation to a public authority established,
constituted, owned, substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly or
controlled—

(i) by the Central Government, the Central Government;
(ii) by the State Government, the State Government;

(b) "competent authority" means—

(0 the Speaker in the case of the House of the People or the Legislative

Assembly and the Chairman in the case of the Council of States or the Legislative

Council;

(४) the Chief Justice of India in the case of the Supreme Court;
(Hi) the Chief Justice of the High Court in the case of a High Court;

(iv) the President or the Governor, as the case may be, in case of other
authorities created by or under the Constitution;

(८2) “freedom of information" means the right to obtain information from any
public authority by means of, —
(0 inspection, taking of extracts and notes;
(i) certified copies of any records of such public authority;

(iii) disketts, floppies or in any other electronic mode or through print-
outs where such information is stored in a computer or in any other device;

(@ “information” means any material in any form relating to the administration,
operations or decisions of a public authority;

(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the
appropriate Governmenit or the competent authority, as the¢ase may be;

() "public authority" means any authority or body established or consfituted,—
(i) by or under the Constitution;
(ii) by any law made by the appropriate Government,
and includes any other body owned, controlled or substantially financed by funds
provided directly or indirectly by the appropriate Government,

- (g}"Public Information Officer" means the Public Information Officer appointed
under sub-section (7) of section 5;

(A) "record" includes—
(7) any document, manuscript and file;
(ii) any microfilm, microfiche and facsimile copy of a document;

(ii) any reproduction of image or images embodied in such microfilm
(whether enlarged or not); and .

(iv) any other material produced by a computer or by any other device;

20

25

30

35

(0) “third party” means a person other than.the person making a request for _

information and includes a public authority.

= Rit
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION AND OBLIGATIONS OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES
Freedom of 3, Subject to the provisions of this Act, all citizens shall have freedom of information,
Information. :
Obligations on 4. Every public authority shall—
Or ies, {a) maintain all its records, in such manner and form as is consistent with its

operational requirements duly catalogued and indexed;

40

45



3

(4) publish at such intervals as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government
or competent authority,—

(i) the particulars of its organisation, functions and duties;

(ii) the powers and duties of its officers and employees and the procedure
followed by them in the decision making process;

(iti) the norms set by the public authority for the discharge of its functions;

(iv) rules, regulations, instructions, manuals and other: categories of records
under its control used by its employees for discharging its functions;

17) the details of facilities available to cit tizens for obtaining information;
10 and

(vi) the name, designation and other particulars of the Public Information
Officer.

(c) publish all relevant facts concerning important decisions and policies that
affect the public while announcing such decisions and policies;

15 (d) give reasons for its decisions, whether administrative or quasi-judicial to
those affected by such decisions;

(c) before initiating any project, publish or communicate to the public generally,
or to the persons affected or likely to be affected by the project in particular, the facts
available to it or to which it has reasonable access which in its opinion should be

20 known to them in the best interests of maintenance of. democratic principles.

5. (1) Every public authority shall for the purposes of this Act, appoint one or more
Officers as Public Information Officers,

(2) Bvery Public Information Officer shall deal with requests for information and
shall render reasonable assistance to any person seeking such information.

25 (3) The Public Information Officer may seek the assistance of any other officer as he

considers necessary for the proper discharge of his duties,

(4) Any officer whose assistance has been sought under sub-section (3), shall render
all assistance to the Public Information Officer seeking his assistance.

6, A person desirous of obtaining information shall make a request in writing or
30 through electronic means, to the concerned Public Information: Officer specifying the
Particulars of the information sought by him: हा

Provided that where such request cannot be made in writing, the Public Information
Officer shail render alt reasonable assistance to the person making. the request orally to
reduce it in writing.

35 7. (1) On-receipt of a request under section 6, the Public Information Officer shall, as
expeditiously as possible, and in any case within thirty days of the réceipt of the request,
either provide the information requested on payment of such fee as may be prescribed or
reject the request for any of the reasons specified in sections 8 and 9:

Provided that where it is decided to provide the information .on payment of any

40 further fee representing the cost of providing the information, he shall'send an intimation to
the person making the request, giving the details of the fees determined by him, requesting
him to deposit the fees and the period intetvening between the despatch of the said intimation

and payment of fees shall be excluded for the purpose of calculating the period of thirty
days referred to above. पर

45 (2) Before taking any ‘decision under section (7), the Public Information Officer shall
take into consideration the representation made by a third party under section 11,

Appointment
of Public
Information
Officers,

Request for
obtaining
Information.

Disposal of
requests.



Exemption
from
disclosure of
information.

Grounds for
refusal to
| in
certain cases.

कर : 4

(3) Where a request is rejected under sub-section (2), the Public Information Officer
shall communicate to the person making request,—

{i) thé reasons for such rejection;

(ii) the period within which an appeal against such rejections may be preferred;

(ii) the particulars of the appellate authority. 5

(4) Information shall ordinarily be provided in the form in which it is sought unless it
would disproportionately divert the resources of the public authority or would be detrimental
to the safety or preservation of the record in question.
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, the following information
not being information relating to any matter referred to in sub-section(2), shall beexempted 10
from disclosure, namely:— दि
(a) information, the disclosure of which would prejudicially affect the
sovereignty and integrity of India, security of the State, strategic scientific or economic
interest of India or conduct. of international relations;
(0) information, the disclosure of which would prejudicially affect public safety 15
and order, detection and investigation of an offence or which may lead to an incitement
to commit an offence or prejudicially affect fair wial or adjudication of a pending
case;

{c) information, the disclosure of which would prejudicially affect the conduct
of Centre-State relations, including information exchanged in confidence between 20
the Central and State Governments or any of their authorities or agencies; .

(d) Cabinet papers including records of deliberations of the Council of Ministers,
Secretaries and other officers;

(९) minutes or records of advice including legal advice, opinions or
recommendations made by any officer ofa public authority during the decisionmaking 25
process prior 10 thé executive decision or policy formulation;

(f) trade or commercial secrets protected by law or information, the disclosure
of which would prejudicially affect the legitimate economic and commercial interests
or the competitive position of a public authority; or would cause unfair gain or loss to
any person; and

(g) information, the disclosure of which may result in the breach of privileges
of Parliament or the Legislature of a State, or contravention of a lawful order of a
court.

30

_ (2) Any information relating to any occurrence, event or matter which has taken place
occurred or happened twenty-five years before the date on which any request is made under 35
section 6 shall be provided to any person making a request under that section:

Provided that where any question arises as to the date from which the said period of
twenty-five years has to be computed, the decision of the Central Government shail be

final.

9, Without prejudice to the provisions of section 8, a Public Information Officer may 40
reject a request for information also where such request—

(व) is too general in nature or is of such a nature that, having regard to the
volume of information required to be retrieved or processed would involve
disproportionate diversion of the resources of a public authority or would adversely

interfere with the functioning of such authority: 45

Provided that where such request is rejected on the ground that the request is
too general, it would be the duty of the Public Information Officer to render help as



19 of 1923,

5

far as possible to the person taking request to reframe his request in such a manner
as may facilitate compliance with it;

(6) relates to information that is required by law, rules, fegulatiotis or orders to. *

be published at a particular time and such information is likely to be so published
5 within thirty days of the receipt of such request; or

(c) relates to information that is contained in Published material available to
public;

(d) relates to information which would cause unwarranted invasion of thé Privacy. ;

of any person,

10 10. If a request for access to information is rejected on the groitndl that it is
to information which is exempted from disclosure, then notwithstanding. anything.contai,
in this Act, access may be given to that Part of the record which does-not obt

15 11. Where a public authority intends to disclose information on a request made’ by a
party which relates to, or-has been Supplied by a third party and has been treated as confidential
by that third party, the Public Information Officer shall by notice to such third. ‘party invite
representation against the Proposed disclosure, if any, within fifty days ftom the date of
receipt of such notice: हु 1

Possible harm or injury to the interests of such third party.

12. (7) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Public Information Officer may,
within thirty days of Teceipt of such decision, prefer an appeal to such authority as may be
25 prescribed: .

Provided that such authority may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause
from filing the appeal in time.

(2) Asecond appeal against the decision under sub-section (/) shall lie within thirty
30 days of such decision, to the Central Government or the State Government or the competent
authority, as the case may be:

Provided that the Central Government or the State Government or the competent
authority, as the case may be, may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of
thirty days if it is satisfied that the appeliant was Prevented by sufficient cause from filing

35 the appeal in time,

(3) The appeals referred to in sub-sections (/), and (2) shail be disposed of within
thirty days of the receipt of such appeals or within such extended period, as the case may
be, for reasons to be recorded in writing,

(4) If the decision of the Public Information Officer against which the appeal is
40 preferred under sub-section (J) or (2) also relates to information of third party, the appellate
authority shall give a reasonable opportunity of being heard to that third party,
CHAPTER III
MiIsceLLANgous

13. No. suit, Prosecution or,other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for
45 anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done-under this Act or any ruie made
thereunder, ॥

! 14, The Provisions of Official. Secrets Act, 1923, and every other Act in force shall
Cease to be operative to the extent to which they are inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act.

Severability, 7

Third party
information.

Appeals.

Protection of
action taken in
good faith,

Act 10 have
overriding
effect.



Bar of 15. No court shall entertain any suit, application or other proceeding in respect of
jurisdiction of any order made under this ‘Act and no such order shail be called in question otherwise than
courts.

by-way of an appeal under this Act.

Act not to 16. (7) Nothing contained in this Act,—~

apply 10
onan (a) shall apply to the intelligence and security organisations, specified in the 5
organisations. Schedule being organisations established by the Central or 8 State Government or
any information furnished by such corganisations'40 the respective Governments;
(b) shall until Part B of the Schedule is amended under sub-section (2), apply to
the intelligence and security organisations by whatever name called discharging their
functions as sich under the State Governments.

(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the

Schedule by including therein any other intelligence or security organisation established by
the Central or a State Government or omitting therefrom any organisation already specified

therein and on the publication of such notification, such organisation shall be deemed to be
included in or, as the case Tay be, omitted from the Schedule. 15
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2), shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
Power to make, > 19, (2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
ules by ° rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Central .
Government. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 20
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) intervals at which matters referred to in sub-clauses (7) 0 (vi) of clause (by
of section 4 shall be published;
(8) the fee payable under sub-section (व) of section 75
(८) the authority before whom an appeal may be preferred under sub-section G) 25
of section 12; पु
(व) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
Power to make 48 (3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
nes by State ryjes to carry out the provisions of this Act.
yvernment., .
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 30
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— °
| the fee.payable under sub-section () of section 7;
(b) the authority before whom an appeal may be preferred under sub-section
(J) of section 12;
(०) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed: 35.
Provided that initially the rules shall be made by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette.
Rule making 1 19, (4) The competent authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
+ power by rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
competent
authority. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 40

rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the fee payable under sub-section (/) of section 7;


10

5 15

7

(0) the authority before whom an appeal may be preferred under sub-section
(+) of section 12;

(८) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

20. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as Laying of

5001 as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for rules.

a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more

successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the

session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification

ini the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter

have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,

that any such modification or annulment shall be without Prejudice to the validity of any-

thing previously done under that rule,

(2) Every rule made under this Act by a State Government shall be laid, as scon as
may be after it is notified, before the State Legislature,

21. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the Provisions of this Act, the Central power to
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not remove
inconsisient with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for _ ‘“ifficulties.
removal of the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years

20 from the date of the commencement of this Act.

25

30

35

(2) Evey order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before the Houses of Parliament.

THE SCHEDULE
{See section 16)
PartA
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY ORGANISATIONS ESTABLISHED BY THE CenTraL Government
1. Intelligence Bureau.
2, Research and Analysis Wing of the Cabinet Secre(ariat. ~
3. Directorate of Revenue Intelligence.
4, Central Economic Intelligence Bureau.
5. Directorate of Enforcement.
6, Narcotics Control Bureau.
| ParrB है
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY ORGANISATIONS ESTABLISHED BY THE STATE GOVERNMENT
Name of the Organisation Name of the State
1


"STATEMENT OF QBJECTS AND REASONS

Th to eriact @ law on right to information was recognized unanimously by the
Chief Ministers Conference on "Effective and Responsive Government" held on 24th May,
1997 at Delhi. In [७ 38th Report relating to Demands for Grants. of the Ministry of
1 Personn 1010 Grievances and Pension, the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home
“Affairs recommended that the Government should take measures for enactment of such a

s legislation 5. ०-५

2. In Order to make the Government more transparent, and accountable to the public,
the Government of India appointed aWorking Group on Right to Information and Promotion
of Open and Transparent Government under the Chairmanship of Shri H. 0, Shourie. The
Working. aS asked to examine the feasibility and néed for either full-fledged Right
‘Act or its introduction in a phased manner to meet the needs of open and
Jovernance and also to examine the frame work of rules with reference to the
ivil Service (Conduct) Rules afid-Manual of Office Procedure. The said Working Group
i Teport in May, 1997 along with a draft Freedom of Information Bill to the
‘The Working Group also recommended suitable amendments to the Civil
Service (Conduct) Rules: and the Manual of Departmental: Security instructions with a
view to bring them in harmony with the proposed Bill: :

3, The draft Bill submitted by the Working Group was subsequently detiberated by
the Group of Ministers constituted by the’Central Government to ensure that free flow of
information_was available to the public, while, inter alia, protecting the national interest,

7 _, Sovereignty and integrity of India, and friendly relations-with foreign States.

4. The proposed Bill is in accord with both article 19 of the Constitution as well as

- article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,

5. In our present democratic frame work, free flow of information for the citizens

»-and non-Government institutions suffers from several bottlenecks including the existing

legal frame work, lack of infrastructure at the grass'root levels and an attitude of secrecy
within the.Civil Service as a result df the old frame work of rules. The Governinent proposes

"to deal with all these aspects in a phased manner so that the Freedom of Information Act

came a reality consistent with the objective of having a stable, honest, transparent and
“efficient Government.
6. The proposed Bill will enable the citizens to have an access to information on a
stafutory basis. With a view to further this objective, clause 3 of the proposed Bill specifies
. that subject to the provisions of this Act, every citizen shall have tight to freedom of
information. Obligation is cast upon every public authority under clause 4 to provide
information and to maintain all records consistent with its operational requirements duly
catalogued, indexed and published af such intervals as may be prescribed by the’appropriate
Government or the competent authority.

7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects, |
New Dein; VASUNDHARA RAJE,
‘The 15th May, 2000. है

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
oo CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Copy. ofletter No. 3401 1/1(s)/97-Estt.(B) dated 15th May, 2000 from Mrs. Vasundhara
Raje, Minister of State for Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension to the Secretary-General,
Lok Sabha) .

‘The President, having been informed of the subject matter of “The Freedom of

Information Bill, 2000”, recommends the introduction and consideration of the said Bill in
the Lok Sabha under Article 117(1) and (3) of the Constitution.

8



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

1, Sub-clause | of clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of one or more
officers as Public Information Officers to deal with requests for information, Itis expected
that the various agencies would be appointing some of their existing officers as the Public
Information Officers for the Purpose of this Act or redesignating the Publicity or information
officers as Public Information Officers. Only in a few cases, it might be necessary to create
additional posts for this purpose. Thus, the manpower requirement in this regard arising
from the legislation is expected to be met from within the existing sanctioned strength of
the various agencies at the Central and State level, all within the existing budget.

2. At this stage, it is not Possible to give Precise details of the expenditure to be
incurred on material resources in terms of computers and other office equipment required
for supply of information. However, the requirement of these items is likely to be met by
the ongoing programmes for computerization of operations in various agencies and any
additional expenditure might be offset by Tecovery of fees for supply of information,

up in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions under the Central
Government. This Cell shall consist of one Joint Secretary, two Deputy Secretaries, two
Senior Analysts and two conventional sections. In addition, the personal staff of the above
officers will also be appointed. An estimated recurring expenditure of Rs. 28 lakhs is
likely to be incurred on the salaries of the officers and staff in the Cell,

4. The Bill does not invotve any other recurring or non-recurring expenditure,



re

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 16(2) of the Bill empowers the Central Government, by notification in the
Official Gazette, to amend the Schedule for including any other intelligence or security
organisation established by the Central or State Government or oinit therefrom any
organisation already specified therein,

Ctause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out
the provisions of the Act. Sub-clause (2) of that clause enumerates the matters with respect

to which rules may be made under this clause.

+, These matters relate to, inter alia, the iittervals at which particulars of organisation,
functions and duties of its officers, details of facilities available to citizens for obtaining
information in such organisation; fee payable to obtain an information from an organisation;
the authority to be p-escribed before whom an appeal may be preferred from the decision
of Public Information Officer and any other matter which is required to be prescribed.

Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of the Act. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are specified
therein, These miatters relate to, inter alia, the fee payable to obtain information from any
organisation; the authority to be prescribed before whom an appeal may be preferred against
the decision of the Public Information Officer and any other matter which is réquired to be
prescribed.

Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the competent authority to make rules to carry out
the provisions of the Act. These matters relate to, inter alia, the fee payable for obtaining
the information from the Public Information Officer of an organisation; the authority (0 be

- prescribed before whom an appeal may be preférred against the decision of the Public
Information Officer and any other matter which is required to be prescribed.

Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Government by order to remove certain
difficulties which may appear to it to be necessary or expedient. Further, such order shall
not be made under this clause after the expiry of a period of two years from the
commencement of this Act. Every such order shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of administrative
details and procedure and, it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself, The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for freedom to every citizen’ to secure access to information under the
control of public authorities, consistent with public interest, in order to promote
openness, transparency and accountability in administration and in relation to
raatteis connected therewith cr incidental thereto.

(Smt. Vasundhara Raje, Minister of State in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions)

MGIP(PLU)MRND——1 301LS—03-06-2000.