• 
Bill No.99 of 1980 
'rUE FIN .. tlN(JE (~o. 2) DILL, 1080 
(AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

THE FINANCE (No.2) BILL, 1980 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PBELIMINAIIY 
CLAlISES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
CHAPTER n 
RATES OF INCGMIioTAX 
2. Income-tax. 
CHAPTER III 
DlUCTTAXES 
I ftC Om,. tal 
3. Amendment of section 2. 
4. Amendment of section 10. 
5. Amendment of section 16. 
6. Amendment of section 32. 
7. A mendment of Bectlon 35. 
8. Amendment of sectlon 35B. 
9. Amendment of Bectlon 36. 
10. Amendment of section 37. 
11. A mendm ent of section 41. 
12. Insertion of new' section 80AA. 
13. A mendment of sectlon 80C. 
14. Omission of section 80FF. 
15. Amendment of section 80G. 
16. Insertion of new section 80-L 
17. Amendment of sectlon 8OJ. 
18. Amendment of section 8OJJ. 

(U) 
19. Amendment of section 80L. 
20. Amendment of section 80RR. 
21. Amendment of section 80T. 
22. Amendment of section BOTT. 
23. Amendment of section 80U. 
24. Amendment of section 139. 
25. Amendment of section 143. 
26. Amendment of section 155. 
27. Amendment of section 164. 
28. Amendment of scction 171. 
29. Amendment of section 208. 
30. Amendment of section 209A. 
31. Amendment of section 212. 
32. Amendment of section 215. 
33. Amendment of section 273. 
34. Amendment of Fourth Schedule. 
35. Consequential amendments to certain sections. 
36. Amendment of section 2. 
37. Amendment of section 5. 
38. Amendment of section 7. 
39. Insertion of new section 20A. 
40. Amendment of section 21. 
41. Amendment of Schedule I. 
Gift-tax 
42. Amendment of Act 18 of 1958. 
43. Amendment of Act 45 of 1974. 
M i S4: ell Gtleous 
44. Saving in certain cases. 
CHAPTER IV 
INDIRECT TAUS 
45. Amendment of Act 51 of 1975. 
46. Amendment of Act 1 of 1944. 
47. Amendment of Act 13 of 1980. 
48. Amendment of Act 58 of 1967. 
49. Amendment of Act 26 of 1978. 
50. Amendment of Act 62 of 1962, etc., to provide for 
an Appellate Tribunal. 

CHAPTER V 
MISCEU-ANEOVS 
CLAUSES 
51. Amendment of Act 6 of 1898. 
52. Amendment of Act 32 of 1971. 
53. Amendment of Act 38 of 1974. 
54. Repeal. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDt;LE. 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. 

The Finance (No.2) BUl, 1980 
(BUl No. 99 of 1980) 
CORRIGENDA 
iPage 6, in l~.oe 33. for "aft" read "after"; 
I 
Page 29, 1D line 23. for ''Developmnet'' read ''DevelOPment' 
. Page 87, 1D line 25, for ''be'' read ''the''; 
Page 96, in line 30, for ''before before" read ''before'' I 
Pap 99, in liDe 15, for "(")" read "(5)"; 
Page 107. in liDe 26, for ''toa!'' read ''total "; 
Page 1.29, in llDe 9 from bottom, for "sent" read "set". 

5 
10 
As INTRODUCED IN LoIC SAB8A 
ON 18TH JUNE, 1980. 
Dill No.99 of 1980 
THE FINANCE (No.2) BILL, 1980 
BILL 
10 give effect to the {irltDtcial proposals of the Central Govem".ent 
for the fi"IIftciaJ year 1980-81. 
BI: it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the 
RepubUc of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PaELIM1JIIUY 
1. r 1) This Act may be called the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1980. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 2 to 
43 am sections 52 and 53 shall be deemed to have come into 
force OD the 1st day of April, 1980. 
CHAPTER n 
RATES OF INCOM .... TAl 
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), 
lor the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of AprU, 
1980, income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified in 
Part I of the First Schedule and shall be increased,-
Short title and 
coDlmencement. 
Income-tu. 
15 (ca) in the cases to which Paragraphs A, B, C and D of 
that Part apply, by a surcharge for purposes of the UnioD; and 
(b) in the cases to which Paragraph E of that Part applies, 
b)' a surcharge, 
calculated in each case in the manner provided therein. 

2 
(2) In the cases to which Sub-Paragraph lor &b-
Paragraph U of Paragraph A of Part I of the First Schedule 
applies, where the assessee has, in the previous year, any net 
agricultural income, in addition to total income, and the 
total income exceeds ten thousand rupees, then, - 5 
(a) the net agricultural income shall be taken into 
account, in the manner provided in clause (b) (that is to say, 
as if the net agricultural income were comprised in the 
total income after the first eight thousand rupees of the 
total income but without being liable to tax), only for the 10 
purpose of charging income-tax in respect of the total 
income; and 
(b) the income-tax chargeable shall be calculated as 
follows:-
(i) the total income and the net agr1cultural income 15 
shall be aggregated and the amount of income-tax sball 
be determined in respect of the aggregate income at the 
rates specified in Sub-Paragraph lor, as the case may 
be, Sub-Paragraph n of the said Paragraph A, as if 
such aggregate income were the total income: 20 
Provided that for the purposes of determining the 
amount of income-tax in accordance with this sub-clause, 
the provisions of clause (ii) of the proviso below &b-
Paragraph lor, as the case may be, &b-Paragraph n 
of the said Paragraph A aDd the provisions relating to 25 
surcharge on income-tax in the said Sub-Paragraphs 
shall not apply; 
(ii) the net agricultural income shall be increased 
by a sum of eight thousand rupees and the amount of 
income-tax shall be determined in respect of the !let 30 
agricultural income 8S 80 inoreased at the rates spec1fted 
in Sub-Paragraph lor, as the case may be, &b-
Paragraph n of the said Paragraph A. as if the net 
agr1culturalincome as 80 Increased were the total1ncome: 
Provided that for the purposes of determining the 35 
amount of income-tax In accordance with this sub-clause, 
the provisions of clause (i) and clause (ii) of the proviso 
below Sub-Paragraph lor, as the case may be, Sub-
Paragraph n of the said Paragraph A and the provisions 
relating to surcharge on income-tax in the said Sub- 40 
Paragrapbs shall not apply; 

43 of 1961. 
3 
(iii) the amount of income-tax determ ined in 
accordance with sub-clause (i) shall be reduced by the 
amount of income-tax detennined in accordance with 
sub-clause (ti): 
5 Provided that where the sum so arrived at exceeds 
Sixty per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds ten thousand rupees, the excess shall 
be disregarded; 
(iv) the amount of Income-tax determined in 
10 accordance with sub-clause (iii) shall be increased by 
a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the 
rate of twent,V per cent. of such income-tax and the sum 
so arrived at shall be the income-tax in respect of the 
total income. 
15 (3) In cases to whicJl the provisions of Chapter XII or 
section 164 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred 
to as the Income-tax Act) apply, the tax chargeable shall be 
determined as provided in that Chapter or that section, and 
with reference to the rates imposed by sub-section (J I or the 
20 rates as specified in that Chapter or section, as the case 
may be. 
(4) In cases in which tax has to be deducted under 
sections 193, 194, 194A, 194B, 194BB, 194D and 195 of the 
Income-tax Act at the rates in forco, the deduction shall be 
25 made at the rates specified in Part II of the First Schedule. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), in cases 
in which income-tax has to be calculated under the first proviso 
to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act or 
charged under sub-section (4) of section 172 or sub-section (2) of 
30 section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 176 
of the said Act or deducted under section 192 of the said Act 
from income chargeable under the head "Salar~.es" or deducted 
under sub-section (9) of section 80E of the said Act from any 
payment referred to in the sald sub-section (9) or in which the 
35 "advance tax" payable under Chapter XVII-C of the said Act 
has to be computed, at the rate or rates in force, such income-
tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" shall be so calcula-
ted, charged, deducted or computed at the rate or rates 
specified in Part m of the First Schedulc: 
40 Provided that in cases to which the provisions of 
Chapter XU or section 164 of the Income-tax Act apply, 
"advance tax" shall be computed with reference to the rates 
imposed by this sub-section or the rates as specified in that 
Chapter or section, as the ctlse may be. 

4 
(6) In the oaae8 to whlcb Sub-Paragraph I or Sub-Pa.raaraph 
n of Pai-agraph A of Part m of the First Schedule applies. where 
the usenee bas, in'the previous year or, If by virtue of any 
provision of the Inoome-tax Act, income-tax Is to be charpd 
III reapeot of the Income of a period other than the previous , 
year, in such other period, any net agricultural income 
exceeding six hundred rupees, in addition to toW iDoome 
am the total income exceeds twelve thousand rupees, then, 
in calculating income-tax under the first proviso to sub-section 
(5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act or in charging Income- 10 
tax uDder sub-section (2) of section 174 or section 175 or sub-
section (2) of section 176 of the said Act or in computing tbe 
"advance tax" payable under Chapter XVU-C of the saki Act., 
at the rate or rates in force. -
(a) the net agrlculturallncome shall be taken into 15 
acOOUDt. in the manner provided in clause (b) (that Is to 
say. as If the net agricultural incomo were comprised 
III the total Income after tbe first eight tbou.88Dd rupees 
of the total Income but witbout being liable to tax). only 
for the purpose of calculating, cbargJng or computiDg such 20 
Income-tax or. as the case may be, "advance tax" in 
re8pect of the total Income; aDd 
(b) such income-tax or. as the case may be. "advance 
tax" shall be 80 calculated, charged or computed as follows:-
(i) the total income and the net agricultural income 25 
sball be aggregated aDd the amount of Income-tax or 
"advance tax" shall be determined in respect of t.be 
aggregate income at the rates specified iJ:i Sub-Paragraph I 
or, 8S the case may be, &lb-Paragraph n of the said 
Paragraph A, as if such aggregate income were the total 30 
income: 
Provided that for the purposes of determining the 
amount of 1ncome-tax or "advance tax" in accordance 
with this sub-clause, the provisions of clause (ii) of 
the proviso below Sub-Paragraph lor, a8 the cu. may 35 
be. Sub-Paragraph IT of the sald Paragraph A and the 
provisions relating to surcharge on income-tax In the 
said Sub-Paragraphs shall not applYi 
(ii) the net agricultural income shall be illcreaRed 
by a sum of eight thousand rupees AmI tlH' :U1!OUlll of 40 
income-tax or "advance tax" slmll be de: , .. nn iL,-'t! in 
respect of the not agricultural income ~ F; :~'J i:w reu,sed 
at the rates specified in Sub-Paragraph I or. ~s the 
case may be, Sub-Paragraph n of the said Paragraph A. 
8S if the net agricultural income as so Jlll'rcased 45 
were the total income: 

6 
Provided that for the purposes of determfniDg the 
amouat of 1Dcome-tax or "adV&DCe tax" In accordance 
with this sub-clause. the provisions of clause (i) 
aDd clause (ii) of the provlBo below ~b-Paragraph I 
or ... the case may be. Sub-Paragraph n of the sald 
Paragrapb A aDd the provisions relating to surcharge 
OD income-tax in the said ~b-Paragraphs shall DOt 
apply; 
(iii) the amount of mcome-tax or "advance tax" 
10 determined in accordance with sub-clause (i) shall be 
reduced by the amount of 1ncome-tax or. as the case 
may be. "advance tax" determined in accordance with 
sub-clawle (i i) : 
Provided that where the sum 80 arrived at exceeds 
15 sixty per oent. of the amount by whJch the total 
tacome axceeda twelve thousam rupees, the excess shall 
be cUsreprded; 
(''') the amount of income-tax or "advance tax" 
determined In accordance with sub-clause (iii) shall 
20 be tDcreued by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
calculated at the rate of ten per cent. of such Income-
tax or. as the case may be. "advance tax" aDd the sum 
80 arrived. at shall be the income-tax or. as the case 
may be, "advance tax" in respect of the total income. 
25 (7) For the purposes of this section and the First Schedule,-
(a) "company in which the public are substantially 
interested" means a company which is such a company as is 
referred to in section 108 of the Income-tax Act; 
(b) "domestic company" means an IndIan company, or any 
30 other company which, in respect of its Income liable to 
income-tax under the Income-tax Act for the .. sessment 
year oommenclog on the 1st day of April, 1980, has made 
the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and payment 
within India of the dlvldends (including dividends on 
35 preference shares) payablo out of such income In accordance 
with the provisions of section 194 of that Act; 
(c) "lDdustrlal company" means a company which Is 
mainly engaged in the business of generation or 
distribution of electricity or any other form of power or 
40 In the constroctlon of ships or in the m8Dlfacture or 
processing of goods or in mining. 

Amendment of 
aection 2. 
6 
fxplanation. - For the purposes of this ctause, a 
company shall be deemed to be mainly engaged in the 
business of generation or distribution of electricity 
or any other form of power or in the construction of 
ships or in the manufacture or processing of goods or 5 
in mining, if the income attributable to anyone or more 
of the aforesaid activities included in its total income of 
the previous year (8S computed before making any 
deduction \Ulder Chapter VIA of the Income-tax Act) is 
not less than fifty-one per cent. of such total income; 10 
(d) "insurance commis~ion" means any remuneration 
or reward, whether by way of commission or otherwise, 
for soliciting or procuring insurance business (including 
business relating to the continuance, renewal or revival 
of policies of insurance); 15 
(t) ''net agricultural income", in relation to a 
person, means the total amount of agricultural income, 
from whatever source derived, of that person computed 
in accordance with the rules contained in Part IV of the 
First Schedule; 20 
(f) ''tax-free security" means any security of the 
Central Government issl\ed or dedared to be income-tax 
froe, or any security of a State Government issued 
income-tax free, the income-tax whereon is payable by the 
State Govornment; 25 
(R) all other words and expressions used in this 
section or in the First Schedule but not defined in this sub-
section and defined in the Income-tax Act shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER III 
DIRECT TAXES 
InCOMe-tal' 
I. In section 2 oftbe Inoone-tax Act, in clause (24), aft • 
sub-clause (iv), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(ivll) the value of any benefit or perquisite, whether 
convertible i~to money or not, oblained by any represen-
tative assessee mentioned in clause (iii) or clause (iv) of 
sub-section (I) of section 160 or by any person on whose 
30 
35 
behalf or for whose benefit any income is receivable by 40 
the representative assessee (such person being hereafter 
in this sub-clause referred to as the ''beneficiary'') and 
any sum paid by the representative assessee in respect 
of any obligation which, but for such payment, would have 
been payable by the bel\eficlar}j '. 45 

7 
.. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act, after clause (23A), 
the following clause shall be inserted and shall be deemed 
always to have been inserted, namely:-
"(23AA) any income received by any person on behalf 
5 of any Regimental Fund or Non- Public Fund established by 
the armed forces of the Union for the welfare of the past 
and present members of such forces or their dependants;". 
I. In section 16 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 
1st day of April, 1981,-
10 (a) in clause (1),-
(i) for the words lIin respect of expenditure incidental 
to the employment of the assessee, ", the words "a deduc-
tion of" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-clauses (a) and (b), the words "derived 
15 from such employment" shall be omitLed; 
(b) in clause (ii), for the words "in respect of any allowance", 
the words "a deduction in respect of any allowance" shall be 
substituted. 
I, In section 32 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 
20 1st day of April, 1981,-
fa) in sub-section (l)"atter clause (ii) , the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
, (iia) in the case of any new machinery orplant (other than 
ships and aircraft) which has been installed after the 31st day 
25 of March, 1980 but before the 1st day of April, 1985, a further 
sum equal to one-half of the amount admissible under clause (ii) 
(exclusive of extra allowance for double or multiple shift work-
ing of the machinery or plant and the extra allowance in respect 
of maohinery or plant installed in any premises used as a hotel) 
30 in respeot of the previous year in w'hic" such mac.binery or 
plant Is installed : 
35 
40 
Provided that 00 deduotion shall be allowed under this 
clause in respeot of -
(d) any machinery or plant installed in any office 
premises or any residential accommodation; 
(b) any office appliances or road transport vehicles; 
and 
(e) any machinery or plant, the whole of the actual cost 
of which is allowed as a deduction (whether by way of 
depreciation or otherwise) in computing the income charge-
Amendment of 
section 10, 
Amendment of 
section 16. 
Amendmen~ of 
section 32. 

• 8 
able under the head "Proflts and gains of business or pro-
fession" of anyone previous year. 
ErpllUlaUon. _ For the purposes oftbis clause,-
(u)- "new machinery or plant" shall have the meaning 
assigned to it in clause (1) of the Explanation below clause 5 
(IIi) ohbis sub-section: 
(b) "residential accommodation" Includes accommoda-
tion tn the nature of a guest house but does not include 
premises used as a botel;'; 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words, brackets and figures 10 
"or clause (iiI", the warda, brackets, figures and letter "or 
clause (uca)" shall be inserted. 
1. In section 35 of the lncome-tax Act. -
(a) in sub-section (2). In clause (ill).-
(f) for the brackets and figures "(ii) , (iii) ", the brackets, 15 
figures and letter "(ii), (ii a), (iii)" shall be substituted with 
effect from the 1st day of April, 1981; 
(ii) for the words "for the same previous year", the words 
"for the same or any other previous year" shall be substituted 
and shall be deemed always to have been substituted; 20 
(b) in sub-section (2A) , with effect from the 1st day of Sep-
tember. 1980,-
(i) after the words, brackets and figures "elause (if) of sub-
section (1)", the words "or to a public sector company" shall 
be insert6d; 25 
(ii) the following Explanation shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
'Explanation. - For the purposes of this sub-sectton, 
''public sector company" shall have the same meaning R8 
in claU8e (b) of the EzpLmdtion below sub-section (28) 30 
of section 32A. 'i 
(e) after sub-section (2A) , the following sub-section shall 
be inserted with effect from the 1st day of September, 1980, 
namely:-
"(28) (I) Where an as8e8see bas incurred any expenditure 35 
(not being in the nature of capital expenditure incurred on the 
acquisition of any land or bdldlng or constructlOft of any 
bunding ) on acteatHIe research undertaken uDder a programme 
approved in thi8 behalf by the pre8cribed authority having 

9 
regard to the social, econ<m.ic and industrial needs of India, 
he shall. subject to the provisions of this sub-section, be 
allowed a deduction of a sum equal to one and one-Courth times 
the amount of the expenditure certified by the prescribed 
I) authority to have been 80 incurred during the previous year. 
(b) Where a deductioo bas been allowed under clatlSe (4) 
fur any previous year in respect of any expenditure, no deduc-
tion in respect of such expenditure shall be allowed under 
clause (i) of sub-section (1) or clause (i a) of sub-section (2) 
10 for the same or any other previous year. 
(e) Where a deduction Is allowed for any previous year 
under this sub-section In respect of expenditure represented 
wholly or partly by an asset, no deduction shall be allowed In 
respect of that asset under clauses (i), (if). (ita) and (iii) of 
15 sub-section (I) or under sub-section (lA) of section 32 for 
the same or any IlUbsequent previous year. 
(d) Any deduction made under this sub-section In respect 
of any expenditure on scientific research in exce,8s of tht> 
expenditure actually incurred shall be deemed to have been 
20 wrongly made for the purposes of this Act if the assessee 
fails to furnish within one year of the period allowed by the 
prescribed authority for completion of the programme, a 
certificate of its completion obtained from that autbority, 
and the provisions of sub-section (S8) of section 155 shall 
25 apply accordingly. ". 
I. In section 35B ofthe Income -tax Act, in 8ub-scction (1) , 
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1981,-
fa) in clause (b). sub-clauses (ii). (iii), (1'). (vi) and (viii) shall 
be omitted; 
30 (b) for fJplanaUon 2 below clause (b), the following fI-
planar ion shall be sUbstituted. namely:-
"Explanation 2. - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that nothing in clause (b) shall be construed to include 
any expenditure which is In the nature of purchasing and manu-
35 facturlng expenses ordinarily debitable to the trading or 
manufacturing account and not to the profit and loss account. It. 
t. In section 36 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (I), after 
cbuse (ii). the following clause sball be inserted with effect from 
the 1st day of April. 1981, namely:-
40 ' (ii 4) a BUm equal to one and one-third times the amount of 
the expenditure inoorred on payment of any salary to an employee 
who, as at the end of the previous year, -
(a) Is totally blind, or 
Amendment of 
section 35B. 
Amendmeat of 
seetiClll 36. 

Amendment of 
sectioD 37. 
Amendment of 
section 41. 
to 
jb) is subject to or suffers from a permanent physioal 
disability (other than blindness) 'which hu the effect of Muoing 
substantially his capacity to engage in a gainful employment 
or occupation : 
Provided that the assessee produces before the lncome-tax 
Officer. in respect of the first assessment year for which deduc-
tion is claimed in relation to each BUch employee under this 
clause. -
5 
(i) in a case rt~fcrrcd to in sub-clause (a). a certificate as 
to his total blindness from a registered medical practitioner 
being an oculist; and 
10 
(ii) in a case referred to in sub-clause (b), a certificate as 
to the permanent physical disability referred to in the said sub-
clause from a registered medical practitioner: 
Provided further that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in 15 
the case of an employee whose income in the previws year oharge-
able under the head "Salaries" exceeds twenty thousand rupees. 
fl'Plcmation I. - In this clause, "salary" includes the pay. 
allowances, bonus or commission payable monthly or otherwise. 
ExplanatiDn 2.·- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 20 
that where a deduction under this clause is allowed for any assessment 
year in respect of any expenditure, deduction shall not be allowed in 
respect of such expenditure under any other provision of this Act for 
the same or any other assessment year; '. 
10. In section 37 of the Income-tax Act, sub-sectio;}s (3A), (38), 
(3C) and (3D) shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of 
April, 1981. 
11. In section 41 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st 
day of April, 1981,-
26 
( a) in sub-section (2), aiter the proviso, the following prOViso 30 
shall be inserted, namely:-
'Provided further that where an asset representing expendi-
ture of a capital nature on scientific research within the meaning 
of clause (c) of sub-Flection (28) of section 35, read with clause 
(4) of section 43 owned by the assessee which was or bas been 3~ 
used for the purposes of business alter it ceased to be usoo for 
the purpose of scientific research related to the business Is sold , 
discarded, demolished or destroyed. the rrovislons of this sub-
section shall apply as if for the words "actual cO£:t", at the first 
place where they occur, the words "actual cost as increased by 40 
twenty-five per cent. thereor' had been substituted. '; 
(b) in Bub-section (3),-
(i) for the words, brackets and figures "clause (iv) of sub-
section (1) of section 35", the words. brackets, figures and 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
11 
letters "olause (i v) of sub-section (l) ,or clause (c) of 6 ub-
section (28), of section 35" shall be substituted: 
(ii) for the words, brackets, flgures and letter "clause (ia) 
of sub-section (2) of section 35 ", the words, brackets, figures 
and letters "clause (la) of sub-section ( 2), or clause (c) of sub-
section (28), of section 35" shall be substituted. 
1Z. In the Income-tax Act, after section BOA, the following section 
shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with 
effect from the 1st day of April, 1963, namely:-
• 
Insertion of 
new section 
80M. 
'80AA. Wbere any deduction Is required to be made or allowed Deductions 
under any section included in this Chapter under the headlng ·C-VedMc _ ~ be made 
£ions in respect of certain incomes" in respect of any income of the :::~:=e 
nature specified in that section which is included in tlte gross total included in 
income of the assessce, then, notwithstanding anything contained ~he cross total 
ded ' d Income. in that section, for the purpose of computing the Hction un er 
that section, the amollnt of income of that nature as comput8:i ir 
accordance with the provisions of this Act (before making any 
deductions under this Chapter) shall alone be deermd to be the 
amount of income of that nature which is derived or received by 
the assessee and which is included in his gross totalinoome. '. 
11. In section 80C of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st 
day of April, 1981,-
(a) for sub-section (1)" the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(I) In oomputing the total income of an assessee, there shall 
be deducted, in accordance withand subject to the provisions of 
this section, an amount calculated, with reference to the aggregate 
of the sums specified in sub-section (2), at the following rates, 
namely:-
(a) where sucb aggregate does 
not exceed Rs. 5, 000 
(b) where such aggregate exceeds 
Rs. 5, 000 but does-not exceed 
Rs.10,OOO 
(c) where such aggregate exceeds 
Rs.I0,OOO 
Tbe whole of such 
aggregate: 
Rs. 5, 000 pIllS 50 per 
cent. of the amount 
by which such aggre-
gate exceeds Rs. 5, 000; 
Rs. 7, 500 plus 40 per 
cent. of the amount by 
which such aggregate 
exceeds Rs. 10,000. "; 
Amendment of 
HCtioa SOC. 
40 (b) In sub-flection (4), in clause (i), for the words "musician 
or actor", the words and brackets"musician. actor or sportsman 
(Including an athlete)" shall be substituted. 

12 
OmlaiaD of U. Section 80FF of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted with effect 
secttoa 80 FF. from the 1st day of April, 1981. 
Aaaeaclment of 
&ec:tiOIl BOG· 
Inaertioa of 
new aectiOft 
80-1. 
Deduction in 
respect of 
plOfit& and 
alliM fIom 
industrial 
andertakings 
after 8 cer-
tllin date, 
etc. 
U. In section 80G of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted 
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1978, namely:-
"( 4) Where the aggregate of the sums referred to in 8ub-
clauses(iv) ,(V) , (vi) and (Vii) of clause (a) and in clause (b) of 
sub-section (2) exceeds the smaller of the following amounts, 
that is to say,-
(i) ten per cent. of the gross total Income (as reduced by 
any portion thereof on which Income-tax is not payable under 
any provision of this Act and by any amount In respect of 
which the assessee is entitled to a deduction under any other 
provision of this Chapter), and 
(ii) five hundred thousand rupees, 
then, the amount by which such aggregate exceeds such smaller 
amount shall be ignored for the purpose of computing the 
aggregate of the sums in respect of which deduction is to be allowed 
5 
10 
15 
under sub-section (1) • "; 20 
(b) after sub-section (5) and before EIplanation I, the following sub-
section shall be inserted and shall be deemed al ways to have been 
inserted, namely:-
ft( SA) Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed for 
any assessment year In respect of any sum speclfted In sub-section (2) , 25 
the sum in respect of which deductiOD 18 so allowed shall not qualify 
for deduction under any other provi8loD of this Act for me same or any 
other assessment year. fl. 
II. In the Income-tax Act, after section SOHHA, the following section 
shall be inserted with effect from the ht day of April, 1981, namely:-
'SO-I. (1) Where the gross total income of an assessee Includes any 
profits and gains derived from an lndustrial undertaking or a ship or 
the business of a hotel, to which this section applies, there shall, in 
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, be 
allowed, in computing the total income of the assessee, a deduction 
from such profits and gains of an amount equal to twenty per cent. 
thereof: 
Provided that in the case of an assessee, beIng a company, the 
provisions of this sub-section shall have effect as if for the words 
"twenty per cent. ", the words "twenty- five per cent. II had been 
substituted. 
30 
35 
40 

5 
10 
15 
20 
26 
30 
36 
13 
(2) This section appUes to any industrial undertaking which fulfils 
aU the follOwing condltions, namely:--
(i) it is not formed by the splitting up, or the reconstruction, of 
a business already in existence; 
(tt) it is not formed by tbe transfer to a new business of machinery 
or plant previously used for any purpose; 
(iii) it manufactures or produces any article or thing, DOt being 
any article or thing specified in the 11st in the Eleventh Schedule, 
or operates one or more cold storage plant or plantR, in any part 
of India, and begins to manufacture or produce articles or things 
or to operate such plant or plant~, at any time within the period of 
four years next followtng the 31st day of )larch, 1981, or 
such further period as the Central Government may, by 
notlfication In the Offtc1a1 Gazette, speclfy with reference 
to any particular Industrial undertaking; 
(iv) In a case where the industrial undertaking manufactures 
or produces articles or things, tbe undertaking employs ten or 
more workers in a manufacturing process carried on with the 
aid of power, or employs twenty or more workers in a manufactur-
Ing process carried on without the aid of power: 
Provided that the condltlon in clause (t) shall not apply in respect 
of any industrial undertaking which is formed as a result of the 
re-establlshment, reconstruction or revival by the assessee of the 
business of any such industrial undertaking as is referred to in 
sectlon 33B, in the circumstances and within the period speclfied 
in that sections 
Provided further that the condition in clause (iii) shall, in 
relation to a small-scale industrial-undertaking, apply as If the 
words ''not being any article or thing speclfied In the list in the 
Eleventh Schedule" had been omitted. 
Explanation f. - For the purposes of clause (ii) of this sub-
section, any machinery or plant which was used outside india by 
aDY person other than the assessee shall not be regarded as 
machinery or plant previously used for any purpose, if the follow-
lug conditions are fuUUled, namely:-
(a) such machinery or plant was not, at any time previous to 
the date of the installation by the assessee, used in India; 
(b) such machinery or plant Is imported into India from any 
country outside India; and 
40 cc) no deduction on account of depreciation in respect of sucb 
machinery or plant has been allowed or is allowable under the 
provisions of this Act in computing the total income of any 

14 
person for any period prior to the date of the installation of the 
machlDery or plant by the assessee. 
EgllDIIItiDn 2.- For the purposes of this sub-section, "small-
scale industrial undertaking" shall have the same meaning as in 
clause (b) of the ErplanatioH below sub-section (8) of section 6 
BORHA. 
(3) This section applies to any ship, where all the following 
conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(i) It Is owned by an Indian company and Is wholly used for 
the purposes of the business carrled on by it; 10 
(ti) it was not, previous to the date of Its acquisition by 
the Indian company, owned or used In indian territorial 
waters by a person resident in India; and 
(iii) it is brought into use by the Indian company at any 
time within the period of four years next following the 1st day 15 
of AprU, 1981. 
(4) This section applies to the business of any hotel, where 
all the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(i) the business of the hotel is not formed by the spUttlng 
up, or the reconstructlon"of a business already in existence 20 
or by the transfer to a new business of a bulldlng previously 
used as a hotel or of any machinery or plant previously used 
for any purpose; 
(ii) the business of the hotel is owned and carrled on by a 
company registered in India with a paid-up capital of not less 25 
than five hundred thousand rupees; 
(iii) the hotel is for the time being approved for the purposes 
of this Sub-section by the Central Government; 
(iv) the business of the hotel starts functiOning after the 31st 
day of March, 1981 but before the 1st day of April, 1985. 
(5) The deduction specified In sub-section (1) shall be allowed 
In computing the total Income in respect of the assessment year 
relevant to the previous year In which the Industrial undertaking 
begins to manufacture or produce articles or things, or to 
operate its cold storage plant or plants or the ship Is first 
brought into use or the business of the hotel starts functioning 
(such assessment year being hereafter In this section referred 
to as the initial assessment year) and each of the six assessment 
years Immediately succeeding the initial assessment year: 
Provided that in the case of an assessee, being a co-operative 
society, the provisions of this sub-section shall have effect as If 
30 
36 
40 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
16 
for the words "six assessment years", the words ''nine assessment 
years" had been substituted. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of 
this Act, the profits and gains of an industrial undertaking or a 
ship or the business of a hotel to which the provisions of sub- section 
(1) apply shall, for the purposes of determining the quantum of 
deduction under sub- section (1) for the assessment year Immediately 
succeeding the initial assessment year or any subsequent assessment 
year, be computed as if such Industrial undertaking or ship or the 
business of the hotel were the only source of income of the assessee 
during the previous years relevant to the initial assessment year 
and to every subsequent assessment year up to and including the 
assessment year for which the determination is to be made. 
(7) Where the assessee Is a person other than a company or a 
co- operative society, the deduction undet sub- section (I) from 
profits and gains derived from an Industrial undertaking shall not be 
admissible unless the accounts of the industrial undertaking ff'lr the 
previous year relevant to the assessment year for which the deduction 
is claimed have been audited by an accountant, as defined in the 
ExpJaPl4tion below sub- section (2) of section 288, and the assessee 
furnishes, along with his return of income, the report of such audit 
in the prescribed form duly signed and verified by such accountant. 
(8) Where any goods held for the purposes of the business of the 
industrial undertaking or the hotel or the operation of the ship are 
transferred to any other business carried on by the assessee, or 
where any goods held for the purposes of any other business carrled 
on by the assessee are transferred to the business of the industrial 
undertaking or the hotel or the operation of the ship and, in either 
case, the consideration, if any, for such transfer as recorded in 
the accounts of the business of the industrial undertaking or the 
hotel or the operation of the ship does not correspond 
to the market value of such goods as on the date of the transfer, 
then, for the purposes of the deduction under this section, the 
profits and gains of the industrial undertaking or the bUSiness of 
the hotel or the operation of the ship shall be computed as if the 
transfer, in either case, had been made at the market value of 
such goods as on that date: 
Provided that where, in the opinion of the Income-tax Officer, the 
computation of the profits and gains of the industrial undertaking or 
the business of the hotel or the operation of the ship in the manner 
hereinbefore specified presents exceptional difficulties, the Income-
tax Officer may compute such profits and gains on such reasonable 
basis ·as he may deem fit. 
Explanation. - In this sub-section, "market value", in relation 
to any goods, means the price that such goods would ordinarily fetch 
on sale in the open market. 
(9) Where it appears to the Income-tax Officer that, owing to 
the close connection between the assessee carrying on the business 

Amendment of 
section 80J. 
16 
• of the industrial undertaking or the hotel or the operation of the 
ship to which this section applies and any other person, or for any 
other reason, the course of business between them is so arranged 
that the business transacted between them produces to the assessee 
more than the ordinary profits which might be expected to arise 5 
in t be business of the industrial undertaking or the hotel or the 
operation of the ship, the Income-tax Offlcer shall, in computing 
the profits and gains of the industrial undertakl.ng or the hotel or the 
ship for the purposes of the deduction under this section, take the 
amount of profits as may be reasonably deemed to have been derived 10 
therefrom. 
(10) The Central Government may, after maklng such inquiry as 
it may think fit, direct, by notification in the Offlcial Gazette, that 
the exemption conferred by this section shall not apply to any class 
of industrial undertakings with effect from such date as it may 15 
specify in the notification. '. 
17. In section 80J of the Incom6-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-section (I), for the wOrUs "computed in the 
prescribed manner", the ~ords, brackets, figure and letter 
"computed in the ",anner specified in sub-section (IA)" shall 20 
be substituted aod shall be deemed to have been substituted with 
effect from the 1st day of April, 19'12; 
(b) after sub-section (1), the follOWing sub-secUon shall be 
inserted and sball be deemed to lIave been inserted wltll effect from 
tlle 1st day of April, 1972, namely :- 25 
'( lA) (l) For the purposes of this sectIon, the capital employed 
in an industrial undertaking or the business of a hotel sball. 
acept as otherwise expressly provided in this section, be 
computed in accorttance with clauses (n) to (IV) and the capital 
employed in a ship shall be computed tn accordance with clause (V). 30 
(II) The aggregate of the amounts representing the values 
of "he assets as on the first day of the computation period of 
the undertaking or of the business of the hotel to which this 
section applies shall first be ascertained in the following 
manner:-
(i) in the case of assets entitled to depreciation, their 
written down value; 
(if) in the case of assets acquired by purchase and DOt 
entitled to depreCiation, their actual cost to the assessee; 
(iii) in the case of assets acquired otherwise than by 
purchase and not entitled to depreciation, the value of the 
assets when they beoame assets of the business; 
(iv) in the case of assets, being debts due to the person 
carrying on the business, the nominal tlll'ount of those debts; 
36 
40 

'rI of 1957· 
18 of 1958. 
14 of 1963. 
7 of 1964. 
17 
(v) in the case of assets, being cash in hand or bank, 
the amount thereof. 
ExplCZMtion I. - In this clause,,"actual cost" has the same 
meaning as In clause (I) of section 43. 
5 Explanation 2. - In this clause and in clause (IJI), "oomputa-
tion period" means the period for which profits and gains of the 
industrial undertaking or business of the hotel are computed 
under sections 28 to 43A. 
Exp'Clllotioft 1 - In this olause and in clauset'V), ''written 
10 down value" has the same meaning as in olause (6) e)f section 
43. 
Exp'Clllatioft 4. - Where the oost of any asset has been 
satisfied otherwise than in oash, the then value of the oonsidera-
tion actually given for the asset shall be treated as the actual 
15 cost of the asset. 
(III) From the aggregate of the amounts as asoertained 
under clause (II) shall be deducted the aggregate of the amounts, 
as on the first day of the computation period, of borrowed 
moneys and debts lowed by the assessee (including aJmUDts 
20 due towards any liabilIty in respect of tax). 
25 
30 
Explanation. - For the purposes of this clause, -
(i) "tax" means -
(.) ADeom e-tax or super -tax (including adnnce tu) 
due under any provision of this Act; 
(b) wealth-ux due under any promioD of the 
WealCh-tax Aot, 1957; 
'(e) glft-tax due under any provision oBbe Glft-tax 
Act, 1958; 
(If) super profits tax due under any prOVision of the 
Super Profits Tax Act, 1963; 
(e) surtax due under any provision of the Companies 
(Profits) Surtax Act, 1964; 
(U) any liability in respect of tax shall be deemed to 
have become due -
35 (a) in the case of advance tax due under any 
provision of this Act. on the date on which such 
advance tax Is payable; and 
(b) in the case of any other tax, on the first day of 
the period within which it is required to be paid. 

Ameaclment of 
I18Ctioa IOJJ. 
18 
(IV) The resultant sum as determined under clause (Ill) 
shall be diminished by the value, as asoertalned under clause 
(If), of any investments the income from whioh is not taken 
into account in oomputlng the profits of the business and any 
moneys not required for the purpose of the business. in so far 5 
as the aggregate of such investments or moneys exceed the 
amount of the borrowed moneys which under clause (Ill) are 
required to be deducted in computJug the capital. 
(V) The capital employed in a ship shall be taken to be 
the written down value of the ship as reduoed by the aggre- 10 
gate of the amounts owed by the assessee as on the 
oomputation date on account of moneys borrowed or debts 
incurred in acquiring that ship. 
E.rplcmation. - In this clause. ''computation date" in 
relation to a ship, means - 15 
(a) in respect of the previous year in which the sh1p 
is first brought Juto use. the date on which it is so brought 
into use; 
(~) in respect of any subsequent previous year. the 
first day of such previous year.'. 20 
II. In section 80JJ of the Income-tax Act, for the portion begJu-
ning with the words "a deduotion as specified hereunder. namely:-" 
and ending with the words "whichever is higher". the following 
shall be substituted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1981, 
namely:- 25 
"a deduction from such profits and gains of an amount 
equal to one-third of the aggregate amount of such profits 
and gains or tlfteen thousand rupees, whichever is less". 
Amead .. _t of II. In section 80L of the Income-tax Act, In sub-section(1) , 
.ection IOL. for clause (vii), the follOWing clause shall be substituted with 30 
Amendment of 
section BORR. 
effect from the 1st day of April, 1981. namely:-
"(Vii) interest on deposits with a flDancial corporation 
which is engaged In providing long-term finance for industrial 
development in India or with a public company formed and 
re gistered in India with the main object of carrying on the 35 
business of providing long-term finanoe for construction or 
purchase of houses in India for residential purposes: 
Provided that the corporation or, as the case may be. the 
company is (or the time being approved by the Cel1trai GOVflrn-
ment for the purposes of clause (viii) of sub-sectlon (1) of 40 
section 36i". 
ZI. In section 80RR of the Income-tax Act, for the words 
"musician or actor", the words and brackets "musician. actor 
or sportsman (including an athlete)" shall be substituted. 

19 
IL In section BOT of the Income-tax Act, in clause (a), the 
words "where the gross total income does not exceed ten thousand 
rupees or" shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of April, 
1981. 
5 II. In section 80TT of the Income-tax Act, in clause (a) , the 
words ''where the gross totallncome does not exceed tun thousand 
rupees or" shall be omitted with effect from the 1st day of April, 
1981. 
U. In section 80U of the Income-tax Act, for the words "five 
10 thousand rupees". the words "ten thousand rupees" shall be 
substituted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1981. 
I.. In section 139 of the Income-tax Act, after suD-section (8), 
the fonowing sub-section shall be inserted with effect from the 1st 
day of September, 1980, namely:-
15 "(9) Where the Income-tax Officer considers that the return 
of income furnished by the assessee is defective, he may 
intimate the defect to the assessee and give him an opportunity 
to rectify the defect within a period of fifteen days from the 
date of such intimation or within such further period which, on 
20 an application made In this behalf, the Income-tax Officer may, 
in his discretion, allow; and if the defect is not rectified within 
the said period of fifteen days or, as the case may be, the 
further period so allowed, then, notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other provision of this Act, the return shall 
25 be treated as an inval1d return and the provisions of this Act 
shall apply as if the assessee had failed to furnish the 
return: 
PrOVided that where the assessee rectifies the defect after the 
expiry of the said period of fifteen days or the further period 
30 allowed, but before the assessment is made, the Inoome-tax 
Offioer may condone the delay and treat the return as a valid 
return. 
Ezplanation .-For the purposes of this sub-section, a return 
of income shall be regarded as defective unless all the tollowing 
35 conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(a) the annexures,statements and columns in the return 
of income relating to computation of income chargeable 
under each head of income, computation of gross total 
income and total iucom~ have been duly filled in; 
40 (b) the return is accompanied by a statement shOWing 
45 
the computation of the tax payable on the basis of the return; 
(e) the return is accompanied by proof of -
(i) the tax, if any, claimed to have been deducted at 
source and the advance tax and tax on self-assessment, 
if any, claimed to have been paid; 
Amendment of 
section BOT. 
Amendment of 
section BOTT. 
Amendment of 
section 80U. 
Amendment of 
section 139. 

Am_dmeDt of 
aec:tioo 143. 
Amendment of 
MCtiOli 1SS. 
20 
(ti) the amount of compulsory deposit, if any, claimed 
to have been made under the Compulsory Deposit Scheme 
(Income-tax Payers) Act, 1974; 
(d) where regular books of account are maintained 
by the assessee, the retum is accompanied by copies of-
(i) manufacturing account, trading account, profit 
and loss account or, as the case may be, income and 
expenditure account or any other simllar account and 
balance sheet; 
3sof 1974-
(ii) tn the case of a proprietary business or profes- 10 
8ion, the personal account of the proprietor; in the 
case of a firm, association of persons or body of 
individuals, personal accounts of the partners or 
members; and in the case of a partner or member of 
a firm, association of persons or body of individuals, 15 
also his personal account in the firm, association of 
persons or body of individuals; or 
(t) where the accounts of the assessee have been audited, 
the retum is accompanied by copies of the audited profit and 
loss account and balance sheet and the auditor's report; 20 
(f) where regular books of account are not maintained by 
the assessee, the retum is accompanied by a statement 
indicating the amounts of turnover or, as the case may be, 
gross receipts, gross profit, expenses and net profit of the 
business or profeSSion and the basis on which such amounts 25 
have been computed, and also disclOSing the amounts of 
total sundry debtors, sundry creditors, stock-In-trade and 
cash balance as at the end of the previous year. ". 
II. In 8Oction 143 of the Income-tax Act, In sub-section (1),ln 
clause (b), sub-clauses (ii) and (iii) shall be omitted. 
21. In section 155, after sub-section (SA), the following sub-
section shall be Inserted with effect from the 1st day of April. 
1981, namely:-
" (58) Where any deduction In respect of any expenditure on 
30 
scientific research has been made in any assessment year under 36 
sub-section (28) of section 35 and the assessee fails to furnish 
a certificate of completion of the programme obtained from the 
prescribed authority wlthin one year of the period allowed for 
its completion by sucb authority, the deduction originally made 
in excess of the expenditure actually incurred shall be deemed 40 
to have been wrongly made, and the Income-tax Officer may, 
notwithstanding ~ythlng contained in this Act, recompute the 
total income of the assessee for the relevant previous year and 
make the necessary amendment: and the proviSions of section 
154 shall, so far as may be, apply thereto, the period of four 45 

6 
10 
16 
20 
25 
21 
years specified in sub-secUon (7) of that section being reckoned 
from the end of the previous year In which the period allowed 
for the oompletlon of the programme by the prescribed authority 
expired. ". 
11. In section 164 of the Income-tax Act,-
(.) In BUb-aectlon ( 1), -
(t) for the portion beg1nn1Dg with the words ''tax shall be 
charged-" and ending with the words "more beneficial to the 
revenue:", the following shall be substituted, namely~ 
"tax shall be oharged on the relevant inoome ur part of 
relevant lDcome at the maztmum margtnal rate:"; 
(ti> in the proviso, -
(I) for olause (t), the following olau/;8 shall be BUbBt1-
tuted, namely:-
"(f) none of the beneficiaries bas any other income 
cbargealie under this Act exoeed1ng the maztmum 
amount not ohargealie to tax in the oase of an associa-
tion of per80D8 or is a beneficiary under any other 
trust; or"; 
(2) in clause (if), for the worda "under a trust 
declared by will ". the words ''under a trust declared 
by any per80n by will and such trust 18 the only trust 
so declared by him" shall be SUb8tituted; 
(3) in the ooncluding portion, for the worda ''as 
if the relevant income or part of relevant income", the 
words "on the relevant inoome or part of relevant Income 
a8 if it" shall be substituted; 
(II) in sub-aeotIOD(3) .-
(i) for the portion beg1nn1ng with the wo.rds "s not 
30 specifioally receivable" and ending with the words ''which-
ever oourse would be more benefictal to the revenue :", 
the following shall be subBtltuted. namely:-
"Is not speclfically receivable on behalf or for the 
benefit of anyone person or the individual 8hares 
36 of the beneficiaries in the income 80 applioable 
are indeterminate or unknown, the tax chargeable 
on the relevant income ,ball be the aggregate of-
(4) the tax whloh would be ohargeable on that part 
of the relevant income which Is applicable to oharltable 
40 or religious purposes (as reduced by the inoome, if 
A. __ tof 
HCtioa 1640 

22 
any, which is exempt under section 11) as if such part 
(or such part as so reduced) were the total inoome of 
an association of persons; and 
(b) the tax on that part of the relevant income which 
is applicable to purposes other than charitable or 5 
rellgious purposes, and which is either not specifically 
receivable on behalf or for the benefit of anyone person 
or in respect of which the shares of the beneficiaries 
'are indeterminate or unknown, at the maximum 
marginal rate:"; 10 
(it) in the proviSO, -
(1) for clause (t). the following clause shall be substi-
tuted. namely:-
"mnone of the beneficiaries in respect of the part 
of the relevant income which is not applicable to 15 
charitable or religious purposes bas any other income 
ohargeable under this Act exceeding the maximum 
amount not chargeable to tax in the case of an associa-
tion of persons or is a beneficiary under any other 
trust; or"; 20 
(2) in clause (it), for the words ''under a trust declared 
by wUJ ", the worde'\mder a trust declared by any person 
by wUl and such trust is the only trust so declared by him" 
shall be substituted; 
(3) in the concluding port1o~for the words "as if the 
relevant income", the words "on the relevant income aa 
if the relevant income" shall be substituted; 
(e) after sub-section (3), the following. ErplcuaCltiofts shall 
be inserted, namely:-
• EJplcuaGtion 1.- For the purposes of tMs section,-
(f) any income in respect of which the persons 
mentioned in clause (til) and clause (iv) of sub-aection 
(1) of section 160 are Uable as repteeentative . 
assessee or any part thereof shall be deemed as 
being not Specifically receivable on behalf or for the 
benefit of anyone person unless the person on whose 
_half or for whose benefit such .lncome or such part 
thereof is receivable during the previoU8 year is 
expressly stated In the order of the court or the 
instrument of trust or wakf deed, as the case may 
be, and Is identifiable as such on the date of such 
order, instrument or deed; 
(Ii) the individual shares of the persons on whose 
behalf or for whose benefit such income or such part 
25 
30 
36 
40 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
23 
thereof is received shall be deemed to be indetermi-
nate or unknown unless the individual shares of the 
persons on whose behalf or for whose benefit such 
income or such part thereof is receivable, are 
expressly stated in the order of the court or the 
instrument of trust or wakf deed, as the case may 
be, and are ascertainable as such on the date of 
such order, instrument or deed. 
Explanation 2. _ In this secUon, "maximum 
marginal rate" means the rate of income-tax (including 
surcharge on income-tax, if any) applicable in relation 
to the highest slab of income in the case of an associa-
tion of persons as specified in the Finance Act of the 
relevant year. ' • 
JI. In section 171 of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section (8) 
and before the Erplanation. the following sub~section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 
provisions of this section, where a partial partition has taken 
place after the 31st day of December. 1978 among the members 
of a Hindu undivided family hitherto assessed as undivided, !-
(4) no claim that such partial partIt10n has taken place 
shall be inquired into und~r sub-section (2) and no finding 
shall be recorded under sub-section (3) that such partial 
partition had taken place and any finding recorded under 
sub-section (3) to that effect whether before or after the 
18th day of June, 1980, being the date of introduction of the 
Finance (No.2) Bill. 1980, shall be null and void; 
(b) such family shall continue to be liable to be assessed 
under this Act as if no such partial partition had taken placei 
(c) each member or group of members of such family 
immediately before such partial partition and the family 
shall be jointly and severally liable for any tax, pen~~y, 
interest, fine or other sum payable under this Aot by .... the 
family in respect of any period. whether before or after 
such partial partitiol1, 
(d) the several1iabllity of any member or group of 
membef.8 aforesaid shall be computed aooordiag to the 
portion' of the joint family property allotted to him or it 
at suoh partial partition. 
and the provision. of this Aot shall apply accordingly."._ 
•• III section 208 of the Inoome-tax Act. ill sub-sectl.on ( 2), for 
clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted wl1h effect 
from the 1st day of SeItember, 1980, namely:-
"(e) in any other case -R~.12, 000. ". 
.. In sectlon 209A of the Inoome-taxAct, in su~sectlOD(4), 
after the proviSO, the followlng provIso sball be il1serted with 
effect from the 1st day of September, 1980, namely:-
'ttl-ovided further that in the case of an assessee, being a 
Amedment of 
section 171. 
:, '"., 
A..adaeatof 
sectlon 2OB. 
AmeadlHllt of 
section 209A. 

A .. _.tof 
Foaltla 
Schedule. 
com~, the provisim8 of th .. aub-eecUm ahall have effect 
as If for the figures and words "33 1/3 per cent. ", the figure. 
aad words "20 per cent. " bad been substltuted. '. 
11. In sectlon 212 d. the Income-tax Act, in sub-l8ctlon (]A), 
after the proviso, the followin, proviSO Iha1l be ln881'ted with 
effect from the 1st day of September, 1980, name1r-
'Prcwlded further that In the case of an ul8ssee, betDl a 
company, the provis1m8 of thls sub-aectlm ahall have effect 
as If for 1he figures and words "33 1/3 per cent.", the 
flgure. and words "20 per cent." bad been substltuted. '. 
II. In sectlon 215 d. the Income-tu Act, in sub-seoUon (1), 
the followlng proviSO shall be lneerted wi th effect from the let 
day d. September, 1980, namely:-
'Prorided that in the case of an a888ss88, belng a company, 
the provialODB d. tbls aub-sectlm ahall have effect as If for 
the words "s8Veoty-(lve per ceot.'~ the words "e1gh1jy-thr88 
IIIId OIle-thLrd per cent." bad been substituted. '. 
.. In aectlon 273 d. the Income-tu Act. with effect from the 
lilt day of September, 1980,-
(t) in sub-secUm (1), the followlDllW'Ovi80 shall be 
In.aerted, namely:-
'Prorided that in the case of an a88ess88, belng a 
company, the provl81ms of thl8 sub-eect1m aball have 
effect as If for the words "88V_ty-flve per oat. ", at 
both the places where they occur, the worda "elghty-three 
IIIId one-thLrd per cent." bad been substituted."i 
(if) in aub-sectlOll (2), before the ErplanGtlon ~ the followlng 
proviso shall be inaerted, name1y:-
'Provided that in the c».8e of an al88ssee, belDl a 
compaDIY, the provi81.OIl8 of this 8ub-eectlm aball have 
effect as If for the words" leYeaty-flve per oeat. " • 
wbereftr they occur, the worda "e1gbty-three aDd 0118-
thlrd per oeDt. " bad been sab8tataled. ' • 
It. In the Fourth Schedule to the Income-tax Act, In Part A, in 
clause (b) of rule 6, the words "_ceeds one~ird 
of the salary of the employee or" shall be omitted 
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1981. 
• The following ameDdments (beiDg amendments of a con-
sequential nature) shall be made In the Income-tax Act with effect 
from the 1st day of April, 1981, namely:-
(I) in sub-sectlon (2) of section 34, in clause (Ii). after the 
worde, bracket. and f!cures "or clause (it) ", the words, 
brackets, figures aod letter "or clause (UG) " shall be Inserted; 
(Ii) in sub-sect1OD (2) of sect10n 38, for the braokets, figures 
5 
10 
16 
20 
26 
30 
36 
and word "(U) and (ut)", the brackets, figures, letter and 46 
word "(U), (iiG) aod (iff)" shall be 8ub8tbtedi 

25 
(Iii) in sub-section (3) of section 80A, after the words, 
figures and letters "'Or section 80HHA tI. the words. figures and 
letter "or section 80-1" s"'all be inserted; 
(iv) in sub-section (9) of section 80HH. for the words, 
5 figures and letter ''under section 8OJ"~ the words, figures and 
letters "under section 80-1 or section 8OJ" shall be substituted. 
(V) in sub-section (6) of section 80BHA, for the words, 
figures and letter "under section 8OJ", the words, figures and 
letters ''under section 80-1 or section 8OJ" shall be 
10 substituted, 
(vi) in sub-section (3) of section 80P, after the words, 
figures and letters "or section 80BHA", the words, figures 
and letter "or section 80-1" shall be inserted. 
I'emrJHcu 
Tl of 1957. 15 •• In the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as tbe 
~tb-tax Act). in seetlon 2, in sub-clause (2) of clause (e), 
for tbe words "Provided tbat". tbe following shall be subsUtuted 
witb effect from the 1st day of April, 1981, namely:-
'Provided that in relation to the assessment year commenc-
20 ing on the 1st day of April, 1981, or any subsE!quent assessment 
year, this sub-clause shall have effeot subject to the modifica-
tion that for item (i) thereo(, the following 11em shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(t)(a) agricultural land other than land comprised in any 
25 tea, coffee, rubber or cardamom plantation. 
(b) any buildJng owned or occupied by a cultivator of, or 
receiver of rent or revenue out of, agrioulturalland other 
than land comprised in any tea. coffee, rubber or oardamom 
plantation : 
30 Provided that the building is on or in the immediate 
vicinity of the land and is a bullding which the cultivator or 
the receiver of the rent or revenue by reason of his connec-
tion with the land requires as a dwelUng410use or a store-
house or an out-house; 
35 (e) animals;": 
Provided further that'. 
It.. In section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act, in sub-section (1). with 
effect from the 1st day of April, 1981,-
(a) for olause (ilia). the following clause shall bEt subsLltuted, 
40 namely:-
"(ilia) agricultural land comprised in any tea, ooffee. 
rubber or cardamom plantation belonging to the assessee,". 
Ameadmeat of 
HCtioa 2. 
Ameadmeat of 
.ec:tioa S. 

26 
• (b) in clause (ivb). for the words "agricultural land", the worda 
"agricultural land comprised In any tea, coffee, rubber or 
cardamom plantation" shall be substituted j 
(c) in clp.use (viiib) , for the words "in an orchard or a 
plantation", the words "in any tea, coffee, rubber or cardamom 5 
plantation" shall be substituted; 
(d) for clause (uvii) , the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(nvii) any deposits with a financial corporation which Is 
engaged in providing long-tenn finanoe for Industrial develop- 10 
ment in India or with a public oompany formed and registered in 
India with the main object of carrying on the business of 
providing long-term finance for construction or purchase of 
houses in India for residential purposes: 
Provided that the corporation or, as the case may be, the 15 
company is for the time being approved by the Central Govern-
ment for the purposes of clause (viii) of sub-section (l)of 
section 36 of the Income-tax Act;". 
Amendment of •• In section 7 of the Wealth-tax Act, in sub-sectlon (I), the 
section 7· following Explanation shall be Jnserted, namely:-
"'Explanation • - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that the price or other consideration for which any 
property may be acquired by or transferred to any person 
under the terms of a deed of trust or through or un~er any 
20 
restrictive covenant in any instrument of transfer shall be 25 
InaertioD of new 
section lOA. 
ABaes.ment 
after partial 
partition of 
8 Hindu 
undivided 
family. 
ignored for the purpose of determining the prioe such property 
would fetch if sold in the open market on the valuation date. ". 
It. In the Wealth-tax Act, after section 20, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
'20A. Where a partial partition has taken place after the 
31st day of December, 1978. among the members of a Hindu 
Wldivided family hitherto assessed as undivided. -
(a) such family shall continue to be liable to be assessed 
under this Act as if no such partial partition had taken 
place; 
,b) each member or group of members of such family 
fmm ediately before such partial partition and the famIly 
shall be jointly and severally liable for any tax, penalty, 
interest, fine or other sum payable under this Act by the 
family in respect of any period. whether before or after 
such partial partition; 
(c) the several liability of any member or group of 
members aforesaid shall be computed according to the 
portion of the joint family property allotted to him or it 
at such partial partition, 
and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly. 
30 
35 
40 

5 
27 
ElplCIJICltiDn • - For the PUrposes of this section, 
"partial partition" shall have the meaning assigned to it 
• 
in clause (b) of the Elplanation to section 171 of the Income-tax 
Act. ' • 
41. In section 21 of the Wealth-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-sRetion (1) , for the words ''In the case of assets 
chargeable to tax under this Act". the words, brackets. fJgure 
and letter "Subject to the provisions of sub-seetion(IA), in the 
case of assets chargeable to tax under this Act" shall be 
10 substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (1). the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(lA) Where the value or aggregate value of the interest or 
interests of the person or persons on whose behalf or for whose 
15 benefit such assets are held falls short of the value of any such 
assets, then. in addition to the wealth -tax leviable and recover-
able under sub-section (1). the wealth-tax shall be levied upon 
and recovered from the court of wards. administrator-general, 
official trustee, receiver. manager or other person or trustee 
20 aforesaid in respect of the value of such assets, to the extent 
it exoeeds the value or aggregate value of such interest or 
interests, as if suoh excess value were the net wealth of an 
individual who is a citizen of India and resident in India for the 
purposes of this Act, and -
25 
30 
35 
(i) at the rates speoified in Part I of Schedule Ii or 
(ii) at the rate of three per oent ... 
whichever course would be more beneficial to the revenue. It; 
(e) In sub-section (4),-
(t) in olause (b), for the words "one and one-half per 
oent. ", the words ''three per cent." shall be substituted; 
(ii) In the proviso,-
(I) in olause (i), for the words ''under a trust declared 
by will", the words ''under a trust deolared by any person 
by w1l1 and such trust is the only trust so declared by him" 
shall be substituted; 
(2) after clause(i) • the following olause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(ia) none of the beneficiaries has net wealth exceed-
ing the amount not chargeable to wealth -tax in the case 
Amendmeat of 
1leCti0ll 21. 

"-dmeDt of 
Sclaedal. L 
AllleodmeDt of 
Act 18 of 195& 
18 
of an lDdlv1dual who 1s a oiUzen of India and realdeDt In 
Jndia for the parposes of tlds Act or Is a beDeflolary 
under any other trust. or". 
(IU) the Explanation shall be numbered as ExplClllaUon 2 
and before that ExplCUl4l&ion. the following Explanation shall 6 
be Inserted, namely:-
"ExplClll4tion 1. - For the purposes of this sub-section, the 
shares of the persODs OD whose behalf or for whose benefit any 
suoh assets are held shall be deemed to be indeterminate or 
unknown unless the shares of the persoDS on whose behalf or 10 
for whose benefit such assets are held on the relevant valua-
tion date are expressly stated In the order of the court or 
instrument of trust or deed of wakf. as the case may be. and 
are ascertainable as such on the date of such order, inetru-
ment or deed. tI. 15 
u. In the Wealth-tax Act, In Part 1 of Schedule 1. -
(4) in Item (1), in the proviso, for the letters and figures 
I'R s. 1,00, 000", at both the places where they occur, the 
leiters and figures l'Rs.l,50,OOO" shall be substituted; 
(b) in Item (2) ,-
(') in the opening portion, for the words, letters and 
figures "assessment year exceeds Rs.1, 00,000", the 
words, letters and figures "assessment year exceeds 
R s.l,50, 000" shall be substituted; 
(U) in the proviso, for the letters and figures 
I'R s. I, 00, OOOI~ at both the places where they ooeur, 
the letters and flgures I'R s. 1,50,000" shall be 
substituted. GifHGX 
U. In the Gift-tax Act, 1958,-
(a) In section 2, In sub-clause (e) of clause (uiv) ,after 
the words "power of appointment", the brackets and words 
"(whether general, special or subject to any restrictions 
as to the persODS In whose favoW' the appointment may be 
20 
25 
30 
made)" shall be inserted; 35 
(b) In section 4, in sub-section (1). after clause (d), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(e) where a person who has an Interest In property 
as a tenant for a term or for life or a remainderman 
surrenders or relinquishes his Interest In the property 
or otberwt Be allows hi s Interest Ix> be termlnated wi th-
out conslderaUon or for a consideration which Is not 
adequatE', the value of the Interest so surrendered, 
40 

5 
10 
29 
rellnqulshed or allowed to be terminated or, a. the 
case may be, the amount by which such value 
exceeds the conslderatlQD received, shall be deemed 
to be a gift made by such penon. " • 
Interes .. w 
U. In the Interest-tax Act, 1974, with effect from the 
1st day of September, 1980,-
(1) In section 2,-
(/I) In clau.e (1), _ 
(Il In aub-clauae (i), the word "and" shall be 
Inaerted at the end; 
(it) In sub-clause(ii), the word "and" shall be 
omitted; 
(iU) sub-clause (iii) shall be omitted; 
15 
2 of 1934. 
(b) In clause (9), after the words and figures ''the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934", the following 
shall be Inserted, name1y:-
", and Includes -
20 
15 of 194 
(/I) the Industrial Finance Corporation of India, 
established under the Industrial Finance Corporatlon 
Act. 1948; 
18 of 1964-
25 
(b) the Industrial Developmem Bank of India, 
f3stabllshed under the Industrial Developmnet Bank 
Act. 19&&; 
(e) the Industrial Re-cOll8t:ructioo Corporation 
of India Ll mlted; and 
(d) the lDdustrlal Credit and Investment Corpora-
tloo d. ~a Limited"; 
(2) In seotloo 8, In sub-seoUOIl (2), for the words, figures 
30 and letters "after the 28th day of February, 1978", the words, 
flgures and letters ", during the period commencing on the 1st 
day of March, 1978 and ending with the 30th day of June, 1980" 
shall be substituted. 
Mi,uU4Dleoul 
M 44. Where before the 18th day of June, 1980 [belDg the date 
on which the Finance (No.2) Blll, 1980 was Introduceg,7, the 
Supreme Court has, on an appeal in respect of the assessment 
AmeadmeDtof 
Act 45 of 1974. 

Amenelment of 
Act 51 of 1975. 
Allleaelment of 
Act 1 of 1944. 
30 
of an assessee for any particular assessment year, held that 
the deduction under any section included In Chapter VIA of 
the Income-tax Act under the beading "C-DeclucUoM ttl 
respect of certain incomes • is to be allowed In a maDDer 
different from that provided in section 8~ of the Inoome-
tax Act, as inserted by section 12 of this Act, then, 
nothing contained in the sald section 80AA shall apply to 
the assessment of such assessee for that particular 
assessment year. 
CHAPI'ER IV 
IffOlallCT TAXES 
... The Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (hereinafter referred 
to as the Customs Tariff Act), shall be amended In the maDDer 
speclfled in Parts I and n of the Second Schedule. 
... In the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter 
referred to as the Central Excises Act),-
(a) In section 2, in c1ause(f), after sub-clause (IIii) , 
the followi ng sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(viii) in relation to alumlnlum, includes lacquering 
6 
10 
16 
or printing or both of. plain oontainers;"; 20 
Ameadmeat of 
Act 13 of 19so. 
Am_eImeatof 
Act 58 of 1957. 
(b) the First Schedule shall be amended in the manner 
specified in Parts I and n of the Third Schedule. 
Il. In section 5 of the Finance Act. 1980, In sub-sectiOll 
( lJ, for the words "flve per cent. ", the words "ten per cent. " shall 
be subs tltu ted. 
•• The Additional DuUes of Exclse (Goods of Special 
Importance) Act. 1957 (here1nafter referred to as the 
AddiUonal Duties of Exclse Act),shall be amended in-the 
manner speclfIed in the Fourth Schedule. 
25 
Ameadmeat of •• In the Customs, Central Excises and Salt and Central 30 
Act lS 0: 19'780 Boards of Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1978, In new section UB, 
as directed by section 21 of that Act to be inserted in the Central 
Exclsee Act.-
(A) in sub-section (1),-
(i) for the words "from the dafe of payment of duty" 
occurring In the openlng portion, the words "from the 
relevlUlt date" nan be substituted; 
(iI) the ElpJaftGUon shall be omitted; 
(b) lor the ExpllUlGtion at the end, the followlng ExplGnotton 
35 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
31 
shall be substltuted, namely:-
'Erplanatiolt. - For the purposes of thls sectlon,-
(A) "refund" Includes rebate of duty of excise on 
excisable goods exported out of India or on excIs-
able materials used In the manufacture of goods whlch 
are exported out of Indiaj 
(0) "relevant date" means,-
(a) in the case of goods exported out of India 
where a refund of excise duty paid is available in 
respect of the goods themselves or, as the case may 
be, the excisable materials used in the manufacture 
of such goods,-
(i) if the lfJOds are exported by sea or air, the 
date on whlch the ship or the aircraft in whlch such 
goods are loaded, leaves India, or 
(ii) if the goods are exported by land, the date on 
which such goods pass the frontier, or 
(iii) if the goods are exported by post, the date 
of despatch of goods by fhe Post Office cmcerned 
to a place outside India: 
(b) in the case of goods returned for being remade, 
refined, reconditioned, or subjected to any other similar 
process, in any factory, the date of entry Into the factory 
for the purposes aforesaid; 
(c) in the case of goods to which banderols are 
required to be affixed If removed for home consump-
tion rut not 80 required when exported outside India, 
if returned to a factory after having been removed 
from such factory for export out of India, the date 
of entry into the factory; 
(d) In a case where a manufacturer Is required 
to pay a sum, for a certain period, on the baSis 
of the rate fixed by the Central Government by 
notification in the OfficIal Gazette In full di s-
charge of his liability for the duty leviable on 
his production of certain goods, if after the 
manufacturer bas made the payment on the basis 
of such rate for any period but before the expiry 
of that period such rate Is reducec:J,the date of 
such reduc~lonj 
(t) in a case where duty of excl se Is paid 
provisionally under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder, the date of adjustment of duty after 
the flnal assessment thereof; 
(f) in any other case, the date of payment of 
duty. '. 

Amendment of 
Act 52 of 1962. 
etc., to provide for _ AppeUate 
Tribunal. 
Ameadmeat of 
Act 6 of l8CJ8, 
A ....... tof 
Act 32 of 1971. 
Am ...... of 
Act 38 of 1974. 
32 
II. (1) The all_cLaeats directed iD the Fifth Schedule, belD, 
ameadmeats to provide for .. Appell .. e TribuDal uDder the Customs 
Act, 1962, the Ceatral Excises Act .. d the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 
.. d for matlers CODDected therewith, shall be made ID the sald Acts. 
(2) The amendments directed to be made by sub-seotion 5 
(1) shall come Into force on 8\lch date as the Central Government 
may, by notification In the Official Gazette, appolnt; and different 
dates may be appointed for the ammdments to different . Acts. 
(3) If any dlfYiculty arises in giving effect to the provisions of any 
Act referred to in sub- section ( 1), as amended by the amendments 10 
thereto directed in the Fifth Schedule (particularly in relation to the 
transition to the prOVisions of that Act as so amended), the Central 
Government may, by general or special order, do anything not 
Inconsistent with such provisions as so amended which appears to 
be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty: 15 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of 
two years from the date on which such amendments came into force. 
CHAPTER V 
MJ BCILU"IDD8 
II. In the First Schedule to the Indian Post Office Act, 1898, - 20 
(a) for the sub-heading" LeUers " and the entries there-
under, the follOWing shall be substituted, namely:-
" Lellers 
For a weight not exceeding ten grams 36 paise 
For every ten grams or fraction 
thereof, exceeding ten grams 15 pals~. "; 
(b) for the sub-heading ":rllrCels " and the entries 
thereunder, the following shall be substituted. namely:-
" Perce" 
26 
For a weight not exceeding five hundred grams Re. 2. 00 30 
For every five hundred grams or fraction 
thereof, exceedlDg five lumdred aramB Ra. 2. 00. It. 
.. In section 64 of the Finance (No.2) Act, 1911, for the 
worde "nine previous years", the worde ''fourteen previou. 
y_r. tt shall be aublltltuted. 
.. In the Compulsory Deposit Scheme (lnoome-tax 
Payer.) Aot, 1974,-
(el) in Beetlon 2, after clause (d), tbe following clau8e 
shall be ineerted and shall be deemed to have been inserted 
36 
145 of 1968. 

27 of 1957. 
10 of 1949. 
6 
10 
33 
With effect from the 10th day of July, 1978, namely:-
, (dd) "Income-tax Officer" has the same meaning as In 
clause (25) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, and inclu\:les 
an Inspecting Assistant Commissioner who exercises or 
performs the powers or functions conferred on, or assigned 
to, bim under section 126 or section USA of the said Act: t; 
(b) after section 7, the following section shall be inserted 
and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 
the 1st day of April, 1975, namely:-
117 A. For the purposes of exemption under section 5 of 
the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the amount of compulsory 
deposit shall be deemed to be a deposit with a banking 
company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies. "; 
(c) with effect from the 1st day of April. 1981. section 8 shall 
• 
eompulllOty depo_it 
to be nempt for 
PQ~ of wealtb-
to. 
15 be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after sub-section 
(1) as so re-numbered. the following sub-section shall be lOSE rted. 
namely:-
"(2) Where any amomt has become repayable or payable under 
sub-section (1). the depositor may, at his option, not withdraw such 
20 amount after 1t has become so repayable or payable, and If he does 
so, sucb amomt sball carry interest for the period it is not with-
drawn as if it were a comRUlsory depoSit, and the provisions of 
this Act shall. so far as may be, apply in relation to such amomt 
or interest tbereon as they apply in relation to a oompulsory 
25 deposit or. as the case may be, interest on sucb deposit. "; 
30 
35 
40 
(d) in section 10. with effect from the 1st day of April, 1975,-
(i) in Bub-section (1),-
(I) in clause (a), for the words "has failed to make", 
the words "has, without reasonable cause, failed to 
make" shall be substituted; 
(2) in clause (b), for the words ''the requisite amomt", the 
words ''the requisite amount and tbere is no reasonable cause 
for making such short payment" shall be substituted: 
(3) for the words ''the Income-tax Officer shall ", the words 
''the Income-tax Officer may" shall be subsUtutedi 
(ii) in sub- section (2).-
(1) in clause (a). for the words ''has failed to make", 
the words ''has. without reasonable cause, failed to make II 
shall be substituted; 
(2) in clause (b).-
(A) for the words "is less than". the word. "fall. 
short of" shall be substituted; 

Special review ill 
certain calletl. 
34 
(8) for the words "hiE. correct income", the words 
''his correct income and there is no reasonable cause 
for making such short payment" shall be substituted; 
(3) for the words "the Income-tax Officer shall", the 
words "the Income-tax Officer may" shall be substituted; 5 
(e) in section 11, with effect from the 10th day of July, 1978,-
(I) in sub-section (1), for the words "Additional Commissioner 
of Income-tax", the words and brackets "Commissioner of 
Income-tax (Appeals)" sball be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), in clause (b) o~ the proviSO, for 10 
the words "Appellate Assistant Commissioner", the words 
and brackets "Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner" shall be substituted; 
(n with effect from the 10th day of July, 1978, sectlon 12 
shall be re-numbered as sub-sectlon (1) thereof, and, - 15 
(i) in sub-section (1),as so re-numbered, for the words 
"Any depoSitor", the words. brackets and figure ''Subject to 
the provisions of sub-section (2), any depositor" shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
I (2) Where an order referred to in sub-section (I) is 
made by an Inspecting Assistant Commissioner in 
eXercise of the powers or functions conferred on or 
assigned to him under section 125 or section 125A of the 
Income-tax Act, the provisions of that sub-section shall 
have effect as if for the words "Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner", the words and brackets "Commissioner 
(Appeals)" were substituted. '; 
(8) after section 12, the following ..section shall be inserted 
with effect from the 1st day of September, 1980, namely:-
'!2A. (1) Where any order imposing a penalty under 
section 10 made by the Income-tax Officer before the date 
on which the Finance (No.2) Act, 1980 received the assent 
of the President (such order being hereafter in this sectioi. 
referred to as pre-amendment penalty order) has not been 
made the subject matter of any subsequent prnceeding by 
way of appeal or reviSion under this Act, then, the 
depOsitor aggrieved by such order may, if he considers 
that no such penalty would have been levied if the amend-
ments made to section 10 by the Finance (No.2) Act, 1980 
had been in force on the date of paSSing of such order, make 
an application to the Income-tax Officer for a special review. 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 

6 
10 
15 
20 
26 
30 
35 
(2) Where a pre-amendment penalty order has been made 
the subject matter of any subsequent proceeding by way of an 
appeal or revision under this Act, the depositor aggrieved 
by the order passed in any such proceeding or, as the case 
may be, the last of such proceedings may, if he considers 
that no such penalty would have been levied if the amendments 
made to section 10 by the Finance (No.2) Act, 1980 had been 
in force on the date of passing of the pre-amendment penalty 
order, make an appUcation to the authority which passed the 
order in such proceeding or, as the case may be, the last of 
such proceedings for a special review. 
(3) The application referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) shall be presented before the 1st day of January, 
1981: 
Provided that the Income-tax Officer or the other authority 
to whom an application for special review is made may admit 
such application after the sald date if he or it is satisfied that 
the depositor had sufficient cause for not presenting it before 
the said date. 
(4) The Income-tax Officer or other authority to whom the 
application for special review is made under sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (2), may make such enquiry or cause such 
enquiry to be made and, subject to the provisions of this Act, 
may pass such order as he or it thinks fit. 
(5) The provisions of section 12 shall, so far as may be, 
apply in relation to an order passed under sub-section (4) as 
they apply in relation to a pre-amendment penalty order or, 
as the case may be, an order passed by any other authority 
under that section. 
(6) The special review under this section shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of any other remedy which an 
aggrieved depoSitor may have under this Act. 
Erp'cmation. - For the purposes of this section, "authorIty" 
includes the Appellate Tribunal. 'i 
35 tk) in section 13, in sub-section (1), after the words "the 
13 of 1980-
40 
Appellate Assistant CommiSSioner, ", the words and brackets 
"the Commissioner (Appeals)" shall be inserted. 
II. Section 2 of the Finance Act, 1980 is hereby repealed 
and shall be deemed never to have been enacted. 
DeclaraUon under tile Provisional Collection 
of Tares Act, 19 31. 
It is hereby declared that it is expedIent in the public interest 
that the provisions of clauses 45, 46. 47 and 48 of this BUl shall 
have immediate effect under the Provisional Collection of Taxes 
16 of 1931. 45 Act. 1931. 
• 
Repeal. 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(Su aecUon 2) 
PART I 
INcoM ..... TAX AND SUaCilAaGE ON INCOM ..... "U 
In the case of every IDdivtdual or lI1ndu undivided famUy or 
unregistered firm or other aSSOCiation of per80D8 or body of 
IndividLlals, whether incorporated or not, or every artlflcia1 
5 
Juridical person referred to in aub-cllUlle (Vii) of clause (3U of 10 
section 2 of the Income-tax Act. not belDl a case to which 
Sub-Paragraph n of this Paragraph or any other Paragraph of 
this Part applies,-
(1) wbere the total income 
does not exceed Rs. 8,000 
(2) where the totallncome 
exceeds Rs. 8,000 but doas not 
exceedRs.15,000 
(3) where the total iDcome 
exceeds Rs. 15,000 but does not 
exceed Rs.20,000 
(4) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 25.000 
(5) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 25, 000 but does not 
exceed Rs.30,OOO 
Nil; 
15 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total iDcome exceeds 
Rs. 8,000; 
Rs. I, 050 plus 18 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Re.15.000; 
Rs. 1.950 plus 25 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 20, OOOi 
Ra. 3, 200 plus 30 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 25, OOOi 
(6) where the total income Rs. 4,700 plus 40 per cent. of 
15 
20 
25 
exceeds Rs. 30,000 but does not. the amount by which the total 30 
exceed as. 50,000 income exceeds Re. 30, oooi 
(7) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 50.000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 70,000 
Rs.12,700 plus 60 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 50, 000. 
36 

(8) where the total iDcome 
exceeds Rs. 70,000 but does not 
exceedRs.l,OO,OOO 
(9) where the total income 
S exceeds R8. 1,00,000 
3'1 
Re. 22,700 plus 55 per cent. of 
the amount by wblch the total 
income exceeds Rs. 70,000; 
Rs. 39,200 ,Ius 60 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000: 
Provided that for the purposes of this Sub-Paragraph,-
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income not 
exceeding Re. 10,000; 
10 (til where the total1ncome exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 12, 000, the income-tax payable thereon shall 
not exceed thirty per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs.I0, 000. 
SurchGrQt em irtcDllle-uz 
15 The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the 
preceding provisions of tbis Sub-Paragraph shall be increased 
by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of twenty per cent. of such income-tax. 
Sub--Paraaraph IJ 
20 In the case of every Hindu undivided family which at any time 
during the previous year has at least one member whose total 
income of the previous year relevant to the assessment yeaI' 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1980 exceeds Rs. 10,000,-
Rates of irtCDllle-tar 
25 (1) where the total lncome Nil; 
does not exceed Ra. 8, 000 
(2) where the total lnoome 
exceeds Rs. 8, 000 but doe.s not 
exceed Re. 15,000 
18 per cent. of the amollDt by 
which the total income exceeds 
Ra. 8,000; 
(3) where the total income Rs. 1,260 plus 25 per cent. of 
exceeds Rs. 15,000 but does not· the amount by which the total 
exceed Ra. 20. 000 income exceeds Rs. 15, 000; 
(4) where the total income 
exceeds Ra. 20,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 25.000 
Re. 2, 510 pJus 30 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
Income exceeds Rs. 20, 000; 

38 
(5) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. ~5. 000 but does not 
exceed Re. 30. 000 
(6) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 30.000 but does not 
exceed &S. 50. 000 
(7) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 50.000 but does not 
exceedRs.70.000 
Rs. 4,010 plus. 40 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 25.000; 
Rs. 6. 010 plus 50 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 30.000; 
Rs. 16.010 plus 65 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 50.000; 
5 
(9) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 70,000 
Rs. 27.010 plus 60 per cent. of 10 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 70. 000: 
Provided that for the purposes of this Sub-Paragraph.-
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income not 
exceeding Re. 10.000; 15 
(ii) where the total income exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 13. 000, the income-tax payable thereon shall not 
p-xceed thirty per cent. of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds Hs.10,000. 
20 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the 
prec-<>ll.ng proVisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be increased 
by a sur-:-harge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of 
twenty per cenL of such income-tax. 
Pllragraph B 
In the (,PBe of every oo-operative society,-
Races of inco",e-14l1' 
(lJ where the total income 
does not exceed as. 10.000 
(2) where the total income 
exceeds Rs, 10,000 but doe. not 
exceed & •. 20.000 
(3) where the total U1come 
exceeds Re.20,000 
15 per cent. of the total 
income; 
Rs. 1.500 plus 25 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 10.000; 
Rs. 4.000 plus 40 per cent. of 
the 1UllC'unt by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 20.000. 
25 
30 
35 

39 
Surch"'Rt 0" incoMt-(cu 
The amount of income- taX computed in acoordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Paragraph shall be increased by a 
surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of 
5 twenty per cent. of such income-tax. 
10 
15 
~o 
25 
30 
P"r4Sr"ph C 
Sub-P Ar"grapk I 
In the case of every registered firm, not being a case to 
which Sub-Paragraph 11 of this Paragraph applies,-
Rates of income-leu 
(1) where the total income Nil; 
does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
(2) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does not 
exceed Re. 25. 000 
(3) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 25.00() but does not 
exceed Rs.50.000 
(4) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not 
exceedRs.1,OO,000 
(5) where the total income 
exceeds Rs.1,00,000 
5 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 10.000; 
Rs. 750 plus 7 per cent. of the 
amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 25, 000; 
Rs. 2. 500 plus 15 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 50, OOOi 
Rs. 10,000 plus 24 per cent. 
of the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
SurcharRt on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be increased 
by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of twenty per cent. of such income-tax. 
In the case of every registered firm whose total income 
includes income derived from a profession carried On by it and 

40 
the in~me so uicluded is not less thaD fifty-one per cent. of 
such total income,-
Rares of income..(ta 
(1) where the total income 
does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
(2)wbere the total income 
exceeds Rs. 10.000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 25,000 
Nil; 
4 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total Income exceeds 
Rs.10,000; 
5 
(3) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does not 
exceed RI. 50.000 
Rs. 600 pillS 7 per cent. of the 
amount by which the totallncome 10 
exceeds Jls, 26, 000; 
(4) where the total income 
exceeds Re. 50, 000 but does not 
exceedRs.1,OO.000 
(5) where the total income 
exceeds Re. 1, 00, 000 
Rs. 2,360 plus 13 per cent. of the 
amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 50,000; 
Rs. 8,850 plus 22 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00, 000. 
s.",luulJe on incomf"'ta 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the 
15 
preceding proVisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be increased 20 
by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of twenty per cent. of such income-tax. 
E.rp'CUlGtimi .• - For the purposes of this Paragraph, "regis-
tered firm" includes an unregistered firm auessed as a regis-
tered firm under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act. 25 
In the case of every local autbortty,-
Rate of income-ta 
On the whole of the total income 50 per cent. 
SU'ChlUlJt on fnCOIIIt-tu 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purpose. of the 
Union calculated at the rate of twenty per cent. of such income-
tax. 
30 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
· 41 
In the caae of a company,-
L In the case of a ckmestic company,-
(1) where the company is 
a company in which the public 
are substantially interested,-
(i) in a case where the 45 per cent. of the total income; 
total lncom e does not exceed 
Re. 1,00,000 
(ii) in a case where the 66 per cent. of the total income; 
total income exceeds 
Re. 1,00,000 
(2) where the company is 
not a company in which the 
public are substantially 
interested, -
(i) in the case of an 
industrial company._ 
(a) where the total 55 per cent. of the toW income. 
income does not exceed 
Re.2,00,000 
(b) where the total 60 per cent. of the total income; 
income exceeds 
Rs. 2, 00,000 
(ii) in any other case 65 per cent. of the total income: 
Provided tbat-
(i) the income-tax payable by a domestic company. being 
a company in which the public are substantially interested, 
the total income of which exceeds Rs. 1.00,000, shall not 
exceed the saregate of-
(ca) the income-tax which would have been payable by 
the company if Its total lDCome bad been Rs. 1,00, 000 
(the income of Re. 1,00,000 for tbia purpose being com-
puted a8 if such lDCome included incODle from variOU8 

42 
sources in the same proportion as the tota11ncome of 
the company); and 
(b) eighty per cent. of the amount by which its total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000; 
(ii) the income-tax payable by a domestic company, not 5 
being a company in which the public are substantially 
interested, which is an in<ktstrial company and the total 
income of which exceeds Rs. 2, 00, 000, shall DOt exceed 
the aggregate of-
(a) the income-tax which would have been payable by 10 
the company if its total income had been Rs. 2,00,000 
(the income of Rs. 2,00,000 for this purpose being oom-
puted as if such income included income from various 
sources in the same proportion as the total income of 
the company); and 15 
(b) eighty per cent. of the amount by which itl total 
income exceeds Rs. 2,00,000. 
II. In the case of a company other than a domestic company.-
(i) on so mIlCh of the total 
income as consists of-
(a) royalties received 
from an Indian concern in 
pursuance of an agreement 
made by it with the Indiau 
concern after the 31st day 
of March, 1961 but before 
the 1st day of Aprll, 1976, 
or 
(b) fees for rendering 
technical servicel received 
from an Indian concern in 
pursuance of an agreement 
made by it with the 1Dd1&n 
concern after the 29th day 
of February, 1964 but 
before the 1st day of April, 
1976, 
and where such agreement has, 
In either case, been approved 
by the Central Government 
(ii) on the balance, if any, 
of the total income 
SurcflarRe on incDme-t4% 
50 per cent. ; 
70 per cent. 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the 
preceding provi8ions of this Paragraph shall be increased by a 
Burcharge calculated at the rate of seven and a half per cent. 
of 8uch income-tax. ' ; 
20 
25 
30 
35 

43 
PART n 
Rates for deduction of tar at source in certain cases 
In every case in which under the provisions of sections 193, 
194, 194A, 194B, 194BB, 194D and 195 of the Income-tax Act, 
5 tax is to be deducted at the rates in force, deduction shall be 
made from the income subject to deduction at the following rates :-
Rate of 
income-tax 
Income-tax 
10 1. In the case of a person 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
other than a company-
(a) where the person ie 
resident in India-
(i) on income by way of 
interest other than "Interest 
on securities 11 
(ii) on income by way of 
winn1ugs from lotteries and 
crossword puzzles 
(tii) on income by way of 
winniugs from horse races 
(iv) on income by way of 
insurance camm is e ion 
(v) on income by way of 
interest payable on -
(A) any security, other 
than a tax-free security, of 
the Central or a State Govern-
ment; 
(B) any debentures or 
other securitiea for money 
issued by or on behalf of 
any local authority or a cor-
poration established by a 
Central, State or Provincial 
Act; 
(C) any debentures issued 
by a company where such 
debentures are listed in a 
recognised stock exchange in 
India in accordance with the 
10 per cent. 
30 per cent. 
30 per cent. 
10 per cent. 
10 per cent. 
Rate of 
surcharge 
Nil; 
3 per cent. , 
3 per centi 
Nil; 
Nil; 

IDCome-tax 
Rate of Rate of 
lDcome-tax Sll1"Cbarp 
Securities Contracts (Bep-
latloD) Act, 1956, aDd my 5 42 of 1_ 
rules made thereunder 
(IIi) OD 8DJ other Income 21 per ceDt. 2 per ceDt.; 
(exolucHDg Interest payable 
OD a tax-free security) 
("> where the perSOD 11 DOt 10 
reslde1lt ill IDdta-
(i> OD the whole Income iDooma-tu: at 30 par oent. &ad 
(excludtag lDtereat payable IUrcharp at 3 per cent. of the 
OD a tax-free security) amount of the inoome, 
or 16 
iDoome-tax and surcharge OD 
iDooma-tax In respect of the 
inoome at the rates prescribed 
In Sub-Paragraph I of Paragraph 
A of Part m of this Schedule. 20 
If suoh iDoome had been the total 
income, 
whichever Ia ~her: 
(ti) OD Income by way of 15 per ceDt. 1.5 per cent.; 2S intereat payable OD a tax-
free aecUl"1ty 
2. m the case of a oompany-
(G) wbere the compaay Is a 
domestic compaay-
(f) OD IDcome by way of 20 per ceDt. 
interest otber thaD ''lDtereat 
1.5 per oent. ; 30 
on aecurltles" 
(iO OD BI'lY other IDoome 21.5 per oent. 1. a per oeDt.; 
(exoludtDg Interest payable 
011 a tax-free eeourltJ) 36 
(b) where the oomPGJ Ia DOt 
a domestic oompaD)"-
(f> OIl bloome by way of 2& per c_t. Nfl; ·-dIvldead8 pa)'able by any 
dom..uc COIDpay 40 

45 
• 
Income-tax 
Rate of Rate of 
income-tax suroharge 
(ii) on Income by way of 40 per cent. Nil; 
5 royalty payable by an Indian 
concern In pursuance of an 
agreement made by it with 
the Indian concern after the 
31st day of March, UW6, 
10 where such royalty Ia In 
consideration for the transfer 
of all or any rights (iacludiDg 
the granting of a llcellCe) In 
respect of copyrtgbt in any 
15 book on a 8ubject referred to 
In tho proviso to sub-section 
(lA)of section USA of the 
Inoome-tax Act, to the indian 
concern 
20 (iii) on Income by way of 
royalty Cnot belDg royalty 
of the nature refl!Jrred to In 
sub-Item (b) (ii)] payable 
by an indian ooncern In 
25 pursuance of an agreement 
made by It with the bUan 
concern and which baa been 
approved by the Central 
Government, -
30 (A) where the agreement 50 per cent. 3.75 per cent. ; 
18 made after the 31st day 
of Maroh. 1961 but before 
the 1st day of Apro.. 1976 
(8) where the agreement 
35 Ia made after the 31st day 
of March. 1976-
(1) on 80 much of the 20 per oent. Ntl; 
amount of such income as 
consists of lump sum oon-
40 sideration for the transfer 

46 
Income-tax 
Rate of Rate of 
income-tax aureharp 
outside india of, or the 
Imparting of Information 5 
outside india In respect 
of, any data, documenta-
tion, drawing or specUI-
cation relating to any 10 patent, Invention, model, 
design, secret formula or 
process, or trade mark or 
similar property 
(2) on the balance, U 40 per cent. Nil; 
15 any, of such income 
(iv) on income by way of 
fees for technical services 
payable by an Indian concern 
In pursuance of an agreement 
20 made by it with the Indian 
concern and which has been 
approved by the Central 
Government-
(A) where the agreement 50 per cent. S. '75 per cat. ; 25 is made after the 29th day 
of February, 1964 but 
before the 1st day of 
April, 1976 
(B) where the agreement 40 per cent. Nfl; 
is made after the 31st day 30 
of March, 1976 
(II) on income by way of 44 per cent. 3.3 per CeDt. i 
interest payable on a tax-
free security 
(IIi) on any other income 70 per cent. S.2S per ceDt. 35 

5 
10 
15 
20 
47 
PART m 
RAtes for calculating or charsing incomNax in certain CAses, deducting 
income~tAI from income charseable under the head "Salaries /II or any 
payment referred to in su~section (9) of section ROE and cOIIIPuting 
I. advCUlc e tal·. 
In cases in which income-tax has to be calculated under the 
first proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax 
Act or charged under sub-section (4) of section 172 or sub-section 
(2) of section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 176 
of the said Act or deducted under section 192 of the said Act from 
income chargeable under the head "Salaries" or deducted under sub-
secUon (9) of section' 80E of the said Act from any payment 
referred to in the said sub-section (9) or bl which the "advance 
tax" payable under Chapter xvn-c of the said Act has to be 
oomp.lted, at the rate or rates in force, such income-tax or, 
as the case may be, "advance tax" (not being "advance tax" in 
respect of any income chargeable to tax under Chapter XU or 
section 164 of the Income-tax Act at the rates as specified in 
that Chapter or section), shall be so calculated, charged. 
deducted or comp.lted at the following rate or rates:-
Paragraph A 
Sub-P aragraph I 
In the case of every individual or Hbldu undivided family 
or unregistered firm or other association of persons or body 
25 of individuals, whether blcorporated or not, or every artificial 
juridical person referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of 
section 2 of the Income-tax Act, not being a case to which Sub-
Paragraph n of tbls Paragraph or any other Paragraph of this 
Part applies,-
30 Rates of i .. colle,w 
35 
(1) where the total income Nil; 
does not exceed Rs. 8, 000 
(2) where the total income 
exoeeds Rs. 8,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 15, 000 
15 per cent. of the amount 
by which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 8,000; 

• (3) where the total Income 
exoeeds Rs. 15,000 but does 
DOt exceed Rs. 20. 000 
48 
(4) where the total IDoome 
exceeds RB. 20,000 but does DOt 
exoeed Rs. 25, 000 
(5) where the total iDcome 
exoeeda_ Ra. 25, 000 but doeB 
Dot exceed Rs. 30,000 
(8) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 30,000 but doeB 
DOt exceed RB. 50,000 
(7) where the total Income 
exceeds RB. 50,000 but does DOt 
exceed RB. 70.000 
(8) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 70.000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 1, ~O, 000 
(9) where the total InQOme 
exceeds Rs. 1, ~O, 000 
Rs. 1,060 pillS 18 per oent. 
of the amount by which the 
total Income exceeds Rs.1S, 000; 
Rs. 1.950 plus 25 per ceot.of 
the amount by which the total 
Income ex0eed8 Re. 20, 000; 
Rs. 3,200 plus 30 per cent. 
of the amOUDt by which the 
total Income aoeed8 
Rs. 25,000; 
Rs. 4.700 pillS "0 per cent. 
of the amOUllt by which the 
total Inoome exoeed8 Ra. 30,000; 
Ra. 12,700 plus 50 per oeat. of 
the amount by which the total 
Income a0eed8 Re. 50,000; 
Rs. 22,700 plus 56 per oent. of the 
amount by which the totallDcome 
exoeeds Rs. 70.oooi 
RII. 39.200 plus 80 per cem. of 
the amount by which the total 
Inoome exoeeds Ra. 1.00,000: 
Provided that for the purposes of th18 Sub- ParcraPh. -
(i) DO Income-tax shall be payable on a total Jaoome DOt 
exceecHac RB.l2, 000; 
(ii) where the total Income exoeeds Ra.12, 000 but doea 
DOt exceed Rs.16,250, the IDoome-tax payable thereon .hall 
DOt exceed thirty per cent. of the amount by whloh the total 
income axceeda Ra. 12 , 000. 
The amouat of mcome-tax oomputed in acoordance with the 
preoecUag provisiOll8 of tb1s Sub-Paragraph llhan be Inoreued by 
• BUrohap for purposes of the UDfOll caloulatad at the rate ~ 
ten per oent. of euch 1noome-tax. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 

In the oue of every Btadu UDCl1vtded lamBy wbfoh at IUIJ time 
duriDg the prevlou8 year has at leat ODe member wbo .. total 
Iacome of the prevloue ,ear releV8l1t to the a ..... ment year 
6 oommeociDg on the 1st day of Aprn, 1981 exceed. 88. 12,000, 
Rau, of '",OIl~W 
(1) where the totallDOome Nfl; 
doel not exoeed Ra. 8,000 
(2) where the totallnoome 22 per cent. of the amount 
10 exceeds Rs. 8,000 but does not by which the total 1Dcome 
exceed Rs. 15, 000 exceeds Rs. 8,000; 
(3) where the total 1Dcome R$. 1,540 plus 27 per oent. 
exceeds R8. 15, 000 but does DOt of the amount by which the 
exceed Rs. 20,000 totallncome exceeds Rs.1b. OOO~ 
15 (4) where the total 1Doome Rs. 2.890 ph" 35 per cent. of 
exceeds Re. 20,000 but does DOt the amount by which the total 
exceed Rs. 25, 000 1Doome exoeedB as. 20.000; 
(5) where the totallDcome Re. 4.640 plus 40 per cent. 
exoeeds Rs. 25,000 but does of the 8lIlOUDt by which tbe 
20 not exoeed R8. 30.000 totallDcome exoeeds 
Ra. 25,000; 
(6) where the total1Doome RI. 6.640 plus 50 per cent. 
exoeeds Rs. 30, 000 but doe8 not of the amount by which the 
exceed Rs. 60.000 total1Doome aoeedB 
25 Ra. 30,000; 
('1) where the tota11Doome R8. 16. 640 plus 60 per oent. 
axoeeds Re. 60,000 of the amount by which the total 
Income exceeds Ra.50.000: 
Provided that for the p.lrpo888 of this Sub-Paragraph.-

50 
(i) DO income-tax shall be pa,yable (11 a totalinoome not 
exceeding Rs. 12,000; 
(ii) where the tota11Dcome exoeeds Rs. 12,000 but does 
not exceed Rs.17, 610, the Income-tax payable thereon shall 
not exceed forty' per cent. of the amount by which the total 5 
income exceeds Re. 12,000. 
SlUe ItGrQt on inc 0111 e--tClI 
The amount of iDcome-tax computed In accordaDge with the 
precedJDg provisions of this Sub-Paragraph sba11 be IDcreued 
by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of ten per cent. of such income-tax. 
Pcarqraph B 
In the case of every co-operative society,-
(1) where the total income 
does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
(2) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 20.000 
(3) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 20,000 
15 per cent. of the total 
income; 
Rs. 1,500 pm's 25 per oent. 
of the amoUDt by which the 
total Income exceeds 
Rs. 10,000: 
Ra. 4.000 plus 40 per cent. 
of the amoUDt by which the 
total Income exceeds 
Rs. 20.000. 
SurehClrQt on incolllt-tClJ' 
The amoUDt of income-tax comp.tted in accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Paragraph shall be IDcreaaed by a 
surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate of 
ten per cent. of such Income-tax. 
10 
15 
25 

5 
10 
15 
20 
51 
P ar"4lraph C 
SIl~Par4Braph I 
In the case of every registered firm, not being a cue to 
which Sub-Paragraph n of this Paragraph appUes,-
Rilles of incomNa 
(1) where the tota1lncome Nil; 
does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
(2) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 25, 000 
(J) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 25, 000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 50, 000 
(4) where the total income 
exoeeds Rs. 50,000 but does not 
exceed Rs. 1,00,000 
(5) where the total Income 
exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 
5 per cent. of the amount by 
which the total Income exceeds 
Rs. 10,000; 
Rs. 750 plus 7 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs.25,OO'>: 
Rs. 2,500 plus 15 per cent. 
of the amount by which the 
total income exceeds 
Rs. 50,000: 
Rs. 10,000 pIllS 24 per cent. 
of the amount by which the 
total Income exceeds 
Rs. 1,00,000. 
The amount of Income-tax computed In accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be increased 
25 by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of ten per cent. of such income-tax. 
In the case of every registered firm whose total Income 
Includes income derived from a profession carried on by it 

52 
and the income 80 included is not lel8 thaD fifty-one per cnt. 
of such total income, -
Ratts of incolfte-t4l 
(1) where the total income 
does not exceed Rs. 10,000 
(2) where the tota1income 
exceeds Rs. 10, 000 but does DOt 
exceed Rs. 25, 000 
(3) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 25, 000 but does 
DOt exceed Rs. 50,000 
(4) where the tota11ncome 
exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does 
not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 
(5) where the total income 
exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 
Nil; 
4 per cent. of the amowat by 
which the totalinoome exceeds 
Rs. 10,000. 
Rs. 800 phu 7 per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
Income exceeds Rs. 25.000; 
Rs. 2,350 ph,s 13 per cent. 
of the amOWlt by which the 
total Income exceeds 
RII. 50,000; 
RII. 8.850 plus 22 per cent. 
of the amount by which the 
total Income exceeds 
Rs. 1,00,000. 
SIlfChCITBt on incolle-lar 
The amount of income-tax computed In accordance with the 
preceding provisions of this Sub-Paragraph shall be Ihcreued 
by a surcharge for purposes of the Union calculated at the rate 
of ten per cent. of such income-tax. 
Explanation • - For the purposes of this Paragraph. "registered 
firm" includes an wa.registered fl'"1D &Bsessed as a registered firm 
under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act. 
In the case of every local authorlty,-
Rate of i"colle-tGI 
On the whole of the total income 50 per cent. 
SurcharRe on ''''OIiNaI 
The amoUnt of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purpose. of the 
Union calculated at the rate of ten per cent. of such income-tax. 
5 
10 
16 
20 
25 
30 
35 

53 
Pllrll9'Gph E 
ID the case of a compaay, -
Rates of inc:olle-lG 
I. In tbe cue of a domestic company,-
5 (1) where the company Is a 
10 
oompaay In which the public 
are substanUally Interested,-
(i) in a case where the 
total income does not exceed 
Rs. 1,00,000 
45 per cent. of the total incomei 
(ii) in a case where the total 55 per cent.of the total1noomei 
incom, exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 
(2) where the company is not 
a company in which the public 
15 are 8ubstanUally interested, -
20 
(i) in the case of an 
JDdustrial company,-
(a) where the total 
income does not exceed 
R8. 2, 00, 000 
55 per cent. of the totalincomei 
(bl where the total 60 per cent. of the total Income; 
Income exceeds Re. 2,00, ooe 
(ii) in any other case 85 per cent. of the total income: 
Provided that -
25 (i) the income-tax payable by • domestic company, being a 
company in which the pubUc are aabstaDUally interested, the 
total income of which exceeds Rs. 1,00, oootehall not exceed the 
acgregate of -
(a) the income-tax which would have been payable by the 
30 compay if its total income had been Rs.I, 00,000 (the incoltle 
of Ra.1, 00, 000 for fbis purpose beiDg computed as if such 
income included income from various sources in the same 
proportion u the tota1income of the company); and 

(b) eighty per cent. of the amount by wbtoh Ita totalilloome 
exceeds Bs. 1,00,000; 
(ii) the Inoome-tu payable by a dollleaUC company, Dat hem, a 
oomplllly ill which the pubUc are aubataDUally lDteroted, which 
fa lID Indutrla1 company and the totalillcome of which _oeeda 5 
Re. 2, 00, ODD. 8ha11 Dot exceed the aarepte of-
(a) the Inoome-tu which would have beaD payable by the 
oompany U Its total 11lcome had been Bs.I, 00, 000 (the mcome 
of Bs. 2, 00, 000 for Ws pul'poae bam, oomputed u If ncb 
moome included mOOlDe frOID vartoue souroes In the BUlle 10 
proport1oD u the total lDoome of the oompaD..J); and 
(b) eighty per cent. of the amount by wbtch ita totaliDoome 
exceeds Bs. 2, 00, 000. 
n. In the cue of a company other tbaIl a domelltlc company,-
(i) (Jl 80 much of the total 
Income as ooosists of -
(4) royalties received from 
an Indian coocern In pursu-
anoe of an agreement made by 
it with the !ndian concern 
after the 31st day of March" 
1961 but before the 1st day of 
Aprn. 1976, or 
(b) fees lor rendermg tecmical 
services received from aD Indian 
ooncern in pursuance of an agree-
ment m.ade by It with the IndiIUl 
concern after the 29th day of Feb-
ruary. 1964 but before the 1st 
day of AprU, 1976, 
IDd where such qreement hu, 
In eitber cue, been approved 
by the Central Government 
(iiJ on the balance. U any, 
of the total income 
50 per cent. ; 
70 per cent. 
15 
20 
26 
30 
35 

55 
SurCharSI on intome-tu 
Tbe amount of mcome-t. computed lD acoordance with tbe 
preoedlDa' provlalol1s of this Paragraph shall be iDcreued by a 
aurcharp calculated at the rate ~ 8even am a half per cent. 
5 of such lucome-tax. 
PART IV 
~ee section 2(7)(e~ 
Rule 1. - Agricultural Income of the nature referred to In 
10 sub-olause (a) of olause (1) of aeotlon 2 of the Income-tax Act 
shall be computed &8 If it were iDcome chargeable to Income- tax 
UDder that Act UDder the head ''lDoome from ather sources" and 
tM prcm.slona of aeottou 67 to 59 of tbat Act shall, 80 far as may 
be, app~ acoordlDgly: 
15 Provided that sub-section (2) of 8ection 58 shall apply subject 
to the modification that the reference to section 40A therein 8hall 
be oonstrued a8 not Including a reference to 8ub-sectiOllS (3) and 
(4) of 8ection 40A. 
Rule 2. - Agricultural Income of the nature referred to In 
20 8ub-clau8e (b) or sub-clausa (c) of clause (1) of section 2 of the 
lDcome-tax Act [other than Income derived from any buUdlng 
required as a dwelling house by the receiver of the rent or revenue 
or the cultivator or the receiver of rent-In-kind referred to in 
the said sub-clause (e) 8hall be computed &8 if it were tncome 
25 chargeable to income-tax under that Act under the head "Profits 
and gains of bu8lneaa or profession" and the provisions of 
sections 30,31,32,34,36,37 ,S8,40,4OA [9ther than sub-
aectlons (3) and (4) thereoG, 41, 43. and 43.4 of the Income-tax 
Aot 8hall. 80 far as may be. apply accordingly. 
30 Rule 3. - Agricultural Income of the nature referred to In 
sub-claule eel of clau8e (1) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 
beluglDcome derived from any buUdlng required as a dwelling 
house by the reoelver of the rent or revenue or the cultivator 
or the receiver of rent-tn-kind referred to In the said sub-
35 clause (c) shall be computed as if It were Income chargeable 
to Income-tax under that Act under the head "Income from 
hou8e property" and the provisiOns of sections 23 to 27 of that 
Act shall, so far as maY be. apply accordingly: 

56 
Prcwided that· sub- section (2) of the .. Id section II eba1l apply 
subject to the modlficatloDB that the refereDCes to "totallDcome" 
&herelD sbaIl be cODStnaed as refereDCes to net qrloultural 
lDCome and that the words, ftpres aDd letter "and before mak-
lDI( any deductloo UDder Chapter VIA" shall be omitted. 6 
Rule 4. - NotwithstaDdlDg anythlDc contalDed lD any other 
provtsiODS of these rules, lD a case where the assessee derives 
lDCome from sale of tea grown aDd manufactured by him in 
IDdla, such lDCome shall be computed In accordaDCe with rule 
8 of the lDcome-tax Rules, 1962, and sixty per cent. of such 10 
lDcome sball be regarded .. the acrlcultural Income of the 
.. seSS88. 
Rule 5 •. - Where the auess88 is a partner of a registered 
firm or an unregistered firm assessed &8 a registered firm 
under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act, which 
in the previous year has any agricultural lDcome, or Is a 
partner of an unregistered firm which baa DOt been assessed 
as a registered firm under clause (b) of the said section 183 
and wblch In the previous yoar has either DO iDCome charge -
able to tax under the lDCome-tax Act or hu total lDCome DOt 
axceedlnl the maximum amOUDt DDt chargeable to tax In the 
cue of an unregistered firm bUt has any qrlculturallDCome, 
then, the agricultural lDcome or loss of the firm shall be 
computed In accordance with theae roes and bis share In the 
agricultural 1Dc0me or loss of the firm sball be computed in 
the manner laid down In sub-sectlcm(l), sub-section (2) and 
sub-section (3) of SectiOD 67 of the Income-tax Act and the 
s hare so computed shall be regarded as the agrlcultural lDcome 
or 10s8 of the &88eS8ee. 
Rule 6. - Where the &8sessee is a member of an associatlon 
of persons or a body of lDdtvldllals (other than a Hindu undivided 
famUy, a company or a firm) which In the previous year baa 
either'DO Income obarpable to tax under tbe Income-tax Act or 
has total income not exceedlDc the maximum amount not charp-
able to tax In the case of an .. soctatJon of per80D8 or a body 
of tndlvlduala (other than a HiDdu uadlvlded funUy, a cOlDPIIDY 
or a firm) but baa any agricultural lDCome, tbeD, the agrl.oul-
turallDCome or los8 of the association or body 8hall be com-
puted In accordaDCe with these rules and the share of the 
a8se8see In the agricultural iDOom. or loss 80 computed shall 
be regarded as the agr1cultural lDCome or 1088 of the 
... eSS88. 
16 
20 
25' , 
30, 

57 
Rid e 7. - Where the result of the computation for the prevloua 
year in respect of any source of agrloulturallDcome ia a 10 •• , 
such loss shall be eet off apinat the inoome of the ... e8He, 
it any, for that previous year from any other source of qrlcul-
5 tura! lDcome: 
Provlded that where the .. se8see Is a parmer of an un-
regl.tered firm whlch has not been a .. e •• ed .. a registered 
finn under clause (b) of section 183 of the Income-tax Act 
or 1. a member of an association r1 persons or a body of 
10 individuals aDd the share of the ... e .... b1 the qrloultural 
l.Deome of the firm, ... oclatlOD or body, .. the c .. e may be, 
ls aloes, .uch 1088 shall not be eet rB. aplDat &DY lDoome 
of the ...... ee from any other .ouroe r1ll1l'lculturallDcome. 
Rul,8. - A1:Jy sum payable by the ... e8888 OIl accaaDt of any 
1& tax levied by the State GovermneDt OIl the agtlcultaral lDcome 
.hall be deducted In compat .. t.be qrlaultural bIoome. 
Rule 9. - (1) Where the ....... has, in the previous year re-
levant to the asseasment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1980, any agricultural lncome and the net result of the computation 
20 of the agricultural income of the a8sessee for anyone or more of 
the previous years relevant to the asses8ment ye.rs commencing on 
the 18t day of April, 1974 or th~ 18t day of April, 1975 or the 18t 
day of April, 1976 or the 1st day of April, 1977 or the 1st day of 
April', 1978 or the 1st day of April, 1979, i. a 1088, then, br the 
21 purpose8 of sub-section (2) of 8ection 2 of this Act,-
(i) the loss 80 computed for the previou8 year relevant to the 
asse8sment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 1974. to 
the extent, if any. such 108s bas not been set off against the 
agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
30 a8sessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 1975 or the 
18t day of April, 1976 or the 1st day of April. 1977 or the 18t 
day of April, 1978 or the 1st day of April, 1979, 
(ii) the 1088 So computed for the previous year relevant to 
the asse 8sment year commencing on the 18t day of April, 1975, 
35 to the extent, if any, such 1088 has not been set o'f against the 
agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
asllE!ssment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 1976 
or the 1st day of April, 1977 or the 1st day of April, 1978 or 
the 1st day of April, 1979. 

58 
• (iii) the loss so oomputed for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year oommenciDg on the 1st day of April, 
1976, to the extent. If any. such 108s bas not been set off against 
the agricultural inoome for the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1977 
or the 1st day of April, 1978 or the 1st day of April, 1979, 
(iv) the 108S so computed for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencilll on the 1st day of April, 1977, 
to the extent. if any, such loss has not been set off against the 
agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the assess-
ment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1978 or 
the 1st day of April, 1979, 
(Il) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1St day of 
April, 1978, to the extent, if any. such loss has not been 
set off against the agricultural income for the prevtous 
year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 
lat day of April, 1979, and 
(vi) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of 
April, 1979, 
shall be set off against the agricultural inoome of the assessee 
for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commenc-
ing on the 1st day of April. 1980. 
(1) Where the 88seSKe has, in the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of Aprll. 1981 
or, if by virtue of any prov1eim m the Income-tax Act. income-tax 
is to be charged in respect of the inoome of a period other than 
that previous year. in such other period, any agricultural income 
IDCi the net result of the comput&Ucm of the agrioulturalincome 
of the assessee for any one or more of the previous years rele-
vant to the assessment years commencJng OIl the 1st day of April, 
1974 or the 1st day of April. 1975 or the let day of Apr1l, 1978 
or the lst day of April. 1977 or the lst day of April, 1978 or the 
bt day of April. 1979 or the 1st day of Aprll, 1980, 11 a 1088, then, 
for the purpose8 of 8ub-tlection (6) of section 2 of this Act, -
(i) the 1088 10 computed for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing <D the lit daJ of Aprll. 
1974, to the extent, U any, such 1088 has not been set off 
against the agrloulturalincome for the previous year relevant 
to the use8ament year commencing on the 1st day of April. 
1975 or the 1st day of April, 1978 or the let day of April. 
1977 or the 1st day of April. 197 8 or the 1st day of Aprll, 1979 
or the 1at day of April. 1980. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
40 

59 
(it) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1975. to the extent, if any, such loss has not been set off 
against tbe agricultural income for the previous year relevant 
5 to the assessment year commeneing on the 1st day of AprH. 
1976 or the 1st day of April, 1977 or the 1st day of April, 
1978 or the 1st day of April, 1979 or the 1st day of April, 1980, 
(iii) the l08S so computed for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
10 1976, to the extent, if any, such loss bas not been set off 
against the agr1cultural income for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1977 or the 1st day of April, 1978 or the 1st day of April, 1979 
or the 1st day of April, 1980, 
15 (ill) the loss 80 computed for the previous year relevant 
to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 
1977. to the extent, if any. such IOS8 has not been set off against 
the agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencmg on the 1st day of April, 197 8 
20 or the 1st day of April, 1979 or the 1st day of April, 1980, 
(II) the loss so computed for the preY ious year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1978, to the 
extent, if any, such loss bas not been set off against the agrIcul-
tural income for the previous year relevant to the assessment year 
25 commencing on the 1st day of April, 1979 or the 1st day of 
April, 1980, 
(IIi) the loss 80 computed for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 1979. 
to the extent. if any. 8uch loss has not been set off agaJ.nst the 
30 agricultural income for the previous year relevant to the asses8-
ment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1980. and 
35 
40 
45 
(vii) the loss so computed for the previous year relevant to 
the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April. 1980. 
shall be set off against the agricultural income of the assessee 
for the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing 
on the 1st day of April, 1981. or the period aforesaid. 
(3) Where a change has occurred in the conlftltution of a firm, 
nothing in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) shall entitle the firm to 
8et off 80 much of the loss proportionate to the share of a 
retired or deceased partner computed in the manner laid down 
in sub-eection(l) , sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of section 
67 of the Income-tax Act as exceeds his share of profits, if any, 
of the previous year in the firm, or entitle any partner to the 
benefit of any portion of the said 1088 (computed in the manner 
aforesaid) which is not apportlonable to him. 

60 
(4) Where any person deriving any agricultural income from 
any source has been succeeded in suoh capacity by another 
person. otherwise than by inheritance, nothing In sub-rule 
(1) or sub-rule (2) shall entitle any person. other than the person 
incurring the loss, to have it set off under sub-rule (1) or, 88 
the case may be. sub-rule (2). 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule. no I08S 
which has not been determined by the Income-tax Officer under 
the provisions of these rules or the rules contained in Part IV of 
the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1974, or ofthe Flret 
Schedule to the Finance Act, 1976. or of the First Schedule to 
the Finance Act, 1976, or of the First Schedule to the Finance 
(No.2) Act, 1977, or oftbe Schedule to the FInance Act, 1978, 
or of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1979, shall be set 
off under sub-rule (1) or, as the case may be, sub-rule (1). 
Rule 10. - Where tbe net result of the computation made 
In accordance with these rules Is a loss, the loss so computed 
shall be ignored am the net agricultural income shall be deemed 
to be nil. 
5 
10 20 of 1974. 
25 of 1975. 
66 of 1976. 
29 of 1977. 
19 of 1m. 
21 of 1979. 15 
RuJ e 1 J. - The prOVisions of the Income -tax Act relating to 20 
procedure for assessment (includlng the provisions of sectioo 
288A relating to rounding off of income) sball, with the necessary 
modifications, apply in relation to the computation of the net 
agricultural income of the assessee as they apply in relation 
to the assessment of the total income. 25 
Rule l2. - For the purposes of computing the net agri-
cultural income of the assessee, the Income-tax Officer shall 
have the same powers as hoe bas under the Income-tax Act for 
the purposes of assessment of the total income. 

THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 45) 
PART I 
In the First Scbedule to the Customs Tariff Act,-
5 (i) the entry in column (5) in sub-beading No. (5) of Heading 
No. 29.01/45, sub-beading No. (6) of Heading No.29. 01/45, 
Heading No. 50.01, Heading No. 50. 00, sub-beading No. (1) of 
Heading No. 50. 03/08 and sub-beading No. (1) of Heading 
No. 50. 09/10 shall be omitted; 
10 (ii) in sub-beading No. (2) of Heading No. 37.01/08, for tbe 
entry In column (3). the entry ''Re. 1.00 per linear metre" 
shall be substituted; 
(iii) in Heading No. 100. 01, for the entry in column (3), 
the entry "30~"shall be substituted. 
15 PART n 
20 
Head-
ing No. 
(1) 
Sub-heading No. and 
deSCription of article 
@) 
In the First Schedule to the 
Customs Tariff Act, for 
Headlng No. 100.02, the 
follOWing Heading shall be 
25 substituted, namely:-
"100.02 All dutiable articles, even 
if elsewhere specified, 
Intended for personal use, 
Imported by post or air, 
30 and exempt from any 
prohibition in respect of 
the Import thereof under 
the Imports and Exports 
(Control) Act, 1947 (18 of 
RAte of duty 
Standard Preferen-
tial Areas 
(3) (4) 
35 1947), but excluding articles 
falling under Heading No. 100.01 
and alcoholic drinks: 
(1) drugs and medicines 60% 
40 (2) others 100% 
61 
Duration 
when rates 
of duty are 
protective 
(5) 
" .. . 

THE TfURD SCHEDULE 
(See section 46) 
PART I 
In the First Schedule to the Central Excises Act,-
(i) in Item No. 14A, for the entry in the third oolumn, the 5 
entry "Fifteen per cent. lid lIalortll." shall be substituted; 
(ii) in Item No. 14B, for the entry in the third column, 
the entry "Fifteen per cent. ad valoreJII. " shall be substituted; 
(iii) in Item No. 14G, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Fifteen per cent. ad vlllortlll." shall be substituted; 10 
(ill) in Item No. 15C, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Fifteen per cent. ad wlortlll." shall be substituted; 
(v) in Item No. 16AA, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry 'Ten per cent. ad valor,...." shall be substituted; 
(vi) In Item No. 26 A, in the entry in the second column, - 15 
(II) the words "AND COPPER ALLOYS CONTAINING 
Nar LESS THAN FIFTY PER CENT. BY WEIGHT OF 
COPPER" shall be omitted; 
(b) the follOWing ErplcmCltiDtl shall be inserted at the end. 
namely:-
'ErplcmCltiDn .- "COPPER" shall include any alloy in 
which copper predominates by weight over .ch of the 
other metals. '; 
(lIii) in Item No.26B, in the second column, the folloWing 
20 
Explanation shall be inserted at the end, namely:- 25 
, Explanation.- "ZINC" shall include any alloy In which 
zinc predominates by weight over each of the other metals. '; 
(viii) tn Item No.27A, in the second column, the following 
ErplGll4tion shall be inserted at .the end, namely:-
'Explanation .- "LEAD" shall include any alloy in 30 
which lead predominates by Weight over each of the other 
metals. '; 
(ix) In Item No. 68, in the second column, the following 
Erplanatlon shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
"Expillnation. - For the purposes of this Item, goods 35 
which are referred to in any preceding Item in this Schedule 
62 

63 • 
for the purpose of excluding such goods from the description 
of goods in that Item (whether such exclusion is by means 
of an FIplancation to such Item or by words of exclusion in 
the description itself or in any other mann,er) shall be 
5 deemed to be goods not specified in that Item. If. 
Item 
No. 
(1) 
PART n 
Description of goods 
(2) 
10 In the First Scbedule to the Central 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
Excises Act,-
(i) after Item No. 15C, the following 
Item shall be Inserted, namely:-
"15CC. MOLASSES 
(ii) for Item No. 16B, the following 
Item shall be substituted, namely:-
"16 B. PLYWOOD, BLOCKBOARD, 
LAMINBOARD", BA rTEN BOARD, 
HARD OR SOFT WALL BOARDS OR 
INSULATING BOARD AND VENEERED 
PANELS, WHETHER OR NOT 
CONT AINING ANY MATERIAL OTHER 
THAN WOOD; CELLULAR WOOD 
PANELS; BUILDING BOARDS OF 
WOOD PULP OR OF VEGETABLE 
FIBRE, WHETHER OR NOT BONDED 
WITH NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL 
RESINS OR WITH SIMILAR ruNDERS; 
AND ARTIFICIAL OR RECONSTITUTED 
WOOD BEING WOOD SHAVINGS, WOOD 
CHIPS, SAW DUST, WOOD FLOUR OR 
OTHER LIGNEOUS WASTE AGGLO-
MERATED WITH NATURAL OR 
ARTIFICIAL RESINS OR OTHER 
ORGANIC BINDING SUBSTANCES, 
IN SHEETS, BLOCKS, BOARDS 
OR THE IJKE. 
(iii) for Item No. 19, the following Item 
40 shall be substituted, namely:-
'19. COTTON FABRICS...-
"Cotton fabrics" means all varieties of 
fabrics manufactured either wholly or 
partly from cotton and includes dhoties, 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
Thirty rupees per 
metric tonne. "; 
Thirty per cent. 
cad vcalo rem. "; 

• 
Item 
No. 
(1) 
64 
Description of goods 
(2) 
sarees, chaddars, bed-sheets, bed-
spreads, counter-panes, table-cloths, 
embroidery in the piece, In strips 
or In motifs, fabrics Impregnated. 
coated or laminated with preparations 
of cellulose derivatives or of other 
artificial Iiastic matertals and fabrics 
covered partially or fully with textfle 
Bocks or wtth preparations containing 
textUe flocks, if (i) In such fabrics 
cotton predominates In weight. or 
(ii) such fabrics contain more than 40 
per cent, by weight of cotton and 50 
per cent. or more by weight of non-
cellulosic fibres or yarn or both: 
Provided that in the case of embroi-
dery in the piece, in strips or in 
motifs, fabrics impregnated, coated 
or laminated with preparations of 
cellulose derivatives or of other artifi-
cial plastic materials and fabrics 
covered partially or fully with textile 
Bocks or wtth preparations containing 
textile flocks, such predominance or 
percentages, as the case may be, 
shall be In relation to the Mae fabrics 
which are embroidered or impregnated, 
coated or laminated or covered, as the 
case may be-
I. Cotton fabrics, other than (i) 
embroidery In the piece, In strips or 
in motifs, (ii) fabrics 1.mpregnated, 
coated or laminated with preparatioDs 
of cellulose derivatives or of other 
artificial plastic materials and (iii) 
fabrics covered partially or fully 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
with textUe flocks or with preparations 
containing textile flocks-
(a) cotton fabrics, not sub-
jected to any process. 
(b) cotton fabrtcs, subjected 
to the process of bleaching, 
mercer1sing, dyeing, printing, 
water -proofing, rubberl.lng, 
shrink-proofing, organdle 
Twenty per cent. 
Gd valorem. 
Twenty per cent. 
ad I1GJD rtlll. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Item 
No. 
(1) 
65 
Description of goods 
(2) 
processing or any other process 
or any two or more of these 
processes. 
n. Embroidery in the piece, in 
strips or In motifs, in or in relation 
to the manufacture of which any 
prooess is ordinarUy carried on 
with the !lid of power. 
m. Cotton fabrics impregnated, 
coated or laminated with prepara-
tions of cellulose derivatives 
or of other artificial plastic 
materials. 
IV. Cotton fabrics covered 
partially or fully with textile 
flocks or wtth preparations 
containing textile flocks such 
as flock printed fabrics and 
flock coated fabrics. 
Explanation 1.- "Base fabrics" 
means fabrics falling under sub-
30 Item I of this Item which are 
subjected to the process of 
embroidery or which are impreg-
nated, coated or laminated wtth 
preparations of cellulose deriva-
35 Uves or of other plastio materials 
or which are covered partially or 
fully with textile flocks or with 
preparations containing textile 
flocks. 
40 ErplCDlGtion II. _Where two or 
45 
more of the following fibres, that 
is to say, 
(a) man-made fibre of cellu-
10sic origin; 
(b) cotton; 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
The duty for the 
time being levi-
able on the base 
fabrics, if not 
al ready paid, 
plus twenty per 
cent. ad valorem. 
The duty for the 
time being levi-
able on the base 
fabrics, if not 
already paid, plus 
thirty per cent. 
ad valorem. 
The duty for the 
time being levi-
able on the base 
fabrics, if not 
already paid, plus. 
thirty per cent. 
ad valorem. 
• 

Item 
No. 
(1) 
66 
Description of goods 
(2) 
(c) wool; 
(d) sUk (including sUk not1); 
(e) jute (including Blmlipatam 
jute or mesta fibrf!); 
(n man-made fibre of non-
cellulosic origln; 
(S) flax; 
(II) ramie. 
in any fabric are equal in weight, then .. 
such one of those fibres the predomi-
nance of which would render such 
fabric fall under that Item (hereafter 
In this Ezp'maGtion referred to as the 
appllcalie Item) among the Items Nos. 
19. 20. 21, 22, 22A and 22AA, which. 
read with the relevant nottfication, if 
any, for the Ume being in force iSsued 
under the Central Excise Rules, 1944, 
involves the highest amount of duty, 
shall be deemed to be predominant in 
such fabric and accordingly such 
fabric shall be deemed to fall under 
the aPliicable Item. 
Explanation III. - This Item does not 
include floor coverings, falUng under 
Item No. 220. '; 
(tv) fot: Item No.22. the following Item 
shall be substltuted, namely:-
'22. MAN-MADE FABRICS-
"Man-made fabrics" means all 
varieties of fabricl) manufactured 
either wholly or partly from man-
made fibres or yarn and includes 
embroidery in the piece, In strips 
or in motifs, fabrics lmpregnated, 
coated or laminated with prepara-
tions of cellulose derivatives or of 
other artificial plastic materials 
and fabrics covered parUally or 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
60 
Item 
No. 
(1) 
67 
Description of goods 
(2) 
fully with textile flocks or with 
preparations containing textile 
flockS, In each of which man-made 
(i) cellulosic fibre or yarn, or (ii) 
non-cellulosic fibre or yarn, pre-
dominates In weight: 
Provided that in the case of 
embroidery In the piece, in strips 
or in motifs, fabrics impregnated.. 
coated or laminated with prepara-
tions of cellulose derivatives or of 
other artificial plastic materials 
and fabrics covered partially or 
fully with textile flocks or with 
preparations containing textile 
flocks, such predominance shall 
be in relation to the base fabrics 
which are embroidered or impreg-
nated, coated or laminated or 
covered, as the case may be-
(1) Man-made fabrics other than (i) 
embroidery in the piece, in strips 
or in motifs, (it) fabrics Impreg-
nated, coated or laminated with 
preparations of cellulose deriva-
ti ves or of other artificial plastic 
materials and (iii) fabrics covered 
partially or fully with textlle flocks 
or with preparations containing 
textile flocks-
(11) man-made fabricS, not 
subjected to any process. 
(b) man-made fabricS, sub3ected 
to the process of bleaching, 
dyeing, printing, shrink-proofing, 
tentering, heat-setUng, crease 
resistant processing or any other 
process or any two or more of 
these processes. 
(2) Embroidery in the piece, In 
strips or in motifs, in or in 
relation to the manufacture of 
which any process is ordinarily 
carried on with the aid of power. 
Rate of d~ty 
@) 
Twenty per cent. 
ad vcalorem pillS 
rupees five per 
square metre. 
Twenty per cent. 
ad IIUOrAl plus 
rupees flve per 
square metre. 
Tbe duty for the 
time being leviable 
on the base fabriC, 
if not already paid, 
pillS twenty per 
cent. ad lIa1orem. 

68 
Item 
No. 
Description of goods 
(1) (2) 
(3) Fabrics impregnated. ooated 
or laminated with preparations of 
cellulose derivatives or of other 
artificial plastic materials. 
(4) Fabrics covered partially 
or fully with textlle flocks or 
with preparations containing 
textile flocks such as flock 
printed fabrics and flock coated 
fabrics. 
ErplGllGtiDn I. - "Base fabrics" 
means fabrics falling under 8U~ 
item (1) of this Item which are 
subjected to the process of 
em broidery or which are impreg-
nated. coated or laminated with 
preparations of cellulose deriva-
tives or of other plastic materials 
or which are covered partially or 
fully with textne flocks or with 
preparations contaln1ng textUe 
flocks. 
ExplanatiDn II. - I'his Item does 
not include glass fabrics or fabrics 
falling under Item No. 19 or Item 
No. 21. 
ErplcmatiDn III. - ExplanatiDn II 
under Item No. 19 shall, 80 far as 
may be, apply In relation to this 
Item as it applies in relation to 
that Item. 
frplanCltion IV. - This Item does 
not include floor coverings, falling 
under Item No. 220. '; 
(V) for Item No. 22F, the following 
Item shall be substituted, namely:-
"22F. MINERAL FIBRES AND 
YARN, AND MANUFACTURES 
THEREFROM, IN OR IN RELATION 
TO THE MANUFACTURE OF WHICH 
ANY PROCESS IS ORDINARILY 
CARRIED ON WITH THE AID OF 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
The duty for the 
time belng levlatie 
on the base fabriCS, 
if not already paid. 
plus thlrty per oent. 
ad l1alor •• 
The duty for the time 
being leviable on the 
base fabrios, if not 
already paid,plllS 
thirty per cent. 
lUI l1alD rat. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
Item 
No. 
(1) 
69 
Description of goods 
(2) 
POWER, THE FOLLOWING, 
NAMELY:-
(1) Glass fibre and yam 
including glass tissues and 
glass wool; 
(2) Asbestos fibre and yam; 
(3) Any other mineral fibre or 
yarn, whether continuous or 
otherwise, such 88 slag wool 
and rock wool; 
(4) other manufactures in wldch 
mineral fibres or yarn or both 
predomiDate or predominates in 
weight. 
ExpllUl4Uon • - This Item does 
not Include asbestos cement 
products. "; 
(vt) In Item No. 27,-
(a) for sub-Item (n, the followlDg 
sub-Item shall be substituted, namely~ 
"m containers, plain, lacquered, 
or printed. or lacquered and 
printed. 
(b) the ExplanAtion shall be numbered 
a. Explanation I. and. -
(i) In Explanation I~ as so 
numbered, for the word 
"oam", the words "collapsl1ie 
tubes, calks" shall be substituted; 
and 
(ti) after Explanation I~ as so 
numbered, the following 
ElplanaUon shall be Inserted, 
namely:-
I'ElplllllArion II. - In this Item, 
the expresslon "AlumlnJum"sball 
include any alloy in whicb 
aluminium predominates 
by weight over eacb of the other 
metals. I. 
• 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
Fifteen per cent. 
cad vcaloran. 
Fifteen per cent. 
cad valorellJ. 
Fifteen per cent. 
U lIa1o'eM, 
Fifteen per cent. 
all LlcaJoral\ 
Fifty per oent. 
ad lIa10rna ,Ius 
twotboueand 
rupees per 
metric tonne. "; 

Item 
No. 
(1) 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 48) 
Description of goods Rate of d~ty 
( 3) 
In the First Schedule to the Additional Duties of 
Excise Act, -
(i) in Item No. 19, 
(a) for sub-item I, the following sub-
item shall be substituted, namely:-
''1. Cotton fabrics, other than (i) 
embroidery in the piece, in strips 
or in motifs, (ii) fabrics impreg-
nated, coated or laminated with 
preparations of cellulose derivatives 
or of other artificial plastic 
materials and (iii) fabrics covered 
partially or fully with textile flocks 
or with preparations containing 
textile flocks -
(a) cotton fabrics, not sub-
jected to any process. 
(b) cotton fabriCS, subjected 
to the process of bleaching, 
mercerising, dyeing, printing, 
water-proofing, rubberising, 
shrink-proofing, organdie 
procesbing or any other process 
or any two or more of these 
processes. 
(b) after sub-item III, the following 
sub-item shall be inserted, namely:-
''IV. Cotton fabrics covered 
partially or fully with textile flocks 
or with preparations containing 
textile flocks such as flock printed 
fabrics and flock coated fabrics. 
70 
Five per cent. 
ad valortll. 
Five per cent. 
cad vcaioral. "; 
The duty for the 
time being levi-
able on tbe bue 
fabrics, if not 
already paid. ": 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 

Item 
No. 
(1,) 
71 
Description of goods 
(2) 
(ii) In Item No. 22, 
5 (a) for sub-item (I), the 
following sub-item shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
11(1) Man-made fabrics, other 
than (i) embroidery In the piece, 
10 In strips or in motifs, (ii) fabrics 
impregnated, coated or laminated 
with preparations of cellulose 
derivatives or of other artificial 
plastiC materials and (iii) fabrics 
15 covered partially or fully with 
textile flocks or with prepara-
tions containing textile flocks -
20 
25 
30 
35 
(a) man-made fabrics, not 
subjected to any process. 
(&) man-made fabrics, 
subj ected to the process of 
bleaching, dyeing, printing, 
shrink-proofing, tentering, 
heat-setting, crease 
resistant processing or any 
other process or any two 
or more of these processes. 
(b) after sub-item (3), the 
following sub-item shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(4) Fabrics covered partially 
or fully with textile flocks or with 
preparations containing textile 
flocks such as flock printed 
fabrics and flock coated fabrics. 
• 
Rate of duty 
(3) 
Seven and a 
half per cent. 
ad vcdorem plus 
rupees two per 
square metre. 
Seven and a 
half per cent. 
ad valorem 
plus rupees 
two per square 
metre. "; 
The duty for 
the time being 
leviable on the 
base fabrics, 
if not already 
paid. ". 

Appeal. to 
Collector 
(Appee1a). 
THE J'IrTH SCHEDULE 
(See seoUoo 50) 
PART I 
AM.OMEns III DE CUSTOMS ACT, ]g62 
1. Section 2.-< 
(II) Por olause (1), substitute -
'( 1) "adjudioating authority" means any authority compe-
tent to pass any order or decision UDder th1s Act, but does 
DOt include the Board, Collector (Appeals) or Appellate 
Tribunal; 
(IA) "alroraft" bas the same mean1Dg &8 in the Aircraft 
Act, 19Mi 
(IB) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Customs, Excise and 
Gold (Ccmtrol) Appellate Tribunal oonstltuted 'under .otlm 
129i'i 
(6) After clause (7). insert-
'(7A) "Collector (Appeals)" means a person appointed to be 
a Collector of Customs (Appeals) under sub-section (1) of 
section 4;'. 
2. Section 3. - For clause (b). substitute -
,t (b) Collectors of Customs (Appeals);". 
3. Section 5. in sub-section (3). - Por "an Appellate Collector 
of Customs", subeUtute "a Collector (Appeals)". 
4. For Chapter XV. substitute -
, CHAPl'D XV 
128.(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order passed 
under this Act by an officer of customs lower in rank than a 
5 
10 
22 of 1934. 
15 
20 
26 
Collector of Customs may appeal to the Collector (Appeals) within 30 
three mouths from the date of the communication to him of such 
decision or order: 
Provided that the Collector (Appeals) may. If he is satisfied 
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from present-
ing the appeal within the aforesaid period of three months. 
allow It to be presented within a further period of three months. 
72 
3& 

73 
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be in such form and sball' be 
verlfled in such manner as may be specified by rules made in this behalf. 
128A" (1) The Collector(Appeals) shall give an opportunity to 
the appellant to be heard if he so desires. 
5 (2) The Collector (Appeals' may, at the hearing of an appeal, 
allow the appellant to go into any ground of appeal not specified 
in the grounds of appeal, if the Collector(Appeals) is satisfied 
that the omission of that grolDld from the grounds of appeal was 
not wilful or unreasonable. 
10 (3) The Collector (Appeals) may, after making such further 
inquiry as may be necessary, pass such order as he thinks fit 
confirming, modifying or annulling the decision or order 
appealed against, or may refer the case back to the adjudioating 
authority with such directions as he may think fit for a fresh 
15 adjud1oation or decision, as the case may be, after taking addltlunal 
evidenoe, If necessary: 
Provided that an order enhanoing any penalty or fine in lieu 
of confiacatic1D or confisoating goods of greater value or reducing 
the amount of refund shall not be passed unless the appellant 
20 has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against 
the proposed order: 
Provided further that where the Collector (Appeals) is of 
opinion that any duty has not been levied or has been short-
levied or erroneously refunded, no order requiring the 
25 appellant to pay any duty not levied, short-levied or erroneously 
refunded shall be passed unless the appellant is given notice 
within the time-limit specified in section 28 to show cause against 
the proposed order. 
(4) The order of the Collector (Appeals) disposing of the appeal 
30 shall be in writing and shall state the points for determination, 
the decision thereon and the reasons for the decision. 
35 
(5) On the disposal of the appeal, the Collector (Appeals) 
shall communicate the order passed by him to the appellant, the 
adJud10ating authority and the Collector of Customs. 
129. (1) The Central Government shall constitute an Ap~llate 
Tribunal to be called the Customs, EXCise and Gold (Control) 
Appellate Trlbunal consisting of as many judicial and technical 
members as it thinks fit to exercise the powers and discharge 
the flDlctions conferred on the Appellate Tribunal by this Act. 
40 (2) A judicial member shall be a person who has for at least 
ten years held a civil judicial post or who has been a member of 
the Central Legal Service (not below Grade I) for at least three 
years or who has been in practioe as an advooate for at least ten 
years; and a technioal member shall be a person who bas been 
Procedure in 
appeal. 
Appellate 
TIt_al. 

Appeal. to tile 
Appellate 
Tribaaal. 
74 
a member of the Indian Customs and Central Excise Service-
Group A and bas held the post of Collector of Customs or 
Central Excise, Level I or any equivalent or higher post for at 
least three years. 
(3) The Central Government shall appoint one of the members 5 
of the Appellate Tribunal to be the President thereof. 
(4) The Central Government may appoint one or more 
members of the Appellate Tribunal to be the Vice-President, 
or, as the case may be, Vice-Presidents. thereof. 
(5) The Vice-President shall exercise suoh of the powers 10 
and perform such of ihe funct1ms of the President as may be 
delegated to him by the President by a geoeral or special order 
in writing. 
129A. (I) Any person aggrieved by any of the following 
orders may" appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against such order-
(a) a decision or order passed by the Collector of Customs 
as an adjudicating authorltYi 
(b) an order passed by the Collector (Appeals) under section 
128Ai 
15 
(c) an order passed by the Board or the Appellate Collector 20 
of Customs under section 128. as It stood immediately before 
the appointed daYi 
(d) an order passed by the Board or the Collector of Customs. 
either before or after the appointed day. under section 130. as 
it stood immediately before that day: 25 
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may. in its discretion. 
refuse to admit an appeal in respect o~ an order referred to in 
clause (b) or clause (e) or clause (d) where -
(i) the value of the goods confiscated without option having 
been given to the owner of the goods to pay a fine in Ueu of 30 
oonfiscation under secUon 125 i or 
(ii) in any disputed case other than a case where the 
determination of any question having a relation to the rate of 
duty of customs or to the vall,le of goods for purposes of 
assessment is in issue or is one of the points in issue. the 35 
difference in duty involved or the duty involvedi or 
(iii) the amount of fine or penalty determined by such 
order, 
does not exceed ten thousand rupees. 

75 
• (2) The Collector of CUstoms may, if he is of opinion that an order 
passed by the Appellate Collector of Customs under section 128, as it 
stood immediately before the appointed day, or the Collector (Appeals) 
under section 128A, is not legal or proper, direct the proper officer to 
5 appeal on his behalf to the Appellate Tribunal against such order. 
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be filed within three months 
from the date on which the order BOught to be appealed against is commu-
nicated to the Collector of CUstoms, or as the case may be, the other 
party preferring the appeal. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
(4) On receipt of notice that an appeal has been preferred under 
this section, the party against whom the a~peal bas been 
preferred may, notwithstanding that he may not have appealed 
against such order or any part thereof" file, within forty-five days of 
the receipt of the notice, a memorandum of cross-objections verified 
in such manner as may be specified by rules made in this behalf 
against any part of the order appealed against and such mem>randum 
shall be disposed of by the Appellate Tribunalas if it were an appeal 
presented within the time specified in sub-section (3). 
(5) The Appellate Tribunal may adnit an appeal or permit 
the filing of a memorandum of cross-objections after the 
expiry of tbe relevant period referred to in sub-section (3) 
or sub-section (4), ifit is satisfied that there was sufficient 
cause Cor not presenting it witbin that period. 
(6) An appeal to the Appellate Triblnal shall be in such form and 
shall be verified in such manner as may be specified by rules made 
in this behalf and shall, except in the case of an appeal referred to 
in sub-section (2) or a memorandum of cross-objections 
referred to in sub-section (4), be accompanied by a fee of 
two bundred rupees. 
129B. (1) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving tbe 
parties to tbe appeal, an opportunity of being heard. pass 
sucb orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying 
or annulling the decision or order appealed against or may 
refer the case back to the autbority whicb passed sucb 
decision or order with such directions as tbe Appellate 
Tribunal may t'hink flt, for a fresh adjudication or decision. 
as the case may be, after taking additional evidence, if 
necessary. 
(2) The Appellate Trlbmal may, at any time within four years 
40 from the date of the order. with a view to rectifying any mistake 
apparent from the record, amend any order passed by it under 
sub-seotion (1) and shall make such amendments if the mistake 
is brought to its notice by the Collector of Customs or the other 
party to the appeal: 
45 Provided that an amendment which has the effect of enhancing 
the assessment or reducing a relllld or otherwi8e increasing the 
Orders of 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 

Pnlcedmeof 
Appell .. 
TIibIm.a. 
76 
liability of the other party shall not be made under this sub-
section. unless the Appellate Tribunal has given notice to him of 
its intention to do so and has allowed him a reasonable opportu-
nity of being heard. 
(3) The Appellate Trl~ shall sead a oopy of every order 5 
passed under tbls section to the Collector of Customs and the 
other party to the appeal. 
(4) Save as otherwise provided in section 130 or section 130E, 
orders passed by the Appellate Tribunal on appeal shall be final. 
129C. (I) Tho powers and functions of the Appellate Tribunal 
may be exercised and discharged by Benches constituted by the 
President from amongst the members thereof. 
(2) Subject to the provisions oontained in sub-sections (3) and 
(4), a Bench shall consist of one judicial member and one technical 
member. 
(3) Every appeal against a decision or order relating, amoag other 
things, to the determination of any question having a relation to the 
10 
15 
rate of duty of customs or to the wlue d. goods for purposes of assess-
ment' shall be heard by a Special Ben,ch constituted by the President 
for hearing such appeals and such Bench shall consist of not less 20 
than three members and shall include at least one judicial member 
and one technical member. 
(4) The President or any other member of the AppeUate Tribunal 
authorised in this behalf by the President may, sitting singly, 
dispose of any case which bas been allotted to the Bench of which 25 
he is a member where-
(CI) the value of the goods confiscated without option 
having been given to the owner of the goods to pay a fine in 
lieu of confiscation under section 125. or 
(b) in any disputed case other than a case where the 30 
determination of any question having a relatim to the rate of 
duty of customs or to tile value of goods for purposes of 
assessment Is in issue or is one of the points In issue, the 
difference in duty involved or the duty involved; or 
(e) the amount of fine or penalty involved, 35 
does not exceed ten thousand rupees. 
(5) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, 
the point shall be decided according to the opinion of the 
majority, if there is a majority, but if the members are equally 
divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ and 40 
the case shall be referred by the President for hearing on such 
point or points by one or more of the other members of the 
Appellate Tribmal, and such point or points shall be decided 

5 
10 
5 of 19(15. 
77 
according to the opinion of the majority of the membe rs of the 
Appellate Tribunal who have heard the case inoluding those who 
first heard It. 
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal 
shall have power to regulate its own procedure and the procedure 
of the Benches thereof in all matters arising out of the exercise of 
Us powers or of the discharge of its functions, including the 
places at which the Benches shall hold their sittings. 
(7) The Appellate Tribunal shall, for the purposes of dis-
chargIng Its funotiCXl8, have ihe same powers as are vested in 
a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying 
a suit in respect of the following matters, name1y:-
(A) discovery and in~pectlon; 
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining 
15 him on oath; 
20 
4S of 1860. 
2 of 1974. 
25 
30 
(e) compelling the production of books of account and 
other documents; and 
(d) issuing oommissions. 
(8) Any proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 and for the purpose of segtion 196 of the 
Indian Penal Code, and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed 
to be a C Ivll Court for all the ~poses of section 195 and 
Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Prooedure, 1973. 
129D. (1) The Board may, of its own motion. oall for and 
examine the record of any proceeding in which a Collector of 
Customs as an adjudicating authority has passed any decision or 
order under this Act for the purpose of satisfying itself as to 
the legality or propriety of any such decision or order and may, 
by order, direct such Collector to apply to the Appellate 
Tribunal for the determination of such points arising out of the 
decision or order as may be specified by the Board in its order. 
(2) The Collector of Customs may, of his own motion, call 
for and examine the record of any proceeding in which an 
35 adjudicating authority subordinate to him bas passed any 
decision or order under this Act for the purpose of satisfying 
himself as to the legality or propriety of any such deoision or 
order and may. by order, direct such authority to apply to the 
Collector (Appeals) for the determlnatim of such polnts arising 
40 out of the decision or order as may be specified by the Collector 
of Customs in his order. 
(3) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) after the expiry of two years from the date of the 
decision or order of the adjudicating authority. 
• 
PowemofBon 
or Collector of 
Cua.a to p ... 
certllin ord.,.. 

Deposit, peDdiD& 
appeal. of duty 
d.llladed or 
pnuty t_'lied. 
Statemeot of 
case to High 
Court. 
'78 
(4) Where in pursuanoe of an order under sub-sectioo (I) 
or sub-section (2), the adjudicating authority or any officer of 
customs authorised in this behalf by the Collector of Customs, 
makes an application to the Appellate Tribunal or the Collector 
(Appeals) within a period of three months from the date of 5 
communication of the order under sub-section( 1) or sub-section 
(2) to the adjudicating authority, such application shall be heard by 
the Appellate Tribunal or the Collector (Appeals), as the case 
may be, as if such application were an appeal made agalnst the 
decision or order of the adjudicating authority and the provisions 10 
of this Act regarding appeals, inoluding the provisions of sub-
section (4) of section 129A shall, so far as may be, apply to 
such application. 
129E. Where in any appeal under this Chapter, the decision 
or order appealed against relates to any. duty demE.nded in 
respect of goods which are not under the control of the 
customs authorities or any penalty levied under this Act, the 
person desirous of appealing against suoh decision or order shall, 
pEllding the appeal, deposit with the proper officer the duty 
demanded or the penalty levied: 
Provided that where in any particular case, the Collector 
(Appeals) or the Appellate Trib.mal is of opinion that the deposit 
of duty demanded or penalty levied would cause undue hardship to 
such person, the Collector (Appeals) or, as the case may be,the 
15 
20 
Appellate Tribunal may dispense with such deposit subject to .such 25 
conditions as he or it may deem fit to Impose so as to safeguard 
the interests of revenue. 
130. ( 1) The Collector of Customs or the other party may, within 
sixty days of the date upon which he is served with notice of an order 
under section 129B (not being an order relating, among other things, 30 
to the determination of any question having a relation to the rate 
of duty of customs or to the value of goods for purposes of assess-
ment), by application in such form as may be specified by rules 
made in this behalf, accompanied, where the application is made 
by the other party, by a fee of two hundred rupees, require the 35 
Appellate Tribunal to refer to the High Court any question of law 
arising out of such order and, subject to the other provisioos 
contained in this section, the Appellate Tribunal shall" within one 
hundred and twenty days of the receipt of such application, draw 
up a statement of the case and refer it to the High Court: 40 
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, JIlt is satisfled 
that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from present-
ing the application within the period hereinbefore specified, 
allow it to be presented within a further period not exceedJng 
thirty days. 45 
(2) On rece1pt of notice that an application has been made 
under sub-section (1). the person against whom such application 
has been made,may, notwithstanding that he may not have filed 

79 
such an application, file, within forty-five days of the receipt 
of the notice, a memorandum of cros8"'Objections verified in 
such manner as may be specified by rules made in this behalf 
against any part of the order in relation to which an application 
5 for reference has been made and such memorandum shall be 
disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal as if it were an application 
presented within the time specified in sub-section (1). 
(3) If, on an application made under sub-section (1), the 
Appellate Tribunal refuses to state the case on the ground that 
10 no question of law arises, the Collector of Customs, oIjas the 
case may 'be" the othe r party may, within six months from the 
date on which he is served with notice of such refusal, apply to 
the High Court and the High Court may, if it is not satisfied with 
the correctness of the decision of the Appellate Trlbunal,require 
15 the Appellate Tribunal to state the case and to refer it, and on 
receipt of any such requisition, the Appellate Tribunal shall 
state the case and refer it accordingly. 
(4) Where in the exercise of its powers under sub-section(3), 
the Appellate Tribunal refuses to state a case which it has been 
20 required by an applicant to state, the applicant may, within 
thirty days from the date on which he receives notice of such 
refusal, withdraw bis application and. if he does so, the fee, 
H any, paid by him shall be refunded. 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
130A. If, on an application made under section 130, the 
Appellate Tribunal is of opinion that, on account of conflict 
In the decisions of High Courts in respect of any particular 
question of law, it is expedient that a reference should be made 
direct to the Supreme Court, the Appellate Tribunal may draw up 
a statement of the case and refer it through the President 
direct to the Supreme Court. 
130B. If the High Court or the Supreme Court is not satisfied 
that the statements in a case referred to it are sufficient to enable 
it to determine the questions raised thereby, the Court may refer 
the case back to the Appellate Tribunal for the purpose of making 
such additions thereto or alterations therein as it may direct in 
that behalf. 
130C. (1) When any case has been referred to the High Court 
under section 130, it shall be heard by a Bench of not less than 
two judges of the High Court and shall be decided in accordance 
with the opinion of such judges or of the majority, if any, of such 
judges. 
(2) Where there is no such majority I. the judges shall state 
the point of law upon which they differ and the case shall then be 
heard upon that point only by one or more of the other judges of 
the High Court, and such point shall be decided according to the 
opinion of the majority of the judges who have heard the case 
including those who first heard it. 
Statemeftt of 
caee to 
Supreme Court 
in certain 
caee .. 
Power of High 
Court or 
Supreme Court 
to require 
statement to 
be amended. 
Case Lefore 
High Court to 
be heard by 
not less th811 
two judges. 

Decision of 
Hi&b Court or 
Supreme Court 
on the case 
stated. 
Appelllto 
Supreme Court. 
HeariDl before 
Supreme Court. 
Sums due to be 
paid notwith-
stMding 
reference, etc. 
ExcluBion of 
time taken 
for copy. 
80 
130D. (I) The High Coort or the Supreme Court hearing any 
such case shall decide the questians of law ralsed therein, and 
shall deliver its judgment thereon containing the groonds on which 
such decision is foonded and a c~y of the judgment shall be sent 
under the seal of the Coort and the Signature of the Reglstrar to 
the Appellate Tribunal which shall pass such orders as are 
necessary to dispose of the case in conformity with such judg-
ment. 
(2) The ooats of any reference to tbe High Coort or the flapreme 
5 
Coort which shall not include the fee tor makin, the reference 10 
shall be in the discretion of the Court. 
130E. An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Coort from -
(a) any judgment of the Higb Court delivered on a reference 
made under section 130 in any case which, on its own motion 
or on an oral apliicatlon made by or on behalf of the party ag- 15 
grieved"lmmedtately after the passing of the judgment, the 
High Coort certifies to be a fit one for appeal to the 
Supreme Coort; or 
(b) any order passed by the Appellate Tribunal relating, 
among other things, to the determination of any question hav- 20 
ing a relation to the rate of duty of customs or to the value of 
goods for purposes of assessment. 
130F. (1) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
1908, relating to appeals to the Supreme Court shall, so far as 
may be, apply in the case of appeals under section 130E as they 
apply in the case of appeals from decrees of a High Coort: 
Provided that nothing in thls sub-section shall be deemed to 
affect the provisions of SUb-section (1) of section 130D or section 
131. 
5 of 1908· 
25 
(2) The costs of the appeal shall be in the discretion of the 30 
Supreme Court. 
(3) Where the judgment olthe High Court is varied or revetscd 
in the appeal, effect shall be given to the order of the Supreme 
Court in the manner provided in section 130D in the case of a 
judgment of the High Coort. 35 
131. Notwithstanding that a reference has been made to the 
Hlgb Court or the Supreme Coort or an appeal has been preferred 
to the Supreme Coort, sums due to the Government as a result 
of an order passed under sub-section (1) of section 129B shall be 
payable in accordance with the order 80 passed. 
131A. In computing the period of limitation specified for 
an appeal or application under this Chapter, the day on which the 
40 

5 
10 
81 
order complained of was served, and if the party preferring the 
appeal or making th{' application was not furnished with a copy of 
the order when the notice of the order was served upon him, the 
time requisite for obtaining a copy of such order shall be excluded. 
131B. (1) Every l;l.ppeal which is pending immediately before 
the appointed day before the Board under section 128, as it stood 
immediately before that day, and any matter ariSing out of or 
connected with such appeal and which is so pending shall stand 
transferred on that day to the Appellate Tribunal and the Appellate 
Tribunal may proceed with such appeal or matter from the stage 
at which it was on that day: 
Provided that the appellant may demand that before proceed-
ing further with that appeal or matter, he may be re-heard. 
(2) Every proceeding which is pending immediately before the 
15 appointed day before the Central Government under section 131, 
as it stood immediately before that day, and any matter arising 
out of or connected with such proceeding and which i.6 so pending 
shall stand transferred on that day to the Appellate Tribunal and 
the Appellate Tribunal may proceed with such proceeding or 
20 matter from the stage at which it was OIl that day as if such pro-
ceeding or matter were an appeal filed before It: 
Provided that if any such proceeding or matter relates to an 
order where -
(a) the value of the goods confiscated without option having 
25 been given to the owner of the goods t<? pay a fine in lieu of 
confiscation under section 125; or 
(b) in any disputed case other than a case where the deter-
mination of any question having a relation to the rate of duty 
of customs or to the value of goods for purposes of assessment 
30 is in issue or is one of the points in Issue, the difference in 
duty involved or the duty involved; or 
(c) the amount of fine or penalty determined by such order, 
does not exceed ten thousand rupees, such proceeding or matter 
shall continue to be dealt with by the Central Government as if 
35 the said section 131 had not been substituted: 
Provided further that the applIcant or the other party may 
make a demand to the Appellate Trlbmal that before proceeding 
further with that proceeding or matter. he may be re-heard. 
(3) Every proceeding which is pending immediately before 
40 the appointed day before the Board or the Collector of Customs 
under sectioo 130,as It stood immediately before that 
dav, and any matter arising out of or connected with such proce-
edtng and which is so pending shall continue to be dealt with by the 
Board or the Collector of Cusmms, as the case may be, 
45 as if the said section had not been substituted. 
Transfer of 
cerh,in 
pending 
proceedings 
and trllll8i-
tiona! 
proviSions. 

Definitions. 
Appearance 
by aatbori sed 
represent Ilti ve. 
82 
(4) Any person who immediately before the appointed day was 
authorised to appear in any appeal or proceeding transferred 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall. notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 1-46A. have the right to appear be-
fore the Appellate Tribunal in relation to such appeal or proceed- 5 
tng. 
13 :rt . In this Chapter --
(a) "appointed day" means the date of coming into force 
of the amendments to this Act specified in Part I of the !'lith 
Schedule to the Finance (No.2) Act. 1980; 10 
(b) "High Court" means. -
(i) in relation to any State. the High Court for that State; 
(ii) in relation to a Union territory to which the jurisdic-
tion of the High Court of a State bas been extended by law, 
that High Court; 15 
(iii) in relation to the Unioo territories of Dadra and 
NagarHaveli and Goa. Daman and Diu, the High Court at 
Bombay; . 
(iv) in relation to any other Unioo territory, the highest 
court of civil appeal for that territory other than the Supreme 20 
Court of Indiaj 
(e) "President" means the President of the Appellate Tri-
bunal. '. 
5. After section 146, insert,-
1146A. (1) Any person who is entitled or required to appear 
before an officer of customs or the Appellate Tribunal in COll-
nection with any proceedings under this Act. otherwise than when 
required under section 108 to attend personally for examination 
on oath or affirmation, may. subj ect to the other proviSions of 
this section, appear by an authorised representative. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, "authorised representative" 
means a person authorised by the person referred to in sub-
section (1) to appear on his behalf, being -
(a) his relative or regular employee: or 
25 
30 
(b) a custom house agent licensed under section 146; or 35 
I (c) any legal practitioner who is entitled to practise in 
any civil court in India; or 
(d) any person who has acquired such qualifications as 
the Central Government may specify by rules made in this 
behaU. 40 

lof 1944. 
4S of 1968· 
83 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section. no 
person who was a member of the Indian Customs and Central 
Excise Service - Group A and has retired or resigned from 
such Service after having served for not less than three years 
5 in any capacity in that Service shall be entitled to appear as an 
authorised representative in any proceedings before an officer 
of customs for a period of two years from the date of his re-
tirement or reSignation, as the case may be. 
10 
15 
20 
(4) No person,-
(a) who has been dismissed or removed from Government 
service; or 
(b) who is conVicted of an offence connected with any pro-
ceeding under this Act, the Central Excises and Salt Act. 
1944 or the Gold (Control) Act, 1968; or 
(e) who has become an insolvent, 
shall be qualified to represent any person under sub-section (1), 
for all times in the case of a person referred to in clause (a). 
and for such time as the Collector of Customs or the competent 
authority under the Central Excises and Salt Act. 1944, or the 
Gold (Control) Act, 1968, as the case may be, may. by order, 
detennine in the case of a person referred to in clause (b), and 
for the period during which the insolvency continues in the case 
of a person referred to in clause (e). 
(5) If any person, -
25 (a) who is a legal practitioner. is found guilty of misconduct 
in his professional capacity by any authority entitled to ins-
titute proceedings against him, an order passed by that authority 
shall have effect in relation to his right to appear before an 
officer of customs or the Appellate Tribunal as it has in re-
30 lation to his right to practise as a legal practitioner; 
(b) who is not a legal practitioner, is found gullty of mis-
conduct in connection with any proceedings under this Act by 
such authOrity as !Day be specified by rules made in this 
behalf, that authority may direct that he shall thenceforth be 
35 disqualified to represent any person under sub-section (1). 
(6) Any order or direction under clause (b) of sub-section 
(4) or clause (b) of sub-aection (5) shall be subject to the follow-
ing conditions. namely:-
(II) no Buch order or direction shall be made in respect 
40 of any persOIl unless he has been given a reasonabl~ q>portu-
Dity of being heard; 

Appeal. to 
Collector 
(Ap ....... ). 
PlDCeciwe 
in appeaL 
84 
(b) any per80n apJut whom any suob order or dlrect101l 
is made may, wttbin ODe mootb f1 the making of the order or 
dlrectlO11, appeal to tbe Board to bave tbe order or d1rectl<Rl 
oancelled; aDd 
(c) no such order or dlreotiOl1 sball take effect untU tbe 5 
exptratlOl1 of one montb from tbe maJdng thereof, or, where 
an appeal has beeD preferred, until tbe disposal of the 
appeal. '. 
PARTU 
1. Section 2. - Re-Ietter clause (41) as clause (AM) and before clause 
(4IG4I) as so re-Iettered, maert-
'(a) "adjudicating authority" means any authority competent 
to pass any order or decision under tbis Act. but does not lnclude 
10 
the Central Board of Excise and Customs constituted under the 15 
Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963, Collector of Central 54 of 1963. 
Excise (Appeals) or Appellate Trlbunalj 
(aa) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Customs, Excise and Gold 
(Control) Appellate Tribunal constituted under secticm 129 of tbe 
Customs Act, 1962;'. 20 
2. For SecUons 35. 351\ and 36, substltute-
'CHAPTER VIA 
APPEAlS 
35. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order passed 
under this Act by a Central Exclse Officer lower in rank than a 
Collector of Central Excise may appeal to the Collector of Central 
Exclse (Appeals) Fbereafter in thls Chapter referred to as the 
Collector (Appeal;) / within tbree mcmtbs from the date of the 
communication to hlm of such decision or order: 
52 of 1962. 
25 
Provided that the Collector (Appeals) may, if he is satisfied that 30 
the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from presenting the 
appeal within the aforesaid period of three months, allow it to be 
presented within a further period of three months. 
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be In the prescribed form 
and shall be verified In the prescrlbed manner. 36 
35A. (1) The Collector (Appeals) shall give an opportwllty to the 
appellant to be heard, if he so desires. 
(2) The Collector (Appeals) may, at the hearlng of an appeal, 
allow an appellant to go lnto any ground of appeal not specified In 
the grounds of appeal, lftbe Collector (Appeals) is satisfied that 40 . 

85 
the omission of that ground from the grounds of appeal was not 
wilful or unreasonable. 
(3) The Collector (Appeals) may, after maldng such further 
lnquiry as may be necessary, pass such order as he thinks fit 
5 confirm.1ng, modifying or annulUng the decision or order appealed 
agalnst,or may refer the case back to the adjudicating authority with 
such dlrectl(IUI as be may think fit for a fresh adJudlcaUOD or declaim, 
as the case may be, after taking additional evidence, If necessary: 
Provided that an order enbanclDg any penalty or fine in lieu of 
10 confiscation or confiscating goods of greater value or reducing the 
amount of refund shall not be passed unless the appellant has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of showlDg cause against the proposed 
order: 
Provided further that where the Collector (Appeals) is of oplLlon 
15 that any duty of excise has not been levied or pald or has been short-
levied or short-paid or erroneouoly refunded, no order requlrlDg 
the appellant to pay any duty not levied or paid, short-levied or 
short-paid or erroneously refunded shall be passed unless the 
appellant Is given notice within the tiDHHimlt spectfied in section 
20 UA to show cause against the proposed order. 
(4) The order of the Collector (Appeals) disposing of the appeal 
shall be in writlDg and shall state the points for determination, the 
decision thereon and the reasons for the decision. 
(5) 01 the disposal of the appeal, the Collector (Appeals) shall 
25 communicate the order passed by him to the appellant, the adJudlcat-
lDg authority and the Collector of Central Excise. 
30 
54 of 1963. 35 
40 
35B. (I) Any person aggrieved by any of the following orders 
may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against such order-
(a) a decision or order passed by the Collector of Central 
Excise as an adjudicating authority; 
(b) an order passed by the Collector (Appeals) under 
section 35A; 
(c) an order passed by the Central Board of Excise and 
Customs constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 
1963 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Board) or 
the Appellate Collector of Central Exoise under section 35, as 
it stood Immediately before the appointed day; 
(d) an order passed by the Board or the Collector of Central 
Excise, either before or after the appointed day, under section 
35A, as it stood immediately before that day: 
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, in Its discretion, 

Orden! of 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 
86 
refuse to admit lID appeal in respect of an order referred to in 
clause (b) or clause (el or clause (d) where-
(i) in any disputed case other than a case where the deter-
mination of any question baving a relation to tbe rate of duty 
of excise or to the value of goods for purposes of usessment 
is in issue or is one of the points in issue, the difference in 
duty involved or the duty involved; or 
(U) the amount of fine or penalty determined by such order, 
does not exceed ten thousand rupees. 
(2) The Collector of Central Excise may, if he Is of oplnloll that 
an order passed by the Appellate Collector of Central Excise UDder 
section 35, as it stood Immediately before the appointed day, or the 
Collector (Appeals) under sectlon 35A, Is notlepl or proper, direct 
any Central Excise Officer authorised by him in this behalf (bere- l-
after in thls Chapter referred to as the authorised offlcer) to appeal 
OIl his bebalf to the Appellate Trlbmal against such order. 
(3) Every appeal under thls sectloo shall be fRed withln three 
months from the date on whIch the order sought to be appealed 
agalnst Is communicated to the Collector of Central Excise, or, as 
the case may be, the other party preferring the appeal. 
(4) On receipt of noUce that an appeal has been preferred under 
this section, the party against whom the appeal has been preferred 
may, notwithstanding that he may not have appealed against such 
order or any part thereof,file, within forty-five days of the receipt 
of the noUce, Ii memorandum of cross-objections verified in the 
prescribed manner against anv part.o1 the order appealed against 
and such memorandum shall be disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal u 
if it were an appeal presented wi thin the time speclfled In sub-section (3) 
(5) The Appellate Tribunal may admlt an appeal or permit the 
filing of a memorandum of cross-objections after the expiry of the 
relevant period referred to in sub-section (3) or sub-section (4), if it 
is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it 
within that period. 
(6) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the prescribed 
form ·and shall be verlfied in the prescribed manner and, shall, 
except in the case of an appeal referred to in sub-section (2) or a 
memorandum of cross-objections referred to in sub-section (4), 
be accompanied by a fee of two hundred rupees. 
35C. (1) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties 
to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders 
thereon as it thinks fit, confirmlng, modifying or annulllng the 
decision or order appealed against or may refer the case back 
to the authority which passed such decision or order with such 
directions as the Appellate Tribunal may think flt, for a fresh 
adjudication or deciSion, as the case may be, after taking 
addiUonal evidence, if necessary. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

87 
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, at any time within four • 
years from the date of the order, with a view to rectifying any 
mistake apparent from the record, amend any order passed by 
it under sub-secUon (1) and shall make such amendments If the 
5 mistake Is brought to its notice by the Collector of Central 
Excise or the other party to the appeal: 
Provided that an amendment which bas the effect of enhancing 
an assessment or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the 
HabUl ty of the other party. shall not be made under this sub-
10 sectlon,unless the Appellate Tribunal bas glveo notice to him of 
Its Intention to do 80 and bas allowed him a reasonable opport-
uni ty of being heard. 
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order 
passed under this section to the Collector of Central Excise 
15 and the other party to the appeal. 
52 of 1962-
20 
(4) Save as provided in section 35G or section 354 orders 
passed by the Appellate Tribunal on appeal shall be final. 
350. (1) The provisions of sub-sections (1). (2). (5) and (6) 
of section 129C of the Customs Act. 1962, shall apply to the 
Appellate Tribunal in the discharge of its functions under this 
Act as they apply to it in the discharge of its functions under 
the Customs Aot, 1962. 
(2) Every appeal against a decision or order relating, among 
other things, to the determination of any question having a rela-
25 tion to the rate of duty of excise or to be value of goods for 
purposes of assessment, shall be heard by a ~ecial Bench 
constituted by the President for hearing such appeals and such 
Bench shall consist of not less than three members and shall 
include at least one judicial member and one technical member. 
30 
35 
40 
( 3) The President or any other member of the Appellate 
Tribunal authorised in this hehalf by the President may. 
sitting singly, dispose of any case which has been allotted 
to the Bench of which he is a member where-
(a) in any disputed case other than a case where the 
determination of any question having a relation to the 
rate of duty of excise or to the value of goods for 
purposes of assessment is in issue or is one of the 
points in issue, the difference in duty involved or the 
duty involved; or 
(b) the amount of fine or penalty involved. 
does not exceed ten thousand rupees. 
35E. (1) The Board may, of its own motion, call for and 
examine the record of any proceeding in which a Collector of 
Procedure of 
Appe11llle 
Tribunal. 
Powena of Board or 
Collector of Central 
Excise to pass 
certain ordena. 

Depoett, p_dlq 
appelll, of duty 
dem .. ded or 
penalty levied. 
Statement of 
cue to Hlp 
Court. 
88 
Cantral Excise as an adjudicatIDg authority has passed any 
decision or order under this Act for the purpose of satisfy-
ing itself as to the legality or propriety of any such decision 
or order and may, by order, direct such Collector to apply 
to the Appellate Tribunal for the determination of such points 5 
arising out of the decision or order as may be specified by the 
Board in Its order. 
(2) The Collector of Central Excise may, of his own motion, 
call for and examine the record of any proceeding in wblch an 
adjudicating authority subordinate to him has passed any 10 
decision or order under this Act for the purpose of satisfylDg 
himself as to the legality or propriety of any such decision or 
order and may. by order. direct such authority to apply to 
the Collector (Appeals) for the determination of such points 
arising out of the decision or order as may be specifled 15 
by the Collector of Central Excise in his order. 
(3) No order shall be made under sub- section (1) or 
sub-section (2) after the expiry of two years from the date 
of the decision or order of the adjudicating authoritly. 
(4) Where in pursuance of an order under sub-section (1) or sub- 20 
section (2)' the adjudicating authority or the authorised officer 
makes an appllcatloo to the Appellate Tribunal or the Collector 
(Appeals) within a period of three months from the date of 
communication of the order under sub- section (1) or sub- section 
(2) to the adjudicating authority, such application shall be heard 26 
by the Appellate Tribunal or the Collector (Appeals), as the case 
may be. as if such application were an appeal made against the 
decision or order of the adjudicating authority and the provisions of 
this Act regarding appeals,1ncludlng the proviSions of sub-section 
(4) of section 35B shall. 80 far as may be, apply to such appUcation. 30 
35F. Where in nny appeal under this Chapter, the decision 
or order appealed against relates to any duty demanded in respect 
of goods which are not under the control of central excise 
authorities or any penalty levied under this Act, the persOll 
desirous of appealing against such decision or order shall, 35 
pending the appeal, deposit with the adjudicating authority the duty 
demanded or the penalty levied: 
ProviGed that where in any particular case, the Collector(Appeals) 
or the Appellate Tribunal is of opinion th,t the depostt of duty 
demanded or penalty levied would cause undue hardShip to such 40 
parBOIl, the Collector (Appeals) or. al the case may be, the Appellate 
Trlbmal, may dlspense WI til such deposlt subject to such OOOOltlODB .. 
be or It may deem fit to Impose so as to safeguard the Interests of 
rev_ue. 
350. (1) The Collector of Central Excise or the other party 
may, within sixty days of the date upon which be is served with 
notice of an order under section 35C (not being an order relating, 
among other things, to the determlnation of any question having a 
45 

89 
relation to the rate of duty ~ excise or to the mae of goods 
for purpoaes of assessment), by appllcatlon In the preacrlbed 
form. aooompanled, where the aPlilcatlOll is made by the other 
party, by a fee of two bundred rupees, reqlllre the Appellate 
5 TrLbmal to refer to the High Court any qUestlClll of law arising 
out of aach order and, subject to the other provisions ooatalned 
In this aeolLan, the Appellate Tribunal aball, within one bundred 
and tweDty days of the reoeipt of such appllcatlon, draw up a 
statement of the case and refer It to the High Court: 
10 Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, If It Is satisfied 
that the appllcant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
presentil1g the application within the period hereinbefore 
specified, allow it to be presented within a further period 
not exceeding thirty days. 
15 (2) On receipt of noUce that an appUo&tloo bas heeD made under sub-
section (1), the person against whom such application bas b~ made, 
may, notwithstanding that he may not have fUed such ,!n application, fUe, 
within forty-five days of the receipt of the notice, a memorandum of 
Cl'Oss-objectlons verified In the prescribed manner against any part d. 
20 the order In reIatlm to which an applLcatLon for reference has been 
made and sucb memorandum shall be disposed of by the Appellate Tri-
bunal as if It were an applIcation presented within the time specifLed In 
sub-sectLm (1). 
(3) If, on an application made under sub-section (1) , the 
25 Appellate Tribunal refuses to state the case on the ground that no 
questlm of law arises, the Collector of Central Exclse,or, as the 
case may be, the other party ma~ within six months from the date 
an which be Is served with notice of such refusal, apply to the 
HLgh Court and the High Court may, If It is not satisfied with the 
30 correctness of the decLslon of the Appellate Tribunal, require 
the Appellate Tribunal to state the case and to refer it, and on 
receipt of any such requiSition, the Appellate Tribunal shall 
state the case and refer It accordingly. 
(4) Where In the exercise of Its powers under sub-section 
35 (3), the Appellate Tribunal refuses to state a case whlch It 
bas been required by an appicant to state, the applicant may, 
wltbln thirty days from the date on which be receives notice 
of such refusal. Withdraw his application and, If he does so, 
the fee, if any, paLd by him shall be refunded. 
40 
45 
35H. If, on an appllcatlon made under section 35G, the 
Appellate Tribunal Is of opinion that, .on account of 
conflict In the decisions of High Courts in respect of any 
particular questl~n of law, It Is expedient that a reference 
should be made direct to the Supreme Court, the Appellate 
Tribunal may draw up a statement of the case and refer 
it through the President direct to the Supreme Court. 
Stlltement of 
case to 
Supreme 
Court in 
certain 
cases. 

Power of High 
Court or 
Supreme Court 
to require 
statement to 
be .. ndecl. 
Calle before 
Hich Court to 
be heerd by 
DOt Ie .. than 
two judges. 
Declslon of 
High Court or 
Supreme Court 
on the case 
stated. 
Appeal to 
Supreme Court. 
90 
351. U the High Court or the Supreme Court Is not 
satisfied that the statements in a case referred to It are 
sufficient to enable It to determine the questions raised 
thereby. the Court may refer the case back to the 
Appellate Tribmal for the purpose of making such additions 
thereto or alterations therein as It may direct in that 
behalf. 
35J. (1) When any case has been referred to the High 
Court under section 350, It shall be heard by a Bench of 
not less than two judges of the High Court and shall be 
decIded In accordance with the opinion of such Judges 
or of the majority, if any, of such judges. 
(2) Where there Is no such majority, the judges 
shall state the point of law upon which they differ and 
the case shall then be beard upon that point only by one 
or more of the other judges d. the High Court,and such 
point shall be decided according to the oplnion of the 
majority of the judges who have heard the case includ-
ing tlX)se who first heard It. • 
3SK. (1) The High Court or the Supreme Court 
hearing any such case shall decide the Questions of 
law raised therein and shall deliver its judgment 
thereon contalnlng the grounds on which such decision 
Is founded and a copy of the judgment shall be sent 
under the seal of the Court and the Signature of the 
Registrar to the Appellate Tribunal which shall pass 
such orders as are necessary to die-pose of the case 
In conformIty wi th such judgment. 
( 1) The oosts of any reference to the Hlgb 
Court or the Supreme Court which shall not include 
the fee for making the reference shall be in the dls-
cretiOll of the Court. 
35L. An appeal shall 11e to 1he Supreme Court from -
(a) any judgment of the High Court delivered on 
a reference made under section 350 in any case 
which, OIl Its own motion or OIl an oral application 
made by or on behalf of the party aggrieved, 
Immediately after the paSSing of the judgment, the 
HIgh Court certlfles to be a fit one for appeal to 
the Supreme Court; or 
(b) any order passed by the Appellate TriblDBl 
relating, among other things, to the determlnatlOll 
of any question having a relatlon to the rate of duty 
of exCise or to the value of goods for purposes of 
asseesment. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

5 of 1908. 
5 
91 
35M. (1) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure , 
1908, relating to appeals to the Supreme Court shall, so t"ar 
as may be, apply In the case of appeals under section 35L 
as they apply In the case of appeals from decrees of a 
HIgh Court: 
ProvIded that nothing In this sub-section shall be 
deemed to affect the provisions of sub-section (1) 
of section 35K or section 35N. 
(2) The costs of the appeal shall be In the dIscretion 
10 of the Supreme Court. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
(3) Where the Judgment of the High Court is varied or reversed 
in the appeal, effect shall be given to the order ofthe Supreme 
Court in the manner provided In section 35K In the case of a 
judgment of the High Court. 
35N. Notwithstanding that a reference has been made to 
the High Court or the Supreme Court or an appeal has been 
preferred to the Supreme Court, sums due to the Government 
as a result of an order passed under sub-section (1) of 
section 35e shall be payatie in accordance with the order 
so passed. 
35-0. In computing the period of limitation prescribed 
for an appeal or application under this Chalter, the day 
on which the order complained of was served, and If the 
party preferring the appeal or maldng the aprUcatiOll was not 
furnished with a copy of the order when the notice d. the order 
was served upon him, the time requisite for ottaining a 
copy of such order shall be excluded. 
35P. (1) Every appeal whIch Is pendIng Immediately 
before the appoInted day before the Board under section 35, 
as It stood Immediately before that day, and any matter 
arising out of or connected with such appeal and which Is 
90 pending shall stand transferred on that day to the 
Appellate TrI Wnal and the Appellate TrlWnal may proceed 
with such appeal or matter from the stage at which It was 
on that day: 
Provided that the appellant may demand that before 
proceeding further wIth that appeal or matter, he may 
be re-henrd. 
(2) Every proceeding which is pending immedIately 
40 before the appoInted day before the Central Government 
under sootlon 36, as it stood immedIately before that day, 
and any matter arIsing out of or connected with such 
proceeding and which Is so pending shall stand transferred 
on that day to the Appellate TriWnal and the Appellate 
45 Tribunal may proceed with such proceeding or matter 
from the stage at which It was on that day as if such 
proceeding or matter were an appeal med before it: 
Hearing before 
Supreme Court. 
Suma due to be 
paid notwith-
at_ding 
reference, etc. 
Excluaion of 
time taken 
for copy. 
Transfer of 
certain pend inC 
proceedings 
an d tranSition III 
provisions. 

Appearance by 
autlxAiaed 
repraentaU yeo 
92 
Provided that if any such prooeeding or matter relates 
to an order where -
(a) in any disputed case other than a case where 
the determination of any question having a relation 
to the rate of duty of excise or to the value of goods 
for purposes of assessment is In Issue or is one 
of the points In issue, the difference in duty involved 
or ~e duty involved; or 
(b) the amount of fine or penalty determined by 
such order, 
does not exoeed ten thousand rupees, such proceeding 
or matter shall continue to be dealt with by the Central 
Government as If the said section 36 had not been 
substituted: 
5 
10 
Provided further that the appllcant or the other 15 
party may make a demand to the Appellate Trlbmal 
that before proceedlng further with that proceeding or 
matter, he may be re-heard. 
(3) Every proceeding whIch is pending immediately before 
the appointed day before the Board or the Collector of Central 20 
Excise under section 35A, as it stood Immediately before 
that day, and any matter arising out of or connected with 
such proceeding and which Is so pending shall continue to be 
dealt with by the Board or the Collector of Central EXCise, 
as the case may be, as if the said section had not been substituted. 25 
(4) Any person who Immediately before the appointed day 
was authorised to appear In any appeal or proceeding 
transferred under sub-seetlon (1) or sub-sectloo (2) shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in sectlon 35Q,have the 
right to appear before the Appellate Trtbunal In relation 30 
to such appeal or proceeding. 
35Q. ( 1) Any person who is entitled or required to appear 
before a Central Excise Officer or the Appellate Trll:wla1ln 
connection with any proceedings under tM. Act, otherwise 
than when required under this Act to appear personally for 
examination on oath or affirmation, may, subject to the 
other provisions of this section, appear by an authorised 
representative. 
(2) For the ~rpose8 of this section, 'authorised 
representatlve" means a person authorised by the person 
referred to In 8U~section (1) to appear on his behalf, 
being -
(A) his relative or regular employee; or 
(b) any legal practitioner who is entitled to practise 
In any ci· ... ll court in India; or 
35 
40 
45 

93 
(e) any person who bas acquired such qualifications • 
as the Central Government may prescrIbe for thls purpose. 
(3) Notwlthstandlng anything contained In this section, 
no person who was a member of the Indian Customs and 
5 Central Excise Service - Group A and has reti red 
or resigned from such Service after having selVed for 
not less than three years In any capacity in that Service, 
shall be entitled to appear as an authorised representative 
in any proceedings before a Central Excise Officer for a 
10 period of two years from the date of his retirement or 
resignation, as the case may be. 
(4) No person, -
(a) who has been dismIssed or removed from Govern-
ment selVlcei or 
15 
52 of 1962. 
(b) who is convicted of an offence connected with any 
proceeding under this Act. the Customs Act. 1962 or 
the Gold (Control) Act, 1968; or 4S of 1968. 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
(c) who bas become an insolvent, 
shall be qualified to represent any person under sub-section (I), 
for all Umes In the case of a person referred to In clause (a). 
and for such tlme as the Collec1or of Central Excise or 
the competent authorl ty under the Customs Act, 1962 
or the Gold (Control) Act, 1968, as the case may be, 
may, by order, determine in the case of a person 
referred to In clause (b), and for the period durIng 
which the insolvency contlnues In the case of a person 
referred to In clause (e). 
(5) If any person, -
(a) who Is a legal practitioner, Is found guUtyof mIs-
conduct In his professional capacity by any authority 
entitled to institute proceedings against him, an order 
passed by that authority shall have effect in relation to 
his right to appear before a Central Excise Officer or 
the Appellate Trltnnal as It has In relation to his right 
to practise asa legal practltioneri 
(b) who Is not a legal practitioner, Is found gullty 
of misconduct In connection with any proceedings under 
this Act by the prescribed authority, the prescribed 
authority may d1 reet that he shall thenceforth be dis-
qualified to represent any person under sub-section (I). 
(6) Any order or direction under clause (b) of sub-
section (4) or clause (b) of sub-sectlon (5) shall be subject 

De&nitiOOL 
94 
to the following conditions, namely:-
(a) no such order or direction shall be made in respect 
of any person unless he has been given a reasonalie 
opportunlty of being heard; 
(b) any person against whom any such order or direction 5 
Is made may, wIthin one month of the making of the order 
or direction, appeal to the Board to have the order or 
direction cancelled; and 
(e) no such order or direction shall take effect 
untU the expiratiOil of OIle mOilth from the making thereof, 10 
or, where an appeal has been preferred, until the disposal 
of the appeal. 
36. In this Chapter -
(a) "appointed day" melns the date of coming into 
force of the amendments fn thls Act specifIed in Part U 
of the Fifth ScheOOle to the Finance (No.2) Act, 1980; 
(b) "ffigh Court" means,-
(i) In relation fn any State, the High Court for 
that state: 
(ii) in relation to a UniOil territory to which the 
jurisdiction of the High Court of a State has been 
extended by law, that High Court; 
(iii) in relation to the Union territories of Dadra 
and Nagar Havell and Goa, Daman and Diu, the 
H 19b Court at Bombay; 
(tv) In relation to any other Unian terrlfnry, the 
highest court of elva appeal for that territory other 
than the Supreme Court ofIndla; 
(e) "President" means the PresIdent of the Appellate 
15 
20 
25 
T rlbunal. '. 30 
3. Before section 36A, Insert -
"CHAPl'ER VlB 
PRESUMPTION AS TO OOQJMrMTS ". 
PART m 
AMDlDMDITS IN no: Gol» (C(I(TIOl.) Aer, 1968 
1. Section 2. -
(i) For clause (a). substitute-
, (a) "adjudicating authority" means an authority competent 
35 

95 
to pass any order or decision under this Act, but does not 
include the Administrator, Collector (Appeals) or Appellate 
Tribunal; 
(CUI) "Administrator" means the Administrator appointed 
5 under section 4; 
(aaa) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Customs, Excise 
and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal constituted under 
section 129 of the Customs Act, 1962:' i 
(ii) After clause (e), insert -
10 '(ee) "Collector (Appeals)" means a Collector of Central 
• 
Excise (Appeals) or a Collector of Customs (Appeals) 
appointed under section 4 to be a Collector (Appeals) for the 
purposes of this Act j }, 
2. Sectlon 4, in sub-sectIon (4), omit "or under clause (a) of sub-
15 sectlClll (1) of sectlon 80 or under sectlon 81". 
20 
25 
30 
3. In Chapter XIV, for the heading, substitute-
"ADJUDICA'I1ON AND APPEALS.·'. 
4, For sections 80, 81 and 82, silbstitute-
'80. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decisIon or order passed 
under this Act by a Gold Control Officer lower in rank than a 
Collector of Central Excise or of Customs may appeal to the 
Collector (Appeals) within three months from the date of the 
communication to him of such decision or order: 
Provided that the Collector (Appeals) may, if he is satisfied 
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
presenting the appeal within the aforesaid period of three 
months, allow it to be presented within a further period of 
three months. 
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be in the prescribed 
form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner. 
80A. (1) The Collector (Appeals) shall give an opportunity 
to the appellant to be heard, if he so desires. 
(2) The Collector (Appeals) may, at the hearing of an 
appeal, allow the appellant to go into any ground of appeal not 
35 specified in the grounds of appeal, if the Collector (Appeals) 
is satisfied that the omission of that ground from the grounds 
of appeal was not wilful or unreasonable. 
(3) The Collector (Appeals) maY" after making such further 
Inquiry as may be necessary, pass such order ,as he thinks 
40 fit confirming, modifying or annulling the decision or order 
appealed Bgainst,or may refer the case back to the adjudicating 
authority with such directions as hI) may think fit for a fresh 
Appeal. to 
Collector 
(Appeals), 
Procedure 
in appeal. 

Appeals to 
tile Appell ate 
Triban al. 
96 
adjudication or decision, as the case may be, after taking 
additional evidence, if necessary: 
Provided that an order enhancing any penalty or fine in 
lieu of confiscation or confiscating things of greater value 
shall not be passed unless the appellant has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
proposed order. 
(4) The order of the Collector (Appeals) disposing of the 
appeal shall be in writing and shall state the points for 
determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for the 
decision. 
(5) On the disposal of the appeal, the Collector (Appeals) 
shall communicate the order passed by him to the appellant, 
the adjudicating authority and the Collector of Central 
Excise or of Customs. 
81. (1) Any person aggrieved by any of the following 
orders may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against such 
order -
(a) a decision or order passed by the Collector 
of Central Excise or of Customs as an adjudicating 
authority; 
(b) an order passed by the Collector (Appeals) under 
section 80AI 
(c) an order passed by the Administrator, Collector 
of Central Excise or of Customs or the Appellate 
Collector of Customs under section 80, as it stood 
immedlately before the appointed day; 
(d) an order passed by the Administrator, either 
before or after the appointed day, under sectlon 81, 
as it stood immediately b<.: :'),'. before that day: 
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, in its 
discretion, refuse to admit an appeal in respect of an 
order referred to in clause (b) or clause (c) or 
clause (d) where, 
(i) the value of the thing confiscated without option 
having been given to the owner thereof to pay a flne 
in 1.:.00 of confiscation under section 73; or 
(ii) the amount of fine or penalty determined by 
such order, 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
does not exceed ten thousand rupees. 40 
(2) The Administrator may. If he Is of opinion that an order passed 
by the Collector of Central Excise or of Customs or the Appellate 
Collector of Customs under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 80, 

97 
as it stood immediately before the appointed day, Is not legal or • 
proper, dIrect an officer authorIsed by him in this behalf (here-
after in this Chapter referred to as the authorised officer) to appeal 
on his behalf to the Appellate Tribunal agalnst such order. 
5 (3) The Collector of Central Excise or of Customs, may, 
if he is of opinion that an order passed by the Collector 
(Appeals) under section 80A is not legal or proper direct the 
authorised officer to appeal on his behalf to the Appellate Tribunal 
agalnst such order. 
10 (4) Every appeal under this section shall be fUed within 
three months from the date on which the order sought to be 
appealed against is communicated to the Collector of Central 
ExcIse or of Customs, or, as the case may be, the other 
party prefer ring the appeal. 
15 (5) On receipt of notice thtlt an appeal has been preferred 
under this section, the party against whom the appeal hs 
been preferred may, notwi thstanding that he may not have 
appealed against such order or any part thereof,file, within 
forty-five days of the receipt of the notic~ a memorandum of 
20 cross-objections verified in the prescribed manner against 
any part of the order appealed against and such memorandum 
shall be disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal as if it were an 
appeal presented within the time specified in sub-section (4). 
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal or permit 
25 the filing of a memorandum of cross-objections after the 
expiry of the relevant period referred to in sub-section (4) or 
sub-section (5) , if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause 
for not presenting it within that period. 
(7) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the 
30 prescribed form and shall be verified in the prescribed 
manner and, shall, except in the case of an appeal referred 
to in sub~section (2) or sub-section (3) or a memorandum of 
cross-objectlons referred to in sub-section (5), be accom-
panied by a fee of two hundred rupees. 
35 
40 
8lA. (1) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass 
such orders thereon as it thinks fIt,confirmlng, modifying 
or annulling the decision or order appealed against or may 
refer the case back to the authority which passed such 
decision or order with such directions as the Appellate 
Tribunal may think fit.1for a fresh adjudication or 
decision, as the case may be, after taking additional 
evidence. if necessary. 
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, at any time within four 
45 years from the date of the order, with a view to rectifying 
any mistake apparent from the record, amend any order 
passed by it under sub-section (1) and shall make such 
amendments if the mistake is brought to its notice by the 
Collector of Central Excise or of Customs or the other 
50 party to the appeal: 
Orders of 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 

Procedure of 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 
Powers of the 
AdmiDistrlltor 
or Collector 
of Central 
Ellciae or of 
Customs to 
pass certain 
orders. 
98 
Provided that an amendment which has the effect of 
enhancing any penalty or Cine in lieu of confiscation or 
confiscating things of greater value shall not be made under 
this sub-section unless the Appellate Tribunal has given 
notice of Its lntentlon to do BO, to the other party and bas 5 
allowed him a reasonable opportunity of being beard. 
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order 
passed under this section to the Collector of Central Excise or 
of Customs and the oiber party to the appeal. 
(4) Save as otherwise provided in section 82B, orders 
passed by the Appellate Tribunal on appeal shall be flnal. 
8lB. (1) The provisions of sub-sections (I), (2), (5) and (6) 
of section 129C of the Customs Act, 1962,ahaD apply to the 
Appellate Tribunal in the discharge of its functions under this 
Act as they apply to it in the discharge of its functions under 
the Customs Act, 1962. 
(2) The President or any other member of the Appellate 
Tribunal authorised in this behalf by the President may. 
sitting singly, dispose of any case which has been allotted to 
the Bench of which he is a member where-
(a) the value of the thing conftscated without option 
llaving been given to the owner thereof to pay a fine in 
Ueu of confiscation under section 73i or 
(b) the arrount of fine or penalty involved, 
does not exceed ten thousand rupees. 
82. (1) The Administrator may, of bis own motion, call 
for and exanine the record of any proceeding in whioh a 
Collector of Central Excise or of Customs as an adjudicat-
ing authority has passed any decision or order under this 
Act for the purpose of satisfying biIl5elf as to the legality 
or propriety of any such decision or order and may, by 
order, direct such Collector to apply to the Appellate 
Tribunal for the determination of such points arising out 
of the decision or order as may be specified by the 
Administrator in his order. 
(2) The Collector of Central Excise or of Customs may, 
of his own motion, call for and ex8ldne the record of any 
proceeding in which an adjudicating authority subordinate 
to him has passed any decision or order \I1der this Act for 
the purpose of satisfying Mmself as to the legality or 
propriety of any such decision or order and may, by order, 
direct such authority to apply to the Collector (Appeals) 
for tlle determination of such points arising out of the 
decision or order as may be specified by the Collector 
of Central Excise or of Customs in his order. 
10 
52 of 1962. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
99 
(3) No order shall be made mder sub-section (1) or 
sub-seotion (2) after the expiry of two years from tl'oe date 
of the decision or order of the adjudioating authority. 
(4) Where in pursuance of an order under sub-seotion 
(1) or sub-section (2). the adjudioating authority or the 
authorised officer makes an application to the Appellate 
Tribunal or the Collector (Appeals) within a period of 
three months from the date of comm\D'lication of thl order 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) to the adjudicating 
authority. such application shall be heard by the Appellate 
Tribunal or the Collector (Appeals). as the case may be. 
as if such application were an appeal made against the 
decision or order of the adjudicating authority and the 
provisions of this Act regarding appeals. including the 
provisions of sub-section (4) of section 8~shall. so far 
as may be. apply to such application. 
82A. Where in any appeal under this Chapter. the decision 
or order appealed against relates to any penalty l~ied under 
this Act. the person desirous of appealing against such 
decision or order shall. pending the appeal, deposit with the 
adjudicating authority the penalty levied: 
Provided that where in any particular case. the Collector 
(Appeals) or the Appellate Tribmalis of opinion that the 
deposit of penalty levied would cause undue hardship to such 
person. the Collector (A ppea1 s) or. as the case may be, the 
Appellate Trilxmal may dispense with such deposit suiject 
to such conditions as he or it may deem f1 t to impose. 
82B. (1) The Colleotor of Central Excise or of Customs 
or the other party may, within sixty days of the date upon which 
be is served with notice of an order under section BlA. by 
applioation in the prescribed form .. accompanied. where the 
application is made by the other party. by a fee of two hundred 
rupees. require the Appellate Tribunal to refer to the High 
Court any question of law arising out of such order and,subject 
to the other provisions contained in this section. the Appellate 
Tribunal sball, within one hundred and twenty days of the receipt 
of such application. draw up a statement of the case and refer 
it to the High Court: 
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal lIllY. if it is satisfied 
40 that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
presenting the appl1caUon within the period hereinbefore 
specified, allow it to be presented within a further period not 
exceeding thirty days. 
(2) On receipt of notice that an appllcatlon has been mado 
45 under sub-section (1). the person against whom such application 
has been made. may. notwithstanding that he may not have 
filed such an appl1catlon. file. within forty-five 
Deposit, 
pending appeal, 
of penalty 
levied. 
Statemeat of 
ca_ to Hich 
Court. 

StatemeDt of 
C8Mto 
Sapreme CoaJt 
ia cettaia 
cas •• 
Power of lU&b 
Court or 
s.. ..... CoIIrt 
to N9lite --._tto 
be .... ded. 
Case before 
HlP CoIIrt to 
be .. MId by 
DOt 1 ... til .. 
two jucfcea. 
100 
days of the receipt of the notioe, a memorandum of cro8S-
objectloDs verified In the prescribed m8llDer agalnst any part of 
the order In relation to which an applioation for refereace has been 
made aDd such memo1'8Ddum shall be dlsposed of by the Appellate 
Trlbmal as If it were an ap}iioatloD presented within the time 
speolfled in sub-sectloo (1). 
(3) U,on an applioatlon made under sub-s8CUon (1), the 
Appellate Tribunal refuses to state the oue on the ground 
that DO question of law arises, the Collector ~ Central Exolse 
or of Customs, or, as the case may be, the other pa.rty, may with-
In six months from the date on whioh he Is served with mUoe 
of suoh refusal, apJiy to the High Court and the Hlgb Court may, 
If It is not satlsfled with the correctness of the decision ~ the 
Appellate Tribunal, require the Appellate TrlblDal to state the 
case and to refer It ,and on receipt of any such requiSition, the 
Appellate Trlhmal shall state the case and refer It accordlngly. 
(4) Where in the exercise of its POW81'S under sub-sectlon 
(3). the Appellate Tribunal refuses 10 state a case whioh It 
has been requlred by an appUoant to state, the applicant 
may. within thirty days from the date on wblob be receives 
notice of sucb refusal, wUhdraw bis appUoaUon ,and, if be 
does so, the fee, If any, paid by him. shall be refunded. 
82C. If, on an applioatlon made mder section 82B, the 
Appellate Tribunal1s of opinion that, on account of con-
flict in ltIe decisions of mgb Courts in respect of any partl-
cular question of law, it is expedient that a reference should 
be made direct to tbe Supreme Court, the AppeDate Tribunal 
may draw up a statement of tbe case and refer It tbrough the 
President direct to the Supreme Court. 
82D. U tbe Higb Court or tbe Supreme Court Is not satlsfled 
tttat the statemeats in a cue referred to it are sutBc1ent to 
mabIe it to determine the questions raised thereby, the Court 
may refer the cue back to the Appellate Tribunal for the pur-
pose of making such additions thereto or alterations therein 
as it may direot in t ... t behalf. 
82E. (1) When any case bas been referred to tbe High Court 
UDder section 82B, it sball be beard by a BeIlcb of not less 
than two Judps of tbe Higb Court and sball be decided in acoor-
dance with the opinion of sucb Judges or of the maJority, if any" 
of such Judges. 
(2) Where there i8 DO 8ucb DIlJOrity, the judps sball state 
tbe point of law upon whiob they differ and the case shall then be 
beard upon that point only by one or more of tbe otber Judges 
of the H1gb Court and sucb point shall be decided aooording to 
6 
10 
16 
20 
25 
so 
35 
40 
the opJ.n1oa of tbe majority of the Judges wbo bave beard the 45 
case incltd1ng those wbo flrst'heard it. 

5 
101 
82F. (1) The High Court or the Supreme Court bear:lng 8DY 
sucb case sball deOide the questions of law raised therein aDd 
shall deliver its judgment thereon conta.1n1ng the groUDds on 
whicb such decision is founded and a copy of the judgment shaUl 
be sent UDder tbe seal of the Court and the signature of the 
Registrar to tbe Appellate Tribunal wbicb sball pass sucb 
orders as are necessary to dispose of the case In conformity 
with such Judgment. 
(2) The costs of 8DY reference to tbe Higb Court or tbe 
10 Supreme Court wbich sball not include the fee for making Ute 
referenctt sball be in the discretion of the Court. 
15 
5 of 19(11. 20 
82G. An appealsballl1e to tbe Supreme Court from any 
judgm8llt of the 81gb Court delivered on a refel't'Jll08 made 
mder section 82B 111 8DY case wbich,on its own motion or 
on an oral applioatlon made by or on bebalf of tbe party 
aggrieved,immediately after the passing of the judgment,tbe 
Higb Court oerUfies to be a fit one for appeal to tbe Supreq 
Court. 
82H. (1) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, relating to appeals to the Supreme Court shall, so far 
as may be, apply in the case of appeals under section 82G 
as tbey apply in tbe case of appeals from decrees of a High 
Court: 
Provided that nothlng in this sub-section shall be deemed 
25 to affect the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 82F 
or section 821. 
(2) The costs of the appeal sball be In the discretion of 
the Supreme Court. 
(3) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or 
30 reversed in t"e appeal, effect shall be given to the order 
of tbe Supreme Court 10 tbe DIIDIler provided in section 
82F In tbe case of a judgment of the High Court. 
35 
821. Notwitbstanding tbat a reference bas been made 
to tbe 81gb Court or the SUpreme Court or an appeal has been 
preferred to tbe Supreme Court, sums due to the Governm8llt 
as a result of an order passed under sub-section (1) of 
section 8lA sball be payable in accordance witb the order so 
passed. 
• 
Decillioll of 
Hip Court or 
Sapr.e Court 
011 the cae 
lIt.ted. 
Appeal to 
Supreme Court. 
H_dlll before 
Supreme Court. 
Sum. due to be 
paid notwUtl .. 
maclin, 
refeftllce. etc. 
82J. In computing the period of UmltaUon prescribed for an EKCluaiOll of 
40 appeal or application UlJder tb1s Cbapter, the day on whioh the ::ue taken 
order complained of was served/_ If the party preferring the r copy. 
appeal or making the application was not furnishedwlth a copy of the 
order when the notice of the order was served upon hlm, the 
time requIsite for obtaining a copy of such order shall be 
45 excluded. 

Tna.fer of 
eert.a 
penclla, 
pIOCMdiap 
IDd tranlli-
tioaal 
plOViaioa •• 
Definitioaa, 
102 
• 82K. (1) Every appeal whicb Is pending Immediately before 
the appointed day before the Adldnistrator or the Collector of 
Central Excise or of Customs under section 80, as it stood 
Immediately before that day and any matter arising out of 
or OODnscted witb sucb appeal and whicb is 80 pending sball 
stand transferred on that day to the Appellate Tribunal or tbe 
Collector (Appeals), as tbe oase may be, and the Appellate 
Tribunal or the Collector (Appeals) may proceed with such 
appeal or matter from the stage at which It was on that day: 
6 
Provided that tbe appellant may demand 'that before 10 
proceeding further witb that appeal or matter, be may be 
re-heard. 
(2) Every proceeding which is pending immediately before 
the appointed day before the Central Government under section 
82, as it stood immediately before that day}and BDY DBtter 15 
arising out of or connected with such proceeding and wMch Is 
80 pending shall stand transferred on that day to the Appellate 
Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal may proceed with such 
proceeding or matter from the stage at which it was on that 
day as if such proceedlng or matter were an appeal CUed before it: 20 
Provided that the applicant or the other party may demand that 
before proceeding further with that proceeding or matter, he may be 
re-heard. 
(3) Every proceeding whicb is pending immediately before 
the appointed day before the Admnistrator under section 81, 25 
as it stood lmmedi ately before that day. and any 
matter arising out of or connected wi tl- such proceeding and 
which 1s so pending shall continue to be dealt with by the 
Administrator as if the said section had not been 
substituted. 30 
(4) Any person who immediately before the appointed day 
was authorised to appear in any appeal or proceeding trans-
ferred under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) sball, not-
withstanding anything contained in section lOlA have tbe 
right to appear before the Appellate Trlbunalin relation to 35 
such appeal or proceeding. 
132L. In tbis Chapter -
(a) "appointed day" means the date of cOrning into force 
of the amendments to this Act specified in Part m of tbe 
Fifth Scbedule to the Finance (No.2) Act, 1980; 40 
(b) '111gb Court" means, -
(i) in relation to a.ay state, the High Court for that 
State; 
(ii) in relation to a Union territory to which the 

5 
10 
15 
20 
103 
jur18d1otlon of the Hlgh Court of a State bas been extended 
by law, that Hlgb Court; 
.(iii) in relatlon to the Union territories of Dadra and 
Nagar Havel1 aDd Goa, Daman and Diu, the Hlgh Court at 
Bombay; 
(tv) in relation to any otOOr Union territory, the highest 
oourt of oivi1 appeal for that territory other than the Supreme 
Court of Indiai 
(c) "President" means the President of the Appellate 
Tribunal. ' • 
5. SecUon 83, in sub-secUone (1) and (3), omit "or exercising 
my powers of revision ". 
6. Ontt section 84. 
7. After secUon 101, insert,-
, 
lOlA. (1) Any person who is enUtled or required to appear 
before a Gold Control Officer or tbe Appellate Tribunal in 
oonnecUon with any'proceedIngs under this Act, otherwise 
than wben required tmder this Act to appear personally for 
examinaUon on oath or affirmation, may, subjeot to the other 
provisions of this secUon, appear by an authorised representative. 
(2) For the purposes of tbis secUon, "authorised representaUve" 
means a person authorised by the person referred to in sub-
secUon (1) to appear on his behalf, being -
(a) his relative or regular employee: or 
25 (b) any legal practitioner who 1s entitled to practise in 
any civil court in India; or 
(e) any person who has acquired such qualificatlons as 
the Central Government may prescribe for this purpose. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this seotion, no 
30 persoDwho was a member of the Indian Customs and Central 
Exoise Service - Group A and has reUred or resigned from 
suoh Servioe after having served for not less than three years 
in any capacity in tbat Service shall be entitled to appear as 
an autborll'ed representative in any proceedings before a Gold 
35 Control Offioer for a period of ~o years from the date of his 
retirement or resignation, as the oase may be. 
(4) No person. -
(a) who has been dlsmissed or removed from Government 
service; or 
Appe_8JlCle by 
authorised 
represeatlltive. 

104 
(") wbo Is ooovicted of an offeaoe connected with any pro-
ceeding under tb1s Act, the Customs Act, 1982, or the 
CeDtral Excises aad Selt Act, 1944; or 
(e) who has beooma an 1DsolveDt, 
52 of 1962. 
1 of 1944. 
shall be qualifted to represeat any person under sub-section (1) • 5 
for an times in the case of a perIOD referred to in clause (4) , 
and for such time as the CoDector of C.tral Excise or of 
Customs or the COD1Peteot authority UDder the CUstoms Act, 
1982, or the Central Excises ad Salt Act. 1944, as the case 
may be, may, by order, determine in the cue of a person 10 
referred to in clause (b). ad for the period duriDg wblch the 
insolvency continues In the case of a per80D referred to in 
clause (e). 
(5) If any person, -
(4) who is a legal practitioner, is found gutlty of mis-
conduct in biB professional cas-city by any autborltjy 
entitled to institute proceedings against him, an order 
passed by that authority shall have effect in relaUon to his 
right to appear before a Gold Control Officer or the Appellate 
Tribunal as it has in relatiCll to bis right to practlse as a 
legal practitioner; 
(b) wbo is not a legal pracUUoner, Is found gutlty of mis-
conduct in CODDeotion with any proceedlngs UDder tbls Act by 
the prescribed authority, the prescribed authority may 
direct that he shall thenceforth be diaqualifled to represent 
any person UDder 81lb-seotlon(l) • 
(6) Any order or diractloo mder clause (I) of sub-secUon (4) 
or clause (b) of sub-sectloo (5) sball be subject to the following 
coodlt1ons, name1y:-
(a) DO such order or direction shall be made In respect 
of any persOD unless ·be has been glVeIl a reasonable opport-
miW of being heard; 
(b) any perBOll agalnst whom any such order or direcUon 
is made may, within one IIIlIlth of the making of the order 
or direction, appeal to the Adm1D1strator to have the order 
or direction cancelled; and 
(e) no such order or direc&n sball take effect unUl the 
expiration of one month from the maldng thereof, or, where 
an appeal bas been preferred, unW tbe disposal of the 
appeal. '. 
8. Section 114, in sub-section (2), in clause (e), 
omit sub-clause (iii). 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of the Bill Is to give effect to the financial proposals 
of the Central Government for the financlal year 1980-81. The 
notes on clauses explain the various provisions contained In the 
Bill. 
NEW DDBI; R. VENKATARAMAN. 
The IBtII J .... e. 1980. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 
AND 274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
(Copy of letter No. F. 3(1)-B(D)/80 dated the 18th June, 1980 
from 1Ilrl R. Venkataraman, Mlnlster of Finance, to the Secretary, 
Lok Babha). 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill, recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of article 
117 read with clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution of Indla, 
the Introduction of the F1nance (No.2) Bill, 1980 to the Lok Babba 
and also recommends to the Lok Babba the coDBlderation 01 the 
Bill. 
2. The BUI will be Introduced In the Lok Sabba immediately 
after the presentatlon of the Budget OIl the 18th JUDe, 1980. 
106 

Clause 2, read wi. th the First Schedule to the Bill, aeeb to preecrlbe the rate. at 
which income-tax (including SUl"clarge thereon) Is to be levied on mcome oharpable 
to tax for the uaessment year 1980-81. Further, It lays down the rates at which tu 
Is to be deducted at source dormg the flnanolal year 1980-81 from inoomes subject to 
lOch deduction under the Inoome-tax A at; and the rate. at which" Idvanoe tu" I. to 
be pald and tax Is to be oalGJlated and charged In special oases for the financial 
year 1980-81. 
Rates of income-tu for the Usell8ment year 1980-8L - Part I of the First Scheclde 
to the BUI speclfi e8 the rates d. Income-tax (including surcharge) OIl incomes liable 
to tax for the assessment year 1980-81. These rates are the aame as those speclfied 
in Part m of the First Schedule to the Finlllloe Act, 1979 for th~ purpose of deductiOl1 
d. tax at source from ''Balarles'' IIIld for comPltatlon d. "advance tax" payable during 
the finllllcial year 1979-80. 
Rates for demctlon of tax at 80urce during the financial year 1980-81 from Incomes 
other than "Salaries"· - Part II of the First Schedule to the Bill speclfles the rates at 
which income-tax (including surcharge where applicable) 18 to be deducted at source 
during the financial year 1980-81 from inoomes other than "Salaries" and retirement 
annuities under section SOE(9) of the Income-tax Aot. The rates 8peclfied in this Part 
for deduction of tax at sooroe are the same as those specified In Part D d. the First 
Schedule to the Finance Act. 1979 for the parposes of deduction of tax at soorce during 
the finanCial year 1979-80, except for certain modlflcatiOl18. In the case of income by 
way of winnings from lotteries and crossword puzzles, and winnings from hor •• races 
payable to a resident recipient (other than a oompany) durtng the financial year 1980-S1, 
tax will be deductible at the rate of 33 per cent. (made up of basic Inoome-tax of 30 per 
cent. and surcbarge of 3 per cent.), as against 36 per cent. during 1979-80. In the 
case of incomes by way of Interest on securiUes issued by the Central or a State 
Government (not being tax-free securities) or interest on debentures or ot"er securiUes 
issued by or on behalf of a local aufhority or a statutory corporaUon or Interest on 
debentures 18sued by companies wbere such debentures are listed in a recognised stock 
exchange in India, income-tax will be deducted at tlle rate of 10 per cent. as in tlle 
finllllcial year 1979-80. In the case of incomes by way of interest on otller securiUes 
(not being Interest on a tax-free security) or dividends payable to a resident recipient 
(other than a company) during the f1nllllc1al year 1980-81, tax w11~ 'however, be 
deducUble at the rate of 23 per cent. (made up of basic income-tax of 21 per cent. 
and surcharge of 2 per cent. ) as against 24 per cent. dUring 1979-80. 
In the case of i·ncomes (other than Interest OIl a tax-free security) payatie to a 
non-resident (other than a company) durtng the financial year 1980-81, tax: will be 
deductible at the minimum rate of 33 per cent. (made up of Income-tu: of 30 per cent. 
and surcharge ~ 3 per cent. ) as against 36 per cent. In 1979-80. In the ca •• of 
Interest on a tax-free security Plyable to a DOn-corporate DOn-resident. the rate for 
deduction will be 16.5 per cent. (made up of income-tax of 15 per cent. and IOrohal'le 
of 1.5 per cent.) as againBt 18 per cent. In 1979-80. 
In the case of incomes by way of Interest other than "Intereat on securities" payable 
to a domestiC cODlpllly durlng the finanCial year 1979-80, tax wUl be deductible at 
the rate of 21.5 per cent. (made up of. iDcome-tax of 20 per cent. and surcharge of 
1.5 per cent.) as In 1979-80. In the case of Illy other inoome (excluding luterest 
Plyable on a tax-free security) payatie to a domestic company during the financial 
yoar 1980-81, tax will be deductltie at the rate of 23 per cent. (made up of inoome-
tax of 21.5 per ceut. and surcharge ~ 1.5 per cent.) as agalnst 24 per cent. in 1979-80. 
lOS 

107 
The rates specified in this Part for deduction of tax at source in all other caees are 
thesR.me as those speclfied in Part n of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1979, for 
the purposes of deduction of tax at source during the financial year 1979-80. 
Rates for deduction of tax at source from ''Salaries'' and retirement annuities, or 
computation of "advance tax" and charging to income-tax in special cases during the 
flnanclal year 1980-81. - Part In of the First Schedule to the Bill specifies the rates 
at which income-tax (including surcharge) is to be deducted at source from ''Salaries II 
and retirement annuities referred to in section 80E(9) of the Inoome-tax Act, and also 
the rates at which "advance tax" is to be paid and Inoome-tax is to be calculated or 
charged in special cases for the financial year 1980-81. 
These rates are the same as those specified in Part I of the First Schedule to the 
Bill for the assessment of Incomes liable to tax for the assessment year 1980-81, 
except for the follOWing modifications:-
(1) In the case of individuals, Hindu undivided fRmilies, unregistered firms, etc., 
no tax wlll be payable if the total Income of the assessee does not exc'}ed Rs. 12, 000. 
Where the total income exceeds Rs.12, 000 by a small margin, the income-tax 
(excluding surcharge) payable by the individuals, ~nndu undivided families with no 
member having independent taxable income exceeding Rs.12, 000, unregistered firms, 
etc., will not exceed 30 per cent. of the excess, of total income over Rs.12, 000 as 
hitherto. In the case of individuals, Hindu undivided families with no member having 
independent taxable income exceecUngRs.12, 000, unregistered firms, etc., this 
marginal provision will cease to operate where the total income exceeds Rs. 16,250. 
Where the total income in the case of Hindu undivided families having one or more 
members with independent taxable income exceeds Rs.12, 000 by a small margin, tbe 
income-tax (excluding surcbarge) payable by the assessee will not exceed 40 per cent. 
of the excess of the toalincome over Rs.12, 000 as against 30 per cent. hitherto. 
Accordingly. in the case ot Hindu undivided famUies witn one or more members 
with independent taxable income exceeding Rs. 12,000, tbis marginal proviSion 
will cease to operate where the total income exceeds Rs.17 .610. 
(11) The rates of income-tax applicalie to the Hindu undivided families having 
one 01' more members witb independent taxable income exceeding Rs.12, 000 have 
been increased. Under the proposed amendment, the nil rate slab has been main-
tained at the existing level for income up to Rs. 8, 000. For the slab of income 
Rs. 8,001 to Rs. 15,000) the rate applicable will be 22% as against 18% as at present; 
for the slab of income Rs. 15, 001 to Rs.20, 000, the rate applicable will be 27% as 
against 25% as at present; for the slab of income Rs. 20,001 to Rs. 25,000 .. the rate 
of tax will be 35% as against 30% as at present; for the income slab of Rs. 25, 001 
to Rs. 30, 000, the rate of tax will be 40% as at present; for the income slab of 
Rs. 30,001 to Rs. 50,000, the rate of tax will be 50% as at present;and for the 
income above Rs. 50,000, the rate will be 60% as against 55% up to Rs. 70, 000 
and 60% for the income exceeding Rs. 70,000 as at present. 
(U1) The rate of surcharge on income-tax in the case of all non-corporate 
aBsessees Is proposed to be reduced from 20 per cent. to 10 per cent. of such 
income-tsx. 
The provisions In the Bill for the purposes of computation of "advance tax" and 
charging of income-tax in special cases durlag the financial year 1980-81 in the 
case of indiViduals, Hlndu undlvlded famUles, unregistered firms, etc., having 

108 
net agricultUrallncome, in addition to oon-agrlculturalincome exceeding 
Rs.12,OOO, are the same as in the Finance Act, 1979 except for the modification 
that these provisions wlll apply only where the net agricultural income exceeds 
Rs.600. 
In the case of compmies, the rates of income-tax specified in Paragraph E of 
Part m of the First Schedule to the Bill are the same as those specified In Para-
graph E of Part I 01. the First Schedule to the Bill. 
Clause 3 seeks to insert a new 8ub-clause (Iva) in clause (24) of section 2. 
The new sub-clause (iva) seeks to provtde that the value of any benefit or perquisite, 
whether convertible into money or not, Which Is obtained by any representative &8seSsee 
mentioned in clause (!11) or clause (iv) 01. section 160( 1) of the Income-tax Act or by 
any beneficiary or anyaJlK)UDt paid by the representative aBBeSSee for the benefit of the 
beneficiary whlch the beneficiary would have ordinarily been required to pay wou1d be 
regarded as "income". 
This amendment wlll take effect from 1st Aprll, 1980 and will accord1n&ly apply 
in relation to the assessment year 1980-81 aDd 8I1bsequent years. 
Clause 4 seeks to insert a new clause (23AA) in sectlon 10 of the Income-tax Act. 
The new clause seeks to provide for exemltlon from Income-tax of any income derived 
by any Regimental Fund or Non-Publlc Fund estabUshed by the armed foreee for the 
welfare of the put and present members 01. the armed forces and their dependants. 
The proposed amendment will apliy retrospectively from 1st Aprll, 1962, fhat Is to 
say, the date of commencement of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 5 seeks to amend section 16 01. the Income-tax Act relating to deduction 
from salaries. 
Under the existing proviSions, a etaDdard deduction is granted to salaried a88eesees 
in respect of expenditure incidental to employment. The standard deduction Is allowed 
In an amount equal to 20 per cent. of the salary up to Bs.10,ooO and 10 per cent. 
01. the salary in excess thereof, subject to a mulmum of Bs. 3, 500. It is proposed 
to extend the benefit 01. the standard demction to pensioners as well. 
The amendmeots wlll take effect from 1st April, 1981 and wlll acoordlngty apliy 
in relation to the assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 6 seeks to insert a new clause (Ua) in sub-section (1) of section 32 of the 
Income-tax Act. 
Under the proposed amendment, an assessee carrying on business or profession will 
be entltled to an addl tional depreciation of lUl amount equal to 50 per cent. of the amount 
of depreciation admissible Wlder clause (ll) of section 32 (1) (other than an extra allowance 
for double or multiple s'hltt working of t'he machinery or plant and the extra allowance in 
respect of mac'"'inery or plant installed in a premises used as a hotel) in respect of any 
new machinery or plant mstalled by him at any tlme after 31st March, 1980 but before 
1st April, 1985. The additional depreclatloo wlll be admi8sibleonly for the previous 
year in which such new machinery or plant 1& installed. The additional depreclatlon 
wlll not be admiSSible in respect of any machinery or plant installed in any office 

109 
preml ses or any residential accommodation, Including any accommxlation In t6e 
nature of a guest house (other than a hotel) or any office appliances or road 
transport vehicles or any machinery or plant the whole of the actual cost of whIch Is 
allowed as a deduction by way of depreciation or otherwise In computing the Income 
chargeable under the head "Proflts and gains of bu8l.noss or profession" of any 
one previous year. The new machinery or plant wUl Include recondl tloned 
machinery or plant Imported from outside IndIa. 
This amendment will take effect from the 1st April. 1981 and will accordingly 
apply in relation to the assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 7 seeks to 3.IneM section 35 of the Income-tax Act relating to deduction in 
respect of expendIture on scientIfic research. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend clause (Iv) of sub-section (2) of section 35. Under 
the existing provisions, where any deduction Is allowed In respect of any capItal 
expendIture represented wholly or partly by an asset, no deductIon Is allowed In 
respect of depreciation or terminal allowance for the same previous yeat in 
respect of that asset. Under the proposed amendment, the deduction for depreciation 
or terminal allowance wlll not be available for any other previous year as well. 
Suh-clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (2A) of section 35. Under the eXisting 
provisions, where an aSBessee pays any sum to an approved scientific research 
association or UniverSity or college or other institution for undertaking scientific 
research under an approved programme, he is entitled to a weighted deduction of one 
and one-third times the amount of such sum. Under the proposed amendment, where 
any such sum 1 s paid to a publlc sector company for undertaking an approved 
programme of scientific research, the assessee will he entitled to a weighted 
deduction of one and one-thlrd times the amount of such sum. For thIs purpose, 
a 'public sector company' wUl mean a statutory corporatIon or a Govermnent 
company as defined In section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to losert a new sub-sectIon (2 B) In sectlon 35. 
Under clause (a) of the new sub-section (2B), an assessee who Incurs any expendI-
blre,other than capital expendIture on acquIsition of any land or buildIng or construc-
tion of any buIlding, for undertaking an approved programme of scIentifIc research, 
wLll be entitled to a weighted deductIon of one and one-fourth times the amount of 
such expendIture so certified by the prescribed autoorlty to have been Incurred on 
such scIentific research during the previous year. 
Under clause (b) of the new sub-section (2B), where any deductlon referred to 
In clause (a) has been allowed for any previOUS year In respect of any eJq)enditure, 
no deduction in respect of such expeoditure will be allowed under sub-sectioo. (1) (i),or 
sub-section (2)(i8) of section 35 for the same or any other previous year. 
Under clause (c) of the new sub-section (2B), where any deduction is allowed for any 
previous year In respect of any capt tal expenditure under cl BUse (a), no deprecIation 
or terminal allowance will be allowed In respect of the sald expenditure for the 
arne or any subsequent prevloos year. 
Under clause (d) of new sub-section (2B), If the assessee falls to furnish a 
oertJ1loate of comlietlon of the awroved programme withln one year of the perIod 
allowed for Its oompietloo by the prescribed authorIty. any deduotlon allowed 

110 
• under this sub-section in excess of the expendlture actually Incurred aball be 
deemed to have been wrmgly allowed and the provisions of section 155 (58) wlll 
apply. 
The amendment in sub -clause (a)(i) will take effect from 1st April, 1981 and the amend-
ment in sub-clause (a)(il) will be D1Ide retrospectively from the commencement of the 
Income-tax Act. The other amendments will take effect from 1st September, 1980 and will 
accordingly apply in relation to the assessroont year 1931-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 8 seeks to amend section 35B of the Income-tax Act relating to the export 
mark6ts development allowance. 
Sub-clRuse (8) seeks to omit sub-clauses ell), (111), (v), (vi) and (vut) in clause (b) 
of sub-section (1) of section 35B. Under the proposed amendment, any expenditure 
incurred on olXaining information regarding markets outside India for the goode, 
services or fac11lttes which the assessee deals in or provides In the oourse of his 
buSiness or on distribution, supply or provision outside India of such goods, services 
or facilities or on preparation and submlsslon of tenders for the supply or provll!lion 
outside India of such goode, etc., or on furnishing to persons outside India samples or 
technical information or on performance of services outside India in connection with, or 
incldental to, the execution of any contract for the supply outside India of such goods, 
services or facilities will not qualify for the weighted deductton. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to substit'.1te a new Explanation for Explanatlon 2 below sub-clause 
(b) of sub section (l) of section 35 B. . The new Explanation seeks to rr ake it clea r that 
expenditure which is in the nature of purchasing and manufacturing expenses ordinarily 
debitatie to the trading or manufacturing account and not to the profit and 108s account 
will not qualify for the weighted deduction under sub-section (1) of section 35B. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1981 and wtU acoordingly apply in 
relation to the assesttment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 9 seeks to insert a new clause (Ha) in snb-sectton (1) of section 36 of the Income-
tax Act. 
Under the proposed amendment, an assessee carrying on a business or profession 
will be entitled to a weighted deduction in respect of any salary up to Rs. 20,000 per 
annum paid by him to an employee who as at the end of the relevant previous year was 
totally blind or who is subject to or suffers from a pennanent physical disablltty, other 
than blindness, which has the effect of reducing substantially his capaoity to engage in 
a gainful employment or occupation. The weighted deduction would be allowed only if 
the employer produces before the Income-tax Officer in respect of the first aSBessment 
year for whi::h the deduction is claimed under this clause, in the case of an employee who 
is totally blind, a certificate as to his bltndnes8 from a registered medical pracUtioner 
being an oculist and in the case of an employee suffering from any permanent physical 
disability. 8 certificate from a registered medical practitioner. 
This amendment Will take effect from the 1st April, 1981 and will accordingly 
apply in relation to the assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 10 seeks to amend section 37 of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the existing proviSions, a specified percentage of the aggregate expenditure 
on advertisement, publiclty and sales promotion is disallowed in the computation of the 
taxable profits. Certain specified kinds of expenditure on advertisement, publioityand 

III 
sales promotion, such as, on advertisement in any small newspaper, statuto~ notices, 
participation in trade fairs or exhibitions, etc., is not taken into account for this purpose. 
Similarly, entertainment expenditure in connection with advertisement, publicity or 
sales promotion Is governed by the other provisions of the Income-tax Act. Further, 
any expenditure on advertisement, publicity or sales promotion for the purpose of the 
buSiness of a new industrial undertaking is exempted from the provisions of this section 
for an initial period of three years. 
Under the proposed amendment, the provisions relating to the disallowance of the 
specified percentage of expenditure on advertisement, publicity and sales promotion. as 
also other related provislons,wlll be omitted. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1981 and will apply In relation 
to the assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 11 seeks to amend section 41 of t~ Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a new proviso in sub-section (2) of section 41. Under the 
existing provisions, where L'1Y building, machinery, plant or furniture owned by the assessee 
and used for the purposes of business or profession is sold, discarded, demolished or destroyed 
the excess of the aggregate moneys payable for such asset and its scrap value over its 
written down value is charged to tax as the income of the business or profeSSion of the 
previous ye8r in which the moneys payable for such assets became due. 
Under the proposed amendment, where any asset representing expenditure of a capital 
nature whic'h has been used for scientific research (feferred to in clause (c) of new sub-
seotion (2B) proposed to be inserted in section 35 by clause 11 and is used for the purpose of 
the business after it ceases to be used for the purpose of scientific research, is sold, 
discarded. demoUshed or destroyed, the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 41 
wlll apply with the modification that for the words "actual cost", the words "actual 
cost as increased by 25 per cent. " were substituted. In other words, the difference 
between the enhanced actual cost and the written down value will be chargeal:ie to 
income-tax under sub- section (2) of section 41. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 41. 
Under the existing proviSions, where a capital asset referred to in section 35(1)(1v) 
and used for the purpose of scientific research is sold without having been used for any 
other purpose. the excess of the sale proceeds together with the deduction allowed under 
section 35(2)(ia) over the actual cost of the capital asset or the amount of th., deduction so 
admisBible, whichever is less, is charged to tax as the income of the business or 
profeBslon of the previous year in which the sale took place. 
Under the proposed amendment, the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 41 will 
also apply in relation to the capital expenditure referred to in clause (c) of new sub-
section (2B) of section 35 proposed to be inserted by clause 7 of this Bill. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1981 and will accordingly apply 
in relation to assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 12 seeks to insert a new section 80AA in the Income-tax Act with reference 
to deductions under any section included under the heading "C._Deduction,s in respect of 
certain incomes" in Chapter VI-A of the Income-tax Act. 
The new Bection seeks to clarify that the deductions provided under any such section 
with reference to the inclusion in the gross total Income of an assessee of any income of 

112 
the nature ~entioned in that section wUl be allowed with reference to the net amount of 
income of that nature included in the gross total income of the as88S888 and that the 
amount of income of that nature 80 included will be computed in accordance with the 
provisions of the Income-tax Act. 
This amendment will take effect retrospectively from the 1st April, 1968 and 
will accordingly apply in relation to the asselsment year 1968-69 and subsequent years. 
Clause 18 seeks to amend section 80C of the Income-tax Act relRUng to deduction In 
respect of Ufe insurance premia, contributions to provident fund, etc. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to substitute sub-section (1) of section 8OC. Under the proposed 
amendment, the quantum of deduction from taxable income in respect of long-term 
savings through life Insurance, provident fund, etc., will be raised so as to allow a 
deduction of the whole of tne first Rs. 5, 000 of the qualifying savings, 50 per cent. of 
tne next Rs. 5. 000 and 40 per cent of the balance. However, the nnnetary limit of the 
savings qualifying for tax relief will remain \Dlc'hanged at 30 per cent. of the gross 
total income or Rs. 30,000, whlchever is less. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (4) of section 8OC. Under the existing 
prOvisions, the monetary limit of the savings qualifying for tax reUef in the case of 
an author, playwright artist, musician or actor can be varied by nJIes. Under the 
proposed amendment, it will be possible to extend the benedt of this higher deduction 
in respect of long-term savings to sportsmen (including athletes) as well. 
These amendments wUl take effect from 1st April, 1981 and wUl accordingly apply 
tn relation to the assessment year 1981- 82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 14 seeks to omit, With effect from the 1st AprU, 1981, section 80FF of the 
Income-tax Act. relating to deduction in respect of expenses on higher education of 
specified dependant relatives. The deduction wUl not, therefore. be avanatie for the 
assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 15 seeks to amend section 80G of the Income-tax Act relating to deduct10n in 
respect of donations to certain funds, charitable institutions, etc. 
Sub-clause <a> seeks to substitute sub-section (4) of section 800. Under the proposed 
amendment, it is being clarified that the deduction in respect of the aggregate sums of 
donations to specified funds and charitable institutions in sub-section (2) of that section 
sball be limited to the smaller of the ceiling limits specifled in ~e new sub-section (4). 
Bub-clause (b) seeks to insert a new sub-section (SA) in section 8OG. Under the 
proposed amendment, where a deduction in relation to any sum specifled in sub-
section (1) of section 80G is claimed and allowed under thts HCtton for any assessment 
year, deduction in relation to such sum shall not be allowed. under any other provision 
of the Act for the same or any other a.ses.ment year. 
The amendment made by lUb-clause (a) wnI take effect retrospectlvely from 1st 
April, 1978 and wnI accordingly apply In relation to the a.selSment year 19'78-79 and 
subsequent years. The amendment made by sub-clause (b) wUl take effect retrospeotively 
from 1st April. 1962, that is to say~from the date of commencement of the Income-tax 
Act, 1981. 

113 
Clause 16 seeks to insert a new section 80-1 tn the Income-tax Act relating'to 
deduction In respect of profits and gains from industrial undertakings, etc., established 
after a certain date. 
Sub-section (1) provides that where the gross total income of an assessee includes 
any profits and gains from an industrial undertaldng or a ship or the business of a hotel, 
he shall be allowed a deduction in the computation of the taxable income of 25% of such 
profits and gains in the case of a company and 20% in the case of other categories of 
assessees. 
Sub-section (2) provides that this section will apply to an industrial undertaking which 
fulfils certain conditions, namely, it is not formed by the splitting up, or ftte reconstruction, 
of a business already in existence: it is not formed by the transfer to a new business of 
machinery or plant previously used for any purpose: it manufactures or produces articles 
or things, other than an article or a thing of low priority speelfied in the Eleventh Schedule 
to the Income-tax Act: it begins to manufacture or produce articles or to operate one or 
more cold storage plant or plants at any time within four years from 1st April, 1981 or 
such extended period as may be notified in the Offielal Gazette: and in th, case of an 
industrial undertaking which manufactures or produces articles, the undertaking employs 
at least 10 workers in a manufacturing process carried on with the aid of power or 
employs at least 20 workers in a manufacturing process carried on without the aid of power. 
It bas heeD specified that in the case of a small-scale industrial undertaking, the benefit 
of this tax holiday will apply even if the undertaking manufactures articles of low priority 
specified in the Eleventh Schedule. .,or the purposes of this sectioo, recODcfitiooed 
imported machinery or plant will be regarded as new. 
Sub-section (3) provides tbat the provisioos of this sectioo apply in relation to a ship which 
fulfils certain conditions, namely, it is owned by an IlXiian company and is woolly used for the 
purposes of the business carried on by it: it was not prior to the date of its acquisition by an 
Indian company owned or used in Indian territorial waters by any person resident in Iodla: and 
it Is brought into use by the Indian COlq)8lly at any time within the period of four years from 
1st April, 1981. 
Sub-section (4) provides that the provisions of this section apply to the business of an 
approved hotel wl1icll fulf1ls certain conditions, namely, it is not formed by the spUtting up 
or the reconstruction of a business already in existence or by the transfer to a new business 
of a building previouslY used as a hotel or of any machinery or plant previously used for any 
purpose; the business of the "'ote1is owned and carried OIl by an Indian oompany with a paid-up 
capital of not less than Rs.5 lakhs; and the business of the hotel starts functioning after 
31st March, 1981 but before 1st April, 1985. 
Sub-section (5) provides that the benefit of this tax holiday wlll be avatlable to an 
Industrtlll undertaking, or a ahlp or the business of a botel for seven assessment 
years beginning with the initial aS8essment year. In the case of a co-operative 
aoctety. this benefit wUl be avallable for a total period of ten assessment years 
beginning with the inittal allsessment year. 
Sub-aection (6) provides tbat for the purpose of computing the deductlon at the 
specified percentage for the assessment year immediately succeeding the lnittal 
assessment year and any subsequent assessment year, the profits and gains will be 
computed as if such business were the only source of Income of the assessee In all the 
auessmeot years for which the deduction at the specified percentage under this 
8ectlon Is avallalie. 

114 
.. 
Sub-section (7) provides that in the case of assessees,other than companies or 
co-operative socteties,whlch are statutorily required to get their accounts audU.ed, 
the deduction Rt the specified 'percentage will not be aVRllable unless the accounts of 
such Rssessee arc audited by a chartered accountant or Rny other qualified accountant 
and the Assessee fUrnishes, along with the retul'lS of income, the report of such 
audit in the form to be prescribed in the Income-tax Rules. 
Sub-section (8) provides that where the goods held for the purposes of the wsiness 
of the industrial undertaking, ship or the hotel are transferred to any other wstness 
carried on by the assessee or where the cost of the goods held for the purposes of any 
other wsiness carried on by the assessee and transferred to the business of the 
industrial undertaking or the hotel or the operation of ship does not correspond to 
the market value of such goods as on the date of the transfer, then, the profits and 
gaills of the industrial undertaking or the ship or the weiness of the hotel wUl be 
computed 88 if the transfer of goods had taken Place at the market value on the date 
of the transfer. The Income-tax Officer has been empowered to compute such profits 
and gains on a reasonable baBis, if the computation of profits on the aforesaid basts 
presents any exceptional dlfficulty. 
Sub-section (9) empowers the Income-tax Officer to determine the reasonable profits 
that could be attributed to the industrial undertaking or ship or the business of a hotel 
in a case where awing to close connection between the assessee and any other person or for 
any other reason, the course of the wSlness is so arranged that the business of the 
industrial undertaking or the ship or the buSiness of the hotel derives more than the 
ordinary profits which might be expected to arlse in that business. 
Sub-section (10) provides that the Central Government may, after making neCe8BBry 
inquiries. direct by notification tn the Official Gazette that the exemption conferred by this 
section will not apply to Bny class of industrial undertakings with effect 'from a specified 
date. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1981. 
Clause 17 seeks to amend section 80J of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the existing provisions, the capital employed in the business of the industrial 
undertaking or ship or the business of hotel is computed in the manner laid down In the 
Income-tax Rules, 1962. Under the proposed amendment, the capital employed in such 
Industrial undertaking, ship or the business of the hotel will be computed In the manner 
specified in the new sub-section (lA). 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to insert a new sub-section (lA) in section 80J. 
Clause (1) of sub-section (lA) provides that the capital employed in an industrial 
undertaKing or the business of the hotel will be computed in accordance with the provi-
sions of clauses (n) to (IV) except as otherwise expressly provided in that section and 
the capital employed in the ship will be computed in accordance "nth clause (V). 
Clause (ll) of 8ub-section (lA) provldes that the aggregate of the value of the assets as on 
the 1st day of the computation period of the undertaking or of the business of the hotel 
will first be ascertained in the manner laid down therein. For this purpose, computa-
tion period means the period for which profits and gains of the industrial undertaking 
or the business of the hotel are computed for the purposes of determining the income 
under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession". The value of the assets 

115 
is taken at their written down value if the assets are entitled to depreciation or ~t their 
actual cost if the assets are not entitled to depreciation. The assets such as casb-in-
hand or bank are taken at their actual amount. 
Clause (ID.) of sub-section (lA) provides that from the aggregate of the value of the 
assets, the aggregate of the borrowed moneys and debts owed by the assessee on the 
1st day of the computation period will be deducted. The debts owed will include lia-
bility In respect of the specified taxes. 
Clause (V) of sub-section (lA) provides that the capital employed in a ship will be 
taken at the written down value of the ship as reduced by the aggregate of the amounts 
owed by the assessee O!l the valuation date on account of moneys borrowed or debts in-
curred in acquiring that ship. 
These amendments will take effect retrospectively from 1st April, 1972 and will apply 
in relation to assessment year 1972 -73 and subsequent years. 
Clause 18 seeks to amend section 80JJ of the Income -tax Act. 
Under the existing' provisions, an assessee who derives profits and gains from a 
busine8S of livestock breeding. or poultry or dairy farming is entitled to a deduction, 
in the computation of taxable income, of an amount equal to one-tbird of the aggregate 
amount of such profits and gains or Bs.10, 000, whichever is higher. Where the aggregate 
amount of such profits and gains does not exceed Rs. 10,000, the whole of such profits 
and gains are exempted from income-tax. Under the prq>osed amendment, a deduction 
will be allowed, in the computation of total income, of an amount equal to one-third of 
the aggregate of the profits and gains derived from these soorces or Rs.15, 000, which-
ever is less. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1981 and will accordingly apply in 
relatlO1l to the assessment year 1.981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 19 seeks to make an amendment in section 80L of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the existing provisions, income from specifled financial assets cpal1f1es for 
exemption from income-tax up to Bs.3,OOO in the case of individuals, Hindu undivided 
families and certain associations of persons. The financial assets specified in this behalf 
include deposita with a ftoancial corporation engaged in providing long-term finance for 
iDduatrial development in India which is approved by the Central Government for the 
purposes of section 36(1)(vil1) of the Income~ Act. The proposed amendment seeks 
to provide that deposits with a public company formed and registered in India with the 
main object of carrying on the business of providing long-term finance for construction 
or purchase of residential hcuses in India and approved by the Central Government for 
the purposes of section 36(\)(vUi) will also quaUfy for inclusion in the categories of 
financial aBsets income from wblch qualifieS for deduction up to Rs.S,OOO under this 
section. 
Tbls am_mmt will take etrect from 1st Apr1l. lOS), and will accordindY apply in 
relatiOll to the a8leSSment year 1981-82 and subsequent year8. 
Clause 20 leeks to amend lecUon 80RR of the Income-tax Act. Under the existing 
ProvisiOll8, a resident individual being an author, playwright, artist, muSician, or actor 
wlao derives iDcome in the exerc1Be of hi. prote.sim fJ;'om foreign SOlrees and receives 
such income in India or br1Dg8 It lDto India in i»relp exoblDp is _utled 1:0 deduct 
26 per cent. of the income so received or brOlgbt in computing h18 totalinoome. Under 

118 
&:be pl'q)oeed ameadmeut, the benefit of thia provi8101l 111 betq eXteaded to eportma_ 
(lDcludlllg athletes). 
TbJa ameadm.eat will take effeot from 1a April, 1880 aad will aoconUqly IIPpl)' til 
relatlO1l to the U.8smeat year 1980-81 ad _bHqu_t yean. 
ClaIlee 21 .. ks to amead aeoUOIl SOT of the Iaoome~ Act relatinl to dedaoUOIliD 
reapect «IOllg-term capital p.ID8 III the cue 01 DOIl-oorporate a ....... 
UDder the utstiDg proviaicm.., wbere the 11'08. total lDci<me of a DOIl-Corporate 
... SIl88 does DOt exceed Be. 10, 000, tbe whole 01 the loag-term capltal p.lDl 18 allowed 
u a deduoticm. in tbe cOlllJ)lltaUcm of the taxable iDoome. UDder the ameDdme., thia 
pravtl101l 111 prq)osed to be deleted in vie. of the propoeal for the ra1IIlq of the eDJDP-
UoD limit lD the cue of Dcm -corporate u.aeea, other thaD re gi8tered firme, from 
Ba.l0,OOO to 111.12,000. 
ThIs amendment wlll take effect from tat April, 1981 aDd will acoord1D&lY IIPPly III 
relatlOll to the assessment year 1981-82 and subeeqlleot years. 
Clause 22 seeke to amend eect101l 80n of the lDcame-talt Act relating to deduotlOll 
In respect of wimdDp from lottery. 
UDder the eldllUDg Pl'OvlliCDB, where tbE! gross total bloome of a non-corporate ... -
ssee doe. not exceed as. 10, 000 the wbole of the income by way of wlDDlnp from , 
lottery i. allowed aa deGlct101l In.tbe e<aputattOll of the taxable income. Under the 
ameadment, thle prO'V18101l I. propoeed to be deleted In new of the pl"Qp~ for ralalllg 
tbe exemptlOll ltmit fram III. 10,000 to RI. 12,000. 
ThIl amendment will take effect from 18t April, 1981 aDd Will accordlDgly apply III 
relatiOll to the assessment year 1981-82 and IlUbee«pent yean. 
Clauae 23 eeeka to amend sect101l 80U of the Inoome-tu Act. 
Under the exi8t1ni provlelC1ll, • reatdeDt lDdtvtdual who la totally bUDd or who adler. 
from a permanent phy8lcal dloablllty (other than bUndDeu) wbich baa the effect of reduc-
IIlg BUblrtaDtlally bil capacity for eDpging Ill. p.1dt1 employment or oocupatiOll, ia 
emlUed to a deGlotloo of Ba. 5,000 in the computatlOll of hlII taxable income. UDder the 
P~08ed ameDlim8llt, the BDlBlDt of deduct1C1l la prq>oeed to be rallied from Ba. 5,000 
to Ra.10, 000, 
Thia amendment wtll take effect frem lat April, 1981, aad wlll accordlqiy IIPPly 
in relatim to the asaelament year 1981-82 aad IUbMqueat yean. 
Clause 2' seeks to Wert a DeW .lI1b-.ectlO1l (9) 111 aeotioD 139 « the ~come-w Act. 
The Explanation to tbe new sub-eect101l spells BIt the condttloDB which wtll han to be 
Illfilled In order to enlUre that a return 11 Dot a defeetive return. The DeW II1b~CltIOll 
empowers the Income-tax OffIcer to iDtlmate the defects to the u.ee.e who hal Bled 
a defectlYe return and glve him aD QPPOrtuDl~ to l'8ctlfy the 8&D1e wltbtD MeeD dap 
or withiD IUch luther period .. the IDcome-tax Offioer may allow. Iftbe u.nee 
fail. to rectify those deJecta; wttblD IRlcb period, the lDceme-tu OffIcer may treat the 
return as an invalid return. In cue the defect. are rectWed after the expiry of the 
period allowed but before the as.eement le made. the lDoome4x Officer may ooadoae 
the delay and treat the return al a valid retum. Where a return 18 treated as laYalld 
by reuOIl of the fa1lure of the u .... to rectify the deteota, the ........ will be 
deemed to have failed to me the return. 

117 
Thl .......... will tab eftect from the 1st September. 1180 ad wUl ap&i1iD 
nJltIoa to rlluru flled aft .. that dille. 
ct.se 26 seea to amead .. cUm 143 oftha lDoome-tu Ad. 
UDder the atattnl provistoas, the lDoclIDe-ta Offtcer may, wttilaat requiring the 
pruIaDoe of the aue .... or the prodadtoD by bJm of mdeDce lD support of the 
relu.l'Il, u .... the total IDcome or loes of the usess .. OIl tile bas18 of the retum 
after maIdIlg speoifted adjustmeats to the lDeome or loes declared ID the retum. The 
IIIOp,osed amendm.t seelal to.omit the recplrem_t to make the followlDllldJutmeuts 
to the lDcome or loa declared lD .lte remm. Damely:-
(1) allowaoe of lUI)' de&acttOll, allowance or rellef wb1oh, OIl the bas. of tDfor-
maUoa avallable ID the retum, acCOllnts and dOCllmeDtII is, prima fac1e, adm.slble, 
bat bu nca been claimed ID the return; 
(11) dlallOWBDCe of lUly decUctlOll, allOWlUlee or relief cla1llled In the retum but 
wblch, OIl the basts of. the lDform8tiOD avaUable In the retum, account.s aDd documents, 
la, prima facie, lDadmlsslble. 
The .. amendments w111 take effect from lilt April, 1980 and wUl accordingly apply 
til relaUcm to the u"sllDlent year 1980-81 and sub8equeat yean. 
Clau .. 26 11880 to 1n8ert a new aub-eection (SB) In section 155 of the Income-tu: 
Act. 
UDder the proposed amendmeat, where an a ..... ee who has olailled a demctlon ID 
respect of aD)' apeDdlture on scientific Neeareh under mb-lleotiClll (lB) of aect10ll 35 
pl'q)OMId to be IDserted by clause 7, fails to IImlah a certificate of complettClll of the 
approved pJ'Ol1'&lllD1e within one year of the period allowed for its completion by the 
preacribed 8IItbority. tJle deduction orig1Dally made In excess of the expenditure actually 
Incurred·wll1 be deemed to have been wroqly made. For this purpose, prov1ai0D8 of 
_ctioa 1M relating to rectification of mistakes will apply and the period of four years 
for ameadment of orders specified ill IIIb-section (7) of that section will be reckoned 
from the ead of the previous year ID which the period allowed for the completion of the 
PI'OIftIIlJD8 by the prescribed authority ellplred. 
Tbi8 ameDdment wUl take effect from lilt April. 1981 aDd will accordingly apply In 
relat10e to the usessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Cia .. 27 seeks to ameud section 164 of the Income-tax Act relatiDg to the taxation 
of dlacretlonary truats. 
8lab-clauae (a)(I) seeks to ameud sub-section (1) of section 164. Under the eXistlDg 
provt.loD8. the tDcome received by the trustees of a discretionary trust Is chargeable 
to lDcome-tax at the nat r.te of 66 per cent. or the rate wblch would be applicable U 
auch 1Dc0llle were the total lDcome of aD assOCiatiOll of per8Oll8, whichever course . 
would be more beDeftclal to the revenge. Under the PropQaed amendment, the Income 
received by the truBtees of • discretionary trust would be chaipable at the rate of 
IDcome-tu, 1Dc1adtDg aarobarge. applicable to the highest slab of Income of aD 
association 01 persODB. •• apeclfted In the Finance Act of the relevaDt assessment 
year. 

118 
• Sub-clause (a)(11) seeks to amend the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 164. 
The first amendment seeks to provide that the provisions of sub-section (1) will not 
apply to a discretionary trust in which none of the beneficiaries has any other income 
chargeable to income-tax and none of them Is a beneficiary. In any other trust. For 
this purpose. DOne of the beneficiaries should have income assessable under the 
Income- tax Act exceeding the exemption l1mlt for the relevant assessment year. 
The second amendment seeks to amend clause (11) of the proviso to section 164(1). 
Under the existing provisions. where a discretionary trust is declared under a wUI. 
the income of the discretionary trust is charged to tax at the rates appl1cable to an 
association of persons and not at the nat rate of 65 per cent. Under the proposed 
amendment. the benefit of concessional tax treatment will be withdrawn if the person 
declarlng such trust has declared any other trust by will. 
&lb-clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 164. &lI>-clause (b)(i) seeks 
to provide that where the property is held under trust in part only for charitable or 
rel1gious purposes and the income which is applicable to other purposes is receivable on 
behalf of beneficiaries whose shares are indeterminate or unknown. the tax chargeable 
would be. the aggregate of the tax on that part of the income which is applicable to 
charitable or rellgious purposes.,to the extent it is not exempt under sectlbn 11 of the 
Income-tax Act,.at lIae rates appllcable to an associatlon of personSi and the tax on the 
income which is applicable to other purpolles would be at the rate of income-tax 
appUcable to the highest slab of income of an asSOCiation of persons 88 specified In the 
Finance Act of the relevant assessment year. 
Sub-clause (b)(ll) seeks to amend tile proviso to section 164(3). Th~ first 
amendment seeks to substitute clause (1) of the proviso by a new clan.e. Under 
the proposed amendment. the benefit of the proviso would be available In respect 
of that part of the income which Is not appllcable to charitable or rellglous purposes 
if nOlle of the beneflclarles bas any other Income chargeable under the Act and nOlle 
of them Is a beneficiary under any other trust. 
The second amendment seeks to amend clause (it) of the proviso. Under the proposed 
amendment. the benefit of the cOllC"essional tax treatment declared by will by a person 
w1ll be withdrawn if such person has declared any other trust by wUI. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to insert two new Exp)'neU9D8 in such-section (3) of section 184. 
Under ExplBDatlon I, any Income in respect of which the persODS mentioned in sectlon 
160(I)(Ul) and (tv) are liable as representative assessee or any part thereof wUl be 
deemed as not being spec1ft\Jal!y receivable on behalf or for'the benetJ.t of 8DY one person 
unless the person on whose behalf or for whose benefit such income or 8Uch part therecl 
Is receivable during the previous year Is expressly mentioned In the order of the Court or 
Instrument of trust or the wakf deed and Is Identifiable on the date of the order, ln8trument 
of trust or the wakf deed. Further. the lndlvldual shares of the beoeficlarle. wlU be deemed 
to be lndetermlnate or unlmown u.Dles8 the individual shares of such beneflclaries are 
expressly stated In the order of the court or an instrument of trust or the wakf deed and 
are ascertainable on the date of such order. lnItrument or deed. 
New Explanation 2 deflnee the expre8s10n "maximum marginal rate" to mean the 
rate of Income tax Including surcharge, If any. apstlcable to the blghest slab of Income 
of an 88soclatlon of persons 88 specified in the Finance Act of the relevant year. 
These amendments will take effect from lst Aprll. 1980 and will aooordJnclY apply 
In relation to assessment year 1980-81 and subsequent year •• 

119 
• Clause 28 seeks tc. Insert a new sub-section (9) In section 171 of the Income-tax 
Act. 
The new sub-section seeks to provide that notwithstanding anything contained In the 
other provisions of section 171, where any partial partition has been effected after 31st 
December, 1978 In relation to a Hindu undlYided famUy which had been assessed as un-
divided. certain consequences will. follow. 
Clause (a) of sub-section (9) provides that it wUI not be competent for the Income-
tax Officer to inquire into an)' claim of such partial partition which has taken place 
and no finding will be recorded under sub-section (3) of section 171 that such partial 
partition had taken place. Where any such finding has been recorded under sub-
section (3) of section 171 to that effect either before or after 18th June. 1980 (the 
date of introduction of this BUl in the House of the People) it wtll be treat...ci as null 
and void. 
Clause (b) of sub-section (9) provides that the famUy wUI contlnup to be liable to 
be assessed as a Hindu undivided famUy as if no partial partition had taken place. 
Clause (c) of sub-section (9) provides that each member or group of members of 
such famUy immediately before such partial partition and the famlly wUI be jointly 
and severally liable (or any. tax, penalty. Interest, fine or any other sum payable 
under this Act in respect of any period preceding or succeeding such partial parti-
tion. 
Clause (d) of sub-section (9) provides that the severalliabUlty of any member or 
group of members wUI be computed in accordance with the portion of the joint famUy 
property which has been allotted to him or such group at such partial partition. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1980. and will acoordingly apply in 
relation to the assessment year 1980-81 and subsequent years. 
Clause 29 seeks to substitute clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 208 of the 
Income-tax Act. 
In the case of a person, other than a company, local authority or registered firm, 
advance tax is payable only where the income of the person subject to advance tax 
exceeds &.10,000. The proposed amendment Meeks to raise this llmit from Bs.10, 000 
to Ra. 12, 000. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st September, 1980. 
Clause 30 seeks to amend sub-section (4) of section 209A of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the exlstlng proviSIOns, an assessee who has made a statement or estimate of 
advance tax Is required to file an estimate or a revised estimate of advance tax If the tax 
on his current income Is likely to exceed the amount of advance tax on the basis of such 
statement or estimate by thirty-three and one-third per cent. on or before the date on 
which the last Instalment of advance tax Is payable by him. Under the proposed amendment, 
a company wlll be required to rne the higher estimate of advance tax If the tax on Its 
current Income exceeds the advance tax payable by It OIl the basis of Its statement or 
estimate by twenty per cent. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st September. 1980. 

120 
C181188 31 seeks to amend _b-sectloo (3A) of sectlon 212 of the 1DC0000-tax Act. 
UDder the existIDg provtal0ll8, aD usessee who is requlred to pay .dvuoe tax In 
pursuance of aD ordel' under eectlOD 210 made by the lDcome-tax Officer 1. required 
to me an estimate of .c:lYaDCe tax if the tax OIl his current Income Is llkely to exceed 
the advance tax demapcJed from him by thirty-three and ODe-third per cent.,on or 
before the date on which the last lDatalment of adv8D08 tax la payable by him. Under 
the proposed amendment, In the case of a company, It will be necessary to rue the 
higher estimate of advance tax if the tax OIl current Income exceeds the ac:IYance tax 
demanded from It by tweDty per cent. 
TbIs amendment wUl take effect from 1st September, 1980. 
Clause 32 seeks to amend sub- aectlon (1) of section 215 of the 1Do0me-tax Act. 
Under the existing provlaiODS, where the .c:IYaDoe tax pald by an ass .... cIurt.nc 
the finaDCial year on the basis of his own estlmate Is leas tbaD seventy-five per cat. 
ot the assessed tax, 1. e., tax OIl the bast. of the reaular assessment a. recmced by tax 
decilcted at aoUl'ce, be is required 110 pay Intereat at the rate of twelve per cent. OIl the 
difference between the asseeaed tax aDd the advuoe tax .ctually pald fro.m 1st AprU 
of the assessment year to the date of the replar assessment. Under the propoeed 
amendment, In the case of a oompu.y,auch Interest would be cbarpable If the advance 
tax paid Is less than eigbty-tbree and ODe-third per cent. of the assessed tax. 
TbIs amendment wlll take effect from let September, 1980. 
C18l188 33 seeks to 8JD8Dd sectlon 273 of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the ex1st1Dg provislOlls, where aD 88888S88 mea • false statement ot advance 
tax, he Is Hable to pay penalty of an amount which Is DOt 188S thaD teD per cent. but 
whleh does DOt exceed ODe aDd a half times the amount by which .dvaDoe to aatually paid by 
him falls sbort of the seventy-five per cent. of the a ...... el tax or the advlUlC8 tax 
payable by him lD accordaDCe with a correct and OOJDp1ete statement, whichever 1. Ie ••• 
Further, an 88ses.ee who has faDed, wUbout reasonable CIWI8, to furni.b a .tatement 
of advanoe tax ls llable to pa,y penalty of an amount wblcb Is not lea. than ten per cent. 
but which does not exceed ODe and a half tlJDu of sevaty-Rv. per cent. of the u ... sed 
tax. Under the propoaed amendment, In the cue of a company, the penalty wlll be 
calculated OIl the basis of eighty-three and cme-thlrd per cent. of the uae.sed tax u 
against seventy-ftve per cent. In the case of other cateFrl88 of asse ..... 
Under the existing provlsiona, where an ..... 888 baa fUed a fal .. estimate of advuoe 
tax, he l8 llable to pa,y a penalty of ID amount wb1cb 1. not Ie •• thaD ten per oeIlt. bat 
which c:loea DOt exceed one and a half times the UDOUDt by wb1cb the advance tax paid by 
btm talls sbort of seventy-flve per cent. of the as .... ed tax or the tax parable In 
accorclaDce with a .tatement or a nottc. l.sued to him by the Income-tax Oftloer. 
whlchever Is 1.8.. Further, where an 88888888 baa rued • hlPer estimate which 
18 fale.. be 1. liable to pay a peulty of ID amount wb1ch i. not 188. than ... per MDt. 
but whlch doe. not exceed one and a ball tlme8 the amount by which the adYance tax 
paid by him falls .bort of seventy-five per cent. of the uaessed tax. JUrther. wbere 
a new .sse .... baa wltbout r8UOllable C8l18e faDed to furnt.sb liD e.Umate of adY..,. 
tax. be i. Uable to pa,y a paalty of an IlIDOUDt which i8 not 1 ••• than t4ID per cent. but 
which doe. DOt uceed ODe and a ball times the 18venty- Rve per oeut. of the useued 
tax. In additiOD, where an ..... see baa without reasonable C8ll88 faDed to fUrn18h 
a higber estimate of advuce tax, be t. Hable to pay penalty wbtch 1. not leas thaD teD 

121 
per 08Ilt. bllt wb1ch does DOt aceed one IDld a half times the aDIOUIlt by which /he tu: 
payable In acoordance wlth a statement or estimate or the tax payable In pursuance 
of a DOttce lasued by thelDcome-tax atlcer falls short of 88V81lty-five per cent. of 
the asaeaaed tax. 
Under the proposed ameudmeut, In the aforesaid cases. where the assessee Is a 
company. the above limit of s8Y81lty-five per cent. of the assessed tax is being raised 
to elghty-three aDd one-third per cent. 
Theae ameDdments wU1 take effect from 1st September, 1980. 
CIIlll88 34 eeeka to ameDd rule 6 of Part A of the Fourth Schedule to the lDcome-tax 
Act. 
UDder the ameDdment, the exlsttDg provision to charge to tax the Interest oredited 
to the recognised provident fund of lUI employee in excess of one-third of the salary of 
Buch employee is proposed to be omitted. 
This amendment will take effect from 1st AprU, 1981 aDd wW accordingly apply in 
relation to the &8aeaSJDent year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 35 seeks to make certain amendments of a consequential nature in dllferent 
pl'OV'lslons d the Income- tax Act. 
The am8Ddments In sub-clau8es (1) aad CU) are conseqaenUal to the 8.1Da1dmat made to 
sectioa 32 of the Income-tax Act under clause 6 of the Bill. 
The amendments in sub-clauses (Ul) to (vi) are consequential to the insertion of 
new section 80-1 in the Income-tax Act under clause 16 of the Bill. 
These ameDdments will take effect from 1st April, 1981 aDd will accordlDgly apply 
In relation to the assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
aause 36 seeks to amend the deflnlUon of "assets" lD clause <e) of sectlon 2 of the 
Wealth -tax Act. The effect of the proposed amendment wUl be that in relation to the 
asseBsment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1981 and subsequent years 
"assets", for the purposes of wealth-tax, will not include agricultural land otber than 
land comprised in any tea, coffee, rubber or ca.rdamom plantatlon and any buUdlng owned 
or occupied by a cultivator of or receiver of rent or revenue out of agricultural land 
other than land comprised in any tea, coffee, nlbber or cardamom plantatlon. 
Clause 37 seeks to amend section 5 of tbe Wealtb-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to aubst1blte clause (tva) of sub-section (1) of section 5-
Under the ProllOsed amendment, tbe value of agricultural land comprised in any tea, 
coffee. rubber or cardamom plantations belonging to the assessee will qualify for 
exemption from wealth-tax up to RB. 1,50,000 along with the value of dtber specified 
financial assets. 
Sub-clause (b) aeeks to amend clause (ivb) of sub-aection (1) of section 5. Under the 
proposed amendment, tbe value of one buUding or a group of buildings being a store-
bouse or a buUding used for keeplDg livestock a.Dd situated on or In the vicinity of BD1' 
agrloultu.nlland oomprl.8ed in tea, coffee, rubber and oardamom plaDtatlons wlll be 
exempt from wealth-tax. 

122 
Sub-clause ,(c) seeks to amend clause (vilib) of sub-section (1) of section 5. Under 
the proposed amendment, the value of trees standing on an agricultural land other 
than that comprised in any tea, coffee, rubber or cardamom plantation will be exempt 
from wealth-tax. 
Sub-clause (d) seeks to substitute clause (xxvll) of sub-section (1) of section 5. 
Under the existing provisions. any deposit with an approved financial corporation 
engaged in providing long-term finance for industrial development in India qualifies 
for exemption from wealth-tax up to Rs. 1,50,000 along with the value of specified 
financial assets. Under the proposed amendment, the benefit of this tax concession 
wUl be extended to any deposit with an approved public company formed and registered 
in India with the main object of carrying on the business of providing long-term 
finance for construction or purchase of houses in India for residential purposes. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1981 and w111 accordingly apply 
in relation to assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 38 seeks to insert a new Explanation in aub-section (1) of seotlcm 7 of the 
Wealth-tax Act. 
Under the proposed Explanation. any price or other consideration for which any 
property may be acquired by or transferred to any person under the terms of a deed of 
trust or through or under any restrictive covenant in any instrument of transfer wlll 
be disregarded for the purpose of determining the market price of such property as on 
the valuation date. 
This amendment w111 take effect !rare 1st April, 1980 and w1ll accordingly apply in 
relation to the assessment year 1980-81 and subsequent years. 
Clause 39 seeks to insert a new section 20A in the Wealth-tax Act. 
The new section 201. seeks to provide that where any partial partition has been , 
effected after 31st December, 1978 by a Hindu undivided family which had hitherto 
been assessed as undiVided, certain consequences will follow. 
Clause (a) of section 2M provides that such family wlll continue to be Hable to be 
aSSe8sed under the Wealth-tax Act as if DO partial parUtlOD had taken place. 
f , 
Clause (b) of section 20A provides that each member or group of members of 
such famlly immediately before such partial partltloo, as also the famlly (welf, will be 
joIntly and severally liable for any tax, penalty, interest or any other sum payable 
l'Dder theWealtb-t&xAct by the family in respect of any period preceding or succeed-
ing web partial partt tion. 
Clause (c) of section 20A provides that the several liab1l1ty of any member or 
group of members for the purposes of clause (bJ wlll be computed accordiDl to the 
portion of the Joint family wbtcb bas been allotted to him at the tlJ:pe of partial 
partition. 
1he Explanation to section 20A leeks to provide tlaat for the purposes of this 
sectioq,"partial partition" will have the meaning .. signed to it in clause (b) of the 
Explanation to section 171 of the Income-tax Act. 

123 
This amendment will take effect from the 1st April, 1980 and wlll accordinpy 
apply in relatioll to the assessment year 1980-81. 
Clause 40 seeks to amend section 21 of the Wealth-tax Act. 
Sub-clause Ca) seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 21. Under the proposed 
amendment, the provi81ons of sub-section (1) bave been made subject to the provisions 
of new sub-section CIA) proposed to be lnserted by sub-clause (b). 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to insert a new sub-section (IA) in section 21. The new sub-
section leeks to provide that where the aggregate value of the interests of the benefi-
ciaries falls short of the total value of the usets held by representative useS88es, 
then, in addition to the wealth-tax payable by the representative assessees, such as, 
the court of wards, administrator general, official trustee, receiver, manager or 
other person, the excess value of such assets will be charged to wealth-tax as if it 
wu the net wealth of an individual citizen of India 'resident in India and charged to 
tax at the rates specified in Part I of the First Schedule or at the rate of 3 per cent •• 
whichever course is beneficial to the revenue. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to "8.IIlend sub-section (4) of section 21. 
Item (i) of this sub-clause seeks to provide that in the case of assets held by a 
discretionary trust, wealth-tax shall be charged at the rate applicable to an individual 
citizen of India and resident in India at the rates specified in Part I of Schedule I or 
at the rate of 3 per cent. (as against 1.5 per cent. hUherto). Whichever course is more 
beneficial to the revenue. 
Item (U) of this sub-clause seeks to amend the proviso to sub-section (4). 
Under clause (i) of the proviso, the wealth-tax is charged at the rates applicable 
to an individual citizen, resident in India if the assets are held by the discretionary 
trust declared by wlll. Under the proposed amendment, the concessional tax 
treatment will be applicable only if such trust is the only trust created by the person 
by wlll. 
A new clause (ia) is proposed to be inserted in the proviso. The new sub-clause 
seeks to provide that where none of the beneficiaries in a discretionary trust has net 
wealth exceeding the esemption limit or none of them is a beneficiary in any other 
trust, wealth-tax sball be charged at the rates specified in Part I of Schedule I and 
not at the nat rate of 3 per cent. as proposed. 
A new Explanation is proposed to be added to this sub-section. Under the new 
Explanation, the shares of the beneficiaries will be deemed to be indetermina~e or 
unknown unless their shares are expressly stated in the order of the court, or lDstru-
ment of trust or deed of wakf and are ascertainable as such on the date of the order, 
instrument or deed. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st April, 1980" and will accordingly apply 
in relation to assessment year 1980-81 and subsequent years. 
Clause 41 seeks to amend Part I of Schedule I to the Wealth-tax Act, 1957. 
Under the proposed amendment, no wealth-tax will be payable in the case of 
individuals as well as Hindu undivided families if their net wealth does not exceed 

124 
Re. 1,50.000. However. wealth-tax payable shall In no case exceed 5 per cent. of the .. 
amOUDt by wblcb the net wealth exceeds Rs. 1,50.000. 
These amendments w111 take effect from 1st AprU. 1981 and wUl acoordingly apply 
In relation to the asseflsment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 42 makes certain amendments in the Gift-tax Act with effect from tbe 1st day 
of April. 1980. 
&Ib-clause (a) of the clause seeks to amend the 'definition of ''transfer of property" 
Qontained in clause (xxiv) of section 2 of the Glft-tax Act to make it clear that the 
exercise of a power of appointment would amount to a transfer irrespective of whether 
such power i8 general or 8pecial or su~'ect to any restrictions as to the perBOIlS in 
wbose favour the appointment may be made. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to amend section 4 of the Gift-tax Act so as to provide that 
where a person who bas an interest in property as a tenant for a term or for life or 
a remainderman surrenders or relinquishes his intere8t in the property or other-
wise allows his interest to be termiuted without consideration or for a oonsideration 
which is not adequate. the value of the interest or. as the case may be. the amount 
by wbich such value exceeds the consideration received will be deemed to be a gift 
made by such person. 
Clause 43 8eeks to make certain amendments in the Interest-tax Act. 1974. 
Sub-clause (l)(a) seeks to omit sub-clause (iii) of clause (7) of section 2 of the 
Interest-tax Act relating to the definition of the expreSSion "interest". The effect of 
the proposed amendment will be to include in tbe scope of the definltlon. the amount 
of any interest accruing or arising on moneys lent for the creation of a capUal asset 
in India where the agreement under wbich such moneys are lent provides for the 
repayment thereof during a period of not less than !'even years. 
Sub-clause (l)(b) seeks to amend clause (9) of section 2 of the Interest-tax Act. 
1974 relating to the definition of the term "scheduled bank ". 
Under the existing provisiollS. a "scheduled bank" means the State Bank of India. 
a subsidiary bank of the State Bank of India, nationalised banks specified in the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act. 1970 or any 
other bank included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934-
Under the proposed amendment. the term "scheduled bank" ... 111 also include certain 
specified industrial financial institutions. The institutions specified in this behalf 
are the Industrial Finance Corporation of India. the Industrial Development Bank of 
India. the Industrial Re-conetruction Corporation of India Limited and the Industrial 
Credit and Investment Corporation of India Limited. 
Sub-clause (2) seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 6 of the Interest-tax Act. 
The proposed amendment seeks to re-introduce the levy of interest-tax on scheduled 
banks in respect of the interest accruing or arising after 30th June, 1980. 
These amendments will take effect from 1st September. 1980 and will accordingly 
apply in relation to the assessment year 1981-82 and subsequent years. 
Clause 44 seeks to insert a saving provision to cover certain cases. 

125 • 
This clause seeks to provide that the provisions of section 80AA proposed to be 
inserted by clause 12 of the Bill will not apply in respect of the assessment of an 
assessee for any particular assessment year if the Supreme Court has, for the said 
assessment year, in an appeal decided before the 18th June, 1980, that is to say the 
lntroduction of the Finance (No.2) Bill, 1980,held that deduction under any section 
included under the heading "C. Deductions in respect of certain incomes,under 
Chapter VIA of the Income-tax Act should be allowed in a manner different from 
that proposed in the new section 80AA. 
Clause 45 read will- the Second Schedule seeks to 
<a) raise t'he rates of import duty on -
(1) Cinematograph films, not exposed: and 
(ti) artlcles of baggage, 
(b) delete the entries in column (5) of the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff 
Act 10 respect of certain Headings as these entries have become redundant, 
(c) to amend Heading No. 100.02 relaUng to articles imported by air or post for 
personal use, by way of clarification. 
Sub-clause (a> of clause 46 seeks to amend clause (f) of section 2 
of tbe Central Excises and Salt Act to include lacquering or printing or both of plain 
containers in the definition of ''manufacture'' in relation to Alum1n1um covered ~ Item 
No. 27 of the First Schedule to this Act. 
Sub-clause (b) of clause 46 read with tbe Third Schedule seeks -
(a' to raise the rates of basic excise duty on -
(1) Soda ash, 
(2) Caustic soda and caustic potash, 
(3) Nitric, HydrochloriC and Sulphuric acids, 
(4) Starch, 
(5) Synthetic rubber; 
(b) to change the tariff description of -
(1) Item No.26A relating to copper and copper alloys to include any alloy In whicb 
copper predominates in weight over each of t1:'e other metals witltln 1ts scope. 
(2) Item No.26B reiaUng to zinc to include any alloy in which zinc predordnates 
in weigbt over each of the other metals within its scope, 
(3) Item No. 27 A relating to lead to include any alloy in which lead predonmates in 
weight over each of the other metals w1thin its scops. 
(4) Item No. 68 relating to goods not elsewhere specified in the Central Excise 
Tariff.to include witltln 1ts scope all such goods which are spec1f1cally excluded 
from the scope of any otber Item either by an Explanation to that Item or by words 
of exolusion in the desoription of that Item or in any other manner. 
(5) Item No.16B relating to plywood to delete sub-items (1) and (11) thereof. 

126 
(6) Item No. 19 relating to cotton fabrlo. to Include ootton fabrlo. oovered 
parUally or fully with textile flocks wttbJn Ita 8COpe. 
(7) Item No.22 relating to man--made fabrl08 to include man-made fabrlc8 oovered 
partially or fully with textile flocks wtthin Ita 8COpe. 
(8) Item No.22F relating to miDeral flbre8 and yarn. by way of clartftoation. 
(9) Item No.27 relating to alum1D1um to include within Ita scope -
(1) collapsible tubes. prlDted or lacquered or prlDted and lacquered. and 
(11) any alloy in which aluminium predominate8 in" weight over eaoh of the 
other metals; 
(c) to include mola8ses as a new Item in the Central Excise Tariff. 
Cla\.lSe 47 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 5 of the FlDance Act, 1980 to ra1ee the 
rate of special excise duty from five per cent. to ten per Ctllt. of the duty of excise leviable 
under the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, read with any notUl-' 
caUon issued by the Central Government for the time being in force. 
Clause 48 read with tbe Fourth Schedule seeks to ammd the First. Schedule to the 
Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 to Include cotton and 
man-made fabrics. covered parUally or fully with textUe flocks wltbin Ita .cope. 
Clause 49 of the Bill seeks to amend certain provi.ionI of I8Ction llB,tbe 1nIertlon 
of which has been directed to be made in the Central Exctses and Salt Act by the CUltom8, 
Central Excises "and Central Boards of Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1978, 10 aI to cover 
specific situations including exports under claim for rebate. 
Clause 50 of the Bill read with the Flfth Schedule seeks to ameDd the Customs Act, 
1962, the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and the Gold (Control) Act, 1988 to pro-
vide for an Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals arising in Customs, Central Exctse 
and Gold control matters. 
These amendmenta will take effect from a date to be noUfled by the Central Govern-
ment; and different dates may be notUled for the amendments to differeDt Actt:. 
Clause 51 seeks to amend the First Schedule to the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 
with a view to revising the postage rates for letters and parcels. 
Clause 52 seeks to amend section 64 of the Finance (No.2) Act, 1971. The effect 
of the amendment will be that the Housing and Urban Development Finance Corporation 
limited (a company formed and registered under the Companies Act. 1968 and 
wholly owned by the Government) which was exempted from income-tax ana surtu 
uptotbe assessment year 1980-81 by the Finance (No.2) Act. 1971 w111 be exempted 
from income-tax and surtax for five more years, that is, up to the asse8sment 
year 1985-86. 
The proposed amendment will take effect from 1st April, 1980. 
Clause 53 seeks to make certain amendments In the Compulsory Deposit Scbeme 
(Income-tax Payers) Act, 1974. 

127 
• Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a new clause (dd) in section 2 of the Act. The 
amendment seeks to define the expression "Income-tax Officer" to mean the Income-
tax Uftlcer as defined in section 2(25) of the Income-tax Act and to include an Inspec-
ting Assistant Commissioner who exercises or performs the powers or functions 
conferred on, or assigned to, him under section 125 or section 125A of the Income-tax 
Act. This amendment is proposed to oe made retrospectively from 10th July, 1978. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to insert a new section 7A in the Act. The amendment seeks 
to secure that for the purpose of exemption under section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act, 
1957, the amount of compulsory deposit w1ll be regarded as a deposit with a banking 
company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies. This amendment is 
proposed to be made :-etrospectlvely from 1st April, 1975. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to insert a new sub-section (2) in section 8 of the Act so as to 
give an option to the depoSitor not to withdraw the amount of instalment or interest 
when it becomes due. The new sub-section also provides that when the amount of 
instalment or ,interest is not so withdrawn, it wUl carry the same rate of interest as 
is payable on tl compulsory deposit for the period for which it is retained. This 
amendment will be effective from 1st April, 1981. 
Sub-clause (d) seeks to amend section 10 of the Act. The proposed amendments 
seek to provide that penalty for failure to make, or for making a short-payment in the 
compulsory deposit made by the assessee will be levied only if the assessee did not 
have reasonable cause to make compulsory deposit or for making a short-payment 
of the compulsory deposit. Further, the Income-tax Officer will be given the discretion 
to levy the penalty. This amendment will have retrospective operation from 1st 
April, 1975. 
Sub-clause (e) seeks to amend section 11 of the Act. The effect of the proposed 
amendments is that the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) will be an authority 
for the purposes of the Act and that no directions w1ll be issued by the Board which 
will have the effect of interfering with the discretion of the Commissioner (Appeals) 
in the exercise of his appellate functions. This amendment will have retrospective 
operation from 10th July, 1978. 
Sub-clause (f) seeks to amend section 12 of the Act. The effect of the proposed 
amendment will be that an appeal from an order of the Inspecting Assistant 
Commissioner who exercises or performs the powers or functions of an Income-
tax Officer wlll lie to the Commissioner (Appeals). This amendment will have 
retrospective operation from lOth July, 1978. 
Sub-clause (g) proposes to insert a new section 12A which enables a depositor 
IIII rteved by an order of penalty imposed by an Income-tax Officer under section 10 
of the Act or by any authority in any proceedings by way of appeal or revision 
against that order to file an application for special review to the Income-tax 
Officer or thl3 authority which passed the last of such orders if the depositor 
considers that no such penalty would have been levied if the amendments made to 
section 10 by sub-clause (d) of this clause had been in force on the date of passing 
of the order of penalty. The application can be presented before the 1st of 
January, 1981. 
Thls amendment wUI take effect from 1st September, 1980. 
Sub-clause (h) seeks to amend section 13 of the Act. Under the proposed a~end­
ment the Commissloner (AppealS) will have the power to amend his orders wlth a 
View'to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record within the specified period. 
Clause 54 seeks to repeal section 2 of the Finance Act, 1980. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 50 of the Bill, read with the Fifth Schedule thereto, seeks to provide for the 
setting up of the Customs, Central Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal for 
customs, Central excise and gold control matters. 
2. The proposed Appellate TribWlal would hear Brst appeals against the orders of 
Collectors of Customs or of Central Excise and second appeals against the orders 10 
appeal passed by the Collectors of Customs (Appeals) or the Collectors of Central 
Excise (Appeals). 
3. Provision bas also been made for the transfer to the Appellate Tribunal of oer-
tain cases pending with the various authoriUes under the Aots on the date when the amend-
ments are brought into force. However, certain cases of revision pending on that 
date where the duty or the difference in duty or fine or penalty involved does not 
exceed Rs.10, 000, etc., are proposed to be continued with the ex1stlng rev18looal 
machinery. For this purpose, it is proposed to oontlnue the reviBlonal maohlDery of 
the Government for two years with a reduced strength. 
4. It is expected that about 10,000 to 11,000 cases would be transferred to the 
Appellate Tribunal when it Is estabUshed. About 6,000 appeals per annum are 
expected to be flied before the Appellate Tribunal thereafter. The number of oases 
that would be dealt wit" by the ex1sUng revisional macbinery would be about 6, 000. 
5. With ttee setting up of the Appellate Tribunal, work of a follow-up nature, suoh 
as examination of orders for making appl1caUons to t"e Appellate TribuDal and appeala 
to the Supreme Court, would also arise in the Central Board of Excise BDd CustolDJ. 
6. The details of estimated recurring expenditure on the establia1uneDt of the Appellate 
Tribunal and the continuance of the existing revlsional maohinery, as disoussed above, 
are given below:-
1. Expenditure rela~, to the Appellate TrtbuQpJ. departmental reprugtdyu 
and the follow-up cell 10 the Central Board of Exo1ee yd Cuetoms. 
(a) Appellate Tribunal: 
(1) Salaries 
1i2L A"v8ra.p nmtb- Annual 
1y expepdltu..... expepditgre 
4fts. ) (RII. ) 
1. President 1 3875 46,500 
2. Vice-President 1 3825 43,500 
3. Members 12 3375 4,88,000 
4. Registrar (1500-2000) 1 2300 27,800 
5. Assistant Registrars 8 1450 1,39,100 
(650-1200) 
8. Technical Officers (650-1200) 7 
7. Head Clerks 7 
1450 1,21,800 
900 76,800 
8. Upper Division Clerks 14 670 1,12,580 
9. Lower Division Clerks 14 520 87,380 
10. Private Secretary to PreSident, 14 1300 2,18,400 
Members 
11. Personal Assistants/ 17 
Stenograpbers 
900 1,83,800 
128 
J 

129 
S. No. Post 
12. Uhrarions 
13. Daftrtes/Record -
Keepers 
14. Peons/Sepoys 
(11) TA/DA expenses, hiring of ofdce 
accommodation/other expenses including 
stationery, maintenance of cars, etc. 
Total of <al 
Nos. 
4 
5 
23 
Average month- Ar.nual 
lyexpenditure expend~ture 
(Rs. ) (Rs. ) 
670 32,160 
360 21,600 
320 88,320 
2,55,000 
19,39,200 
(b) Departmeptal representatives woo would represent tb" department's 
case before the Tribunal: 
(1) Salaries 
~ ~ Nos. Average monthly Annual 
expenditure 
(Rs. ) 
1. Senior Departmental 7 2300 
Representatives (1500-2000) 
2. Junior Departmental 7 1800 
Representatives Group 
(A) (1100-1600) 
3. Junior Departmental 7 1450 
Representatives (650-1200) 
4. Personal Assistants/ 17 900 
Stenograpbers 
5. Upper Division Clerks 7 670 
6. lDwer Division Clerks 7 520 
7. Peons/Sepoys 7 320 
(11) TA/DA expenses, hiring of 
office accommodation and other 
expenses 
Total of (b) 
(c) Follow-up cell to be sent up in the Central Boar~?LExc:.!se 
and Customs tohaDdle Tribunal matters. 
8alarlel! 
Nos. Average 
montbly-S.No. E2!1 
eXp!nditure 
(Rs. ) 
1. Director 
2. Under Secretary 
1 2600 
1 1900 
expendi-
ture 
(Rs. ) 
1,93,200 
1,51,200 
1,21,800 
1,83,600 
56,280 
43,680 
26,880 
94,000 
8,70,640 
Annual 
expenditure 
(Rs. ) 
31,200 
22,800 

130 
Post Nos. 
3. Section Offlcer 1 
4. Personal Assistants/ 2 
Stenographers 
5. Assistants 4 
6. Upper Division Clerks 2 
7. Lower Division Clerks 2 
8. Peon/Sepoy 1 
Total of (c) 
Gross 'reourriDg' expenditure 
6. e. total of (8), (b) and (c) J 
LESS 
(d) Approximate IlniDg on account of replacement 
of the present arrangement of revisions/appeals 
(e' Accrual from addlUonaI fees since the fee 18 
Average 
monthly-
e~endUure 
(Rs. ) 
1300 
900 
900 
670 
530 
320 
being ftxed at Rs.200, as against Rs.laS for a revision 
appUcaUOD and 'NU' for an appeal to the Board at present 
Savings D. e. total of (d) and (e' J 
NET RECURRING EXPENmTURE 
Li. e. (a) + (b' + (c) - (d) - (e' J 
n. Expenditure relating to transitional prov1siops. 
Estimated expenditure on 'residual' rey1Bjppa} mach1Dea 
(1) Salaries 
~ ~ H2h Average 
monthly 
expeDdltul't! 
(Rs. t 
1. Joint Secretaries 2 3126 
2. lJnder Secretaries 4 1900 
3. Personal AsB1stanta/ 4 900 
Stenographers 
4. Upper DiVision Clerks a 670 
5. lAnYer Division Clerks 2 520 
6. Peons/Bepoys a 320 
(11) TA/DA and otha, expenses 1Dcludiu.g staUonery 
LNote: Tbls expend1ture will be only for 2 yea:raJ 
Annual 
expenditure 
(Rs. ) 
15,600 
21,600 
43,200 
16,080 
12,480 
3,MO 
--1,66,800 
29,76,640 
17,30,000 
6,75,000 
24,06,000 
5,71,640 
Annual 
expeoditure 
(Rs. ) 
76,000 
91,200 
43,200 
18,080 
12,480 
7,880 
2,45,640 
50,000 
2,95,640 
l~be total recurrlDg expendlture that is Ilkely to be involved therefore 1s of the order of 
P.I. 8. 6 lakhs. 

131 
7. The gross DOn-recurring expenditure on aocotmt of the establishment of the 
Appellate Tribunal LWhicb would bave Bencbes at four plaoesJand tbe institution 
of departmental representatives Is estimated to be Rs. 11.5 lakbs. As aga1n8ttb1s, 
a saving of Rs. 4 lakbs is anticipated. Tbus the net non-recurring expenditure 
is likely to be of Rs. 7. 6 lakbs. 
8. The Blll does not involve any other expenditure of a recurring or 
non-recurring nature. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (c) of clause 7 seeks to insert a new sub-section (2B) in seotion 35 of 
the Income-tax Act. The new eub-secUon provides for a weighted deduction in respeot 
of expenditure on certain programmes of scientiflc research. Such a programme 
must be one approved by the prescribed authority having regard to the social, 
economio and industrial needs of India. In order to be el1g1ble for the deduction, 
the assessee has also to furnish a certiU~ate of completion of the programme from the 
same authority. 
Clause 16 seeks to insert a new section 80-1 in the Income-tax Act relaUng to 
deduction in respect of profits and gains from industrial undertakings, etc., estabUshed 
after a certain date. Sub-section (7) of this new section provides that in the case of 
asses sees , other than oompanies or co-operative societies, the deduction under the 
8e9tion will DOt be available tc such assessees unless the accounts of suoh assessees are 
audited by a ohartered accountant or by any other qual1f1ed accountant and the assessee 
furni8hes along with his return of income the report of such au:lit in the form to be 
prescribed by rules, algned and verified by such accountant. 
Clause 50 read with the Fifth Schedule thereto, seeks to amend the 
Cus10ms Act, 1962, the Central Excises and Balt Act, 1944 and the Gold (Control) 
Act, 1968 to make detailed provisions regarding appeals 10 the Appellate Collectors of 
Customs or Central ExCise, DOW being redesignated as the Collector of Customs (Appeals) 
or Collector of Central Excise (Appeals), as the case may be, and to provide for an 
Appellate Tribunal under these Acts. The proposed Appellate Tribunal would hear first 
appeals againBt the orders of the Collectors of Customs or of Central Excise and second 
appeals against the orders in appeal passed by the Collectors of Customs (Appeals) 
or Central Excise (Appeals). As a result of these amendments, the ambit of the power 
to make rUles under section 156 of the Customs Act, section 37 of the Central Excises 
and Salt Act, 1944 and section 114 of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 will become enlarged 
to cover, inter alia. the form and manner in which appeals may be llIlde to the Collector 
of Customs (Appeals) or the Collector of Central Excise (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal, 
the form of applications to be made to the Appellate Tribunal for requiring a statement 
of case to be referred to the High Court, the manner of verification of such appeals and 
applications and other matters relating to such appeals. It is also proposed to include a 
provision in all these Acts for appearance by authorised representatives before tlle 
various authorities under these Acts including the Appellate Tribunal. '!'be clauses 
OCIIlC8rned empower the Central Governmont to specify by rules qual1ftcations for such 
autborised representatives. Provision bas also been included to specify an authority by 
rules which will inquire into an allegations of misconduct In connection with any proceedings 
under the Acts concerned against an authorised representative other than a legal practitioner 
8Dd disqualify him from appearing as ali authorised representative. This 1s', however, 
lubject to a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the affected person and a right of 
appeal to the Central Board of Excise and Customs or the Administrator,under the Gold 
(Control) Act,against the orders of the prescribed authority. . 
Sub-clause (3) of clause 50 empowers tlle Central Government to remove by general 
or special order any difficulty whic.h may arise in giving effect to the prOVisions of any 
Act referred to therein as amended by the amendments thereto directed in the Fifth 
Schedule. As all the problems which may arise, partlcularly in relation to the transition 
to the new provlaioll8 as to &ppeal, cannot be envisaged, this provision has been included 
by way of abundant caution. It is also made clear in the sub-clause that suoh a removal 
of difficulties order In relation to any Act sbould not be inconsistent with the provisions 
of the Act. 

133 
The delegation of legislative power under the aforementioned provisions relates to 
matters of procedure or administrative detail or to matters in respect of which it 1s not 
possible to visualise at this stage. Hence the delegation of legislative power is of 
a normal character. 

LOK &ABBA 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government 
for the flnanclal year 1986-81. 
(Shri R. VeMat •• _, 
Minister of FillallCe.) 