80f 1922. 
<t of 1981. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
'2 0 A fJ G l~ 81 
.~ 
Bill No. 99 of 1981 
--... ~--. c 
THE DELHI UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Delhi University Act, 1922. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the 
Republic of India as 1011ows:-
1. (1) Thi'3 Act may be called the Delhi University (Amendment) 
Act, 1981. 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 9th day of June, 
10 
1981. 
2. In section 5 of the Delhi University Act, 1922 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act), after SUb-section (1), the following sub-section 
shall be itlserted, namely:-
"(IA) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-secti'on (1), 
the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it i's necessary 
or expedient '30 to do in the public interest, direct, by order in writing, 
the University to admit to its privileges any i'nstitution situated out-
side India and the University shall be bound to comply with such 
di'rection.". 
3. (1) The Delhi University (Amendment) Ordinance, 1981, is hereby 
repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance she.l1 be deemed 
20 to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this 
, Act. 
Shott 
title 
and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 5. 
Repeal 
and 
saving. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
From time to time Government of India ha..; been receiving requests 
from friendly foreign countries having no university of their own or the 
Welfare Associations of Indians domiciled in foreign countries for affi-
liation of their institut~ons of higher education to a univernity in India. 
It has, however, not been possible for the Government to accede to such 
requests because none of the univernities in India has extra-territorial 
jurisdiction. Recently a request was recerv~d frorri a friendly foreign 
country for affiliation of their proposed degree college to the University 
of Delhi for Three-Year degree course. In order to make it p()3sible for 
the Government to acceae to such requests and to enable the University 
Of Delhi to affiliate colleges outside India, it was decided to amend,section 
5 of the Delhi University Act to empower the Central Government, if 
it is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the public 
intereo3t, to issue a directive in writing to the University of Delhi to admit 
'to its privileges any institution situated outside India. 
2. In view of the fact that the foreign country which approached the 
Government for affiliation of its college to Delhi University desired that 
the College should start functioning from the academi'c ses3ion beginning 
in July,. 1981, the President promulgated an Ordinance namely, the 
Delhi University (Amendment) Ordinance, 1981, on 9th June, 1981 
amending the. Delhi Uni'versity Act for the purpose of granting affiliation 
to colleges situated outside India. The present Bill t3eeks to replace tl\e 
said Ordinance. 
NEW DELm; 
The 11th. AUgust, 1981. SHEILA KAUL. 
~ , . 

LOK SABHl 
' . .J<I. I 
A 
Bll.,L 
further to amend the Delhi UniversIty Act, 1922. 
(Smt. Sheila KG1&! .. Mini:S.ter of State in the Ministries of Education and 
Social We~fare.) 