Bill No. 99 of 1,63 
THE PETROLEUM PIPELINES 
(ACQUISITION OF RIGHT OF USER 
IN LAND) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCIID IN Lox SABRA 
ON 12111 NOVBMBBR, 1962) 

BIll No. 99 01 1_ 
TIlE PETROLEUM PIPELINES (AC~t1f.SITION 
OF RIGHT OF, USER IN LAND) B , 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOR SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to ,proui4e 1M tM acquiBitton of right of u.B'I' in ltmd lor laying 
petroleum pipelines and fM matters coa.neated therewith. 
BII it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-':' 
1. (1) TIlis Act may be called the' Petroleum Pipelines (Acquisl- Short title, utent and tion of Right of User in Land) Act, 1962. applic:atioD. 
S (2) It ,extends to the whole of India except the ~tate of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
(3) It applies in the first instance to the whole of the States of 
West Bengal, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat and the Union 
territory ot Delhi; and the Central Government may, by notification 
10 in the Official Gazette, declare that this Act shall also apply to such 
other State or Union territory and with e1fect from such date as may 
be specified in that notification and thereupon the provisions of this 
Act shall apply to that State or Union territory accordingly. 
15 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "competent authority" means any person or authority 
authorised by the Central Government, by notiftcation in the 
Official Gazette, to perform the functions of the competent 
authority under this Act; 
Delaitlon .. 

PubUcadoD 
of notific::a-
ti~ for ac-
quiaitiOD. 
Power to 
anter. lUr-
vey, etc. 
2 
(b) "corporation" means any body corporate established 
under any Central, Provincial ot: State Act, and includes-
(i) a company formed and registered under the Com- 1 of r9s6. 
panies Act, 1956; and 
(ii) a company formed and registered under any law 5 
relating to companies formerly in force in any part of India: 
(c) "petroleum" has the same meaning as in the Petroleum f 
Act, 1934, and includes natural Bas and reftnery gas; 10 0 1934-
(d) ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 10 
3. (1) Whenever it appears to the Central Government that It is 
necessary in the public interest that for the transport of petroleum 
from one locality to another locality pipelines may be laid by that 
Government or by any State Government or a corporation and that 
for the purpose of laying such pipelines it is necessary to acquire the IS 
right of user in any land under which such pipelines may be laid, it 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare its intention to 
. acquire the right of user therein. 
(2) Every notification under sub-section (1) shall give a brief 
description of the land. 20 
(3) The competent authority shan cause the substance of the 
notification to be published at such places and in such manner as may 
be prescribed . 
.t. On the issue of a notification under sub-section (1) of section 3, 
it shall be lawful for any person authorised by the Central Govern- 25 
ment or by the State Government or the corporation which proposes 
to lay pipelines for transporting petroleum, and his servants and 
workmen-
(a) to enter upon and survey and take levels of any land 
specified in the notification; 30 
(b) to dig or bore into the sub-soil; 
(c) to set out th~ intended line of work; 
(d) to mark such levels, boundaries and line by placing 
marks and cutting trenches; 
(e) where otherwise survey cannot be completed and levels 35 
taken and the boundaries and line' marked, to cut down and 
clear away any part of any standing crop. fence or jungle; and 
(f) to do all other acts necessary to ascertain whether pipe-
tines can be laid under the land: 

, 
Provided that while exercising any power under this section, such 
person. or any servant Or workman of such person shall cause as little 
damage or injury as possible to such land. 
5. (1) Any person interested in the land may, within twenty-one Hc:arl':'l o~ 
5 day. from the date of the notification under sub-section (1) of sec- Ob)eCUODlo 
tion 3, object to the laying of the pipelines under the land. 
(2) Every objection under sub-section (1) shall be made to the 
competent authority in writing and shall set out the grounds thereof 
and the competent authority shall give the objector an opportunity 
10 of being heard either in person or by a legal practitioner and may, 
after hearing all such objections and after making such further 
inquiry, if any, as that authority thinks necessary, by order either 
allow or disallow the objections. 
(3) Any order made by the competent authority under sub-sec-
I 5 ~on (2) shall be final. 
e. (1) Where no objections under sub-section (1) of section 50celaratiOD 
have been made to the competent authority within the period speci- ~~:=::~t 
fied therein or where the competent authority has disallowed the of U8er. 
objections under sub-section (2) of that section, that authority shall, 
20 as soon as may be, submit a report accordingly to the Central Gov-
ernment and upon receipt of such report the Central Government 
shall declare, by notification in the Official Gazette, that the right of 
user in the land for laying the pipelines should be acquired. 
(2) On the publication of the declaration under sub-section (1), 
25 the right of user in the land shall vest absolutely in the Central 
Government free from all encumbrances. 
(3) Where in respect of any land, a notification has been issued 
under sub-section (1) of section 3 but no declaration under this 
section has been published within a period of one year from the date 
30 of that notification, that notification shall cease to have eftect on the 
expiration of that period. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the 
Central Government may, on such terms and conditions as it may 
think fit to impose, direct by order in writing, that the right of user 
in the land for laying the pipelines shall, instead of vesting in the 
35 Central Government vest, either on the date of publication of the 
declaration or, on such other date as may be specified in the direc-
tion, in the State Government or the corporation proposing to lay 
the pipelines and thereupon the right of such user in the land shall, 
40 subject to the terms and conditions so imposed, vest in that State 
Government or corporation, as the case may be, free from aU 
encumbrances. 

4 
~':ta:- 7.(1) Wbfll'e the right of user 111 any land has ~~ in 'm. 
State Gov- Central Govermnent or in any State Government or corporation 
emment or under section 6-corporatioQ 
~~ pipe- (i) it shall be lawful for any person authoriaed by 'the 
Central Government or such State Government or corporation, , 
as the oase may be, an~ his servants and workmen to enter 
Upon the land and lay pipelines or to do any other act neceasary 
for the laying of pipelines: 
Provided that no pipeline shan be laid under-
(a) any land which, immediately before the date of 10 
the notification under sub-section (1) of section 3, .u 
used for residential purposes; 
(b) any land on which there stands any pennaaent 
structure which was in existence immediately before the 
laid datej 1 S 
(c) any land which is appurtenant to a dwelling 
house; or 
(d) any land at a depth which is less tban- one'metre 
from the surface; and 
(ii) such land shall be used only for laying the pipelines 20 
and fOO' maintaining, examining, repairing,altering or removing 
any such pipelines or for doing any other act necessary for 
any of the aforesaid purposes or for the utilisation of such 
pipelines. 'l1 ; j 
(2) If any dispute arises with regard to any matter referred to 2.c; 
in paragraph (b) or paragraph (c) of the proviso to clause (i) of -
sub-section (1), the dispute shall be referred to the competent 
authority whose decision thereon shall be final. 
Power to 8. For maintaining, exwnining, repairing, altering or removmg 
c:nte! land any pipeline, or for doing any other act necessary for the utUisation 30 
Tor lRapec- f h "lin f th rnakin f "ct" lion, etc. 0 t e pipe es or or ego any mspe Ion or measure-
ment for any of the aforesaid purposes, any person authorised in 
this behalf by the Central Gov~ent, the State Government or 
the col'pomtion, as the case may be, may, after giving reasonable 
notice to the occupier of the land under which the pipeUne has been 3~ 
laid, enter therein with sUch workmen and assistants as may be' 
necessary: 
Provided that, where such person -15 satisfied that an emergency 
exists, De such notice shan be necessary: 

.~ 
Itrovideci further that, while exercising· any powers under thla 
'section; suth penon or any workman or assistant of such person, 
8hall cause as little damage or injury as possible to such -land. 
9. (1) The owner or occUpier of the land with respect to which Rcstri~tiona 
. 1 . h b d d b ct' (1) f . 6 rcgardtng 5 a dec aration as een rna e un er su -se lon. 0 ~on ,the usc of 
shall be entitled to use the land for the purpose for which such land. 
'land was put to use immediately before the date of the notification 
under sub-section '(1) of section 3: 
Provided that, such owner or occupier shall not after the decla-
10 ration under sub-section (1) of section 6-
(i) construct any building or any other structure; 
(ii) construct or excavate any tank, well, . reaervoir or 
clam; or 
(iii) plant any tree, 
IS .on that land. 
(2) The owner or occupier of the land under which any pipeline 
has been laid shall not do any act or permit any act to be done 
which will or is likely to cause any damage in any manner whatso-
ever to the pipeline. 
20 '10. (1) Where in the exercise of the powers conferred .by see· Compensa-
tion 4, section 7 or section 8 by any person, any damage, lOIS or lion • 
. injury is sustaiDed by any person interested in the land under 
which the pipeline is proposed to be, or is beiR" or bas been laid, 
the 'Ceatral . Govenuneat, the State Govenmum.t or the corporation, 
25 as the case may be, shall be liable to pay COIIlp8JlSlltioa to such 
person for such damage, loss or injury, the amount of which shall 
be' determined by the competent authority in the first instance . 
. -(2) If thee.mount of compensation determined by the com-
petent authority under 'sub-section (1) is not acceptable to either 
30 of the parties, the amount of compensation shall, on application 
by either of the parties to the District Judge within the limits of 
whose jurisdiction the land or any part thereof is situated, be 
determlnedby that District Judge. 
• (3) The competent authority or the District Judge while deter-
3' mining the compensation under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), 
as . the case may be, shall have due regard to the damage or loss 
"SUstained by any person interested in the land by reason of-
, (i) the removal of trees or standing crops, if any, on the 
land while exerCising the powers under. section 4,section 7 or 
40 section 8i 

6 
(ii) the temporary severance of the land under which the 
pipeline has been laid from other lands belonging to, or in the 
occupation of, such person; or 
(iii) any injury to any other property, whether mow-ble 
or immovable, or the earnings of such persons caused in any 5 
other manner: 
Provided that in determining the compensation no account ahall 
be taken of any structure or other improvement made in the land 
after the date of the notification under sub-section (l) of section 3. 
(4) Where the Ji8ht of user of any land has vested in the Cen- 10 
tral Government, the State Government or the corporation, the 
Central Government, the State Government or the corporation, .. I 
the ease may be, shall, in addition to the compensation, if any, pay-
able under sub-section (1), be liable to pay to the owner and to 'II 
any other person whose right of enjoyment in that land bas been IS 
aftected in any lD8DDer whatsoever by reason of such vestm" com-
pensation calculated at ten per cent. of the market value of that 
land on the date of the notification under sub-section (1) of lee-
dOD 3. I I 
(5) The market value of the land on the said date shall be 20 
determined by the competent authority and if the value so deter-
mined by that authority is not acceptable to either of the parties, 
it shall, on application by either of. the parties to the District Judge 
referred to in sub-section (2), be determined by that District 
Judge. 25 
(6) The decision of the District Judge under sub-section (2) or 
sub-section (5) shall be final. IJ 
Depolit and 11. (1) The amount of compensation determined under section 
payment of 10 shall be deposited by the Central Government. the State Gov-
=~CDIa- ernment or the corporation, as the case may be, with the competent 30 
authority within such time arid in such manner as may be pres-
cribed. 
(2) If the amount of compensation is not deposited within the 
time prescribed under sub-section (1), the Central Government. 
the State Government or the corporation, as the ease may be, shall 35 
be liable to pay intere&t thereon at the rate of six per cent. per 
annum from the date on which the compensation had to be dep::>-
sited till the date of the actual deposit. 
(3) Aa soon as may.be after the compensation has been depo-
sited under sub-section (1) the competent authority shall, on be- 40 
half of the Central Government, the State Government or the cor-
poration, as the case may be, pay the compensation to the perIOllI 
ctlUeci thcwto. 

7 
(4) Where several persons claim to be interested in the amount 
of compenllltion deposited under sub-section (I), the competent 
authority shall detennine the persons who in its opinion are entitl-
ed to receive the compensation and the amount payable to .each of 
S them. 
(5) If any dispute arises as to the apportionment of the com-
pensation or any part thereof or as to the persons to whom the 
same or any part thereof is payable, the competent authoritv sbaIl 
refer the dispute to the decision of the District Judge within the 
10 limits of whose jurisdiction the land or any part thereof is situated 
and the decision of the District Judge thereon shall be final. 
Competent lZ. The competent authority shall have, for the purposes of this authority to 
Act. all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the have cen:l rl 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following mattel'l, =ue:Urta. 
IS namely:- • 
(4) summoning and anforcing the attendance of any per-
son and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any docu-
ment; 
20 (c) reception of evidence on. afftdavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or 
ofBce; 
(e) fssuing commission for examination of witnesses. 
13. (I) No suit, prosecution or other le~a1 proceedin~ shan lie ~=: 
2' allBinst any person for anything which is in good faith done or taken 1:1 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or notfftea- sood Calth. 
tion made or Ulsued thereunder. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall Ue against the 
Central Government, the competent authority or anv State Gtlvem-
30 ment, or corporation for any damage, loss or injury caused or likelv to 
be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done In pursuance of this Act or any rule or notification made or 
Issued thereunder. I 
14. Save as otherwise expressly proV'ided in this Act, no civil Bar of jum-
3S eourt shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the ~~:u~. 
competent authority is empowered by or under this Act to determine 
and no injunction shall he p,ranted by any court or other authority 
in reapeet of any. action taken or proposed to be taken in pursuance 
of any power conferred by or under this Act. 

Cenain of!'· 
ence to be 
co,Dizabic. 
8 
IS; (1) Whoever wilfully obstructs any person in doing any \)£ 
the· acts authorised by section 4 or section 7 or section 8 or wiUully 
6.lls up, destroys, damages or displaces any trench or mark made 
under section 4 or ·wil!ully does any act prohibited under section 9, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to· g. 1. 
months or with fine or with both. 
(2) Whoever wilfully removes, displaces, damages or destroy. 
any' pipeline laid under section 7, shall be puniahable with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year, but· 
which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine. 10 
16. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898, &ll offence falling under sll'b-seetion (2) of seetion 
15 shall be deemed to be cognizable within the meaning of that 
Code~ 
• 
Power to 17. (1) The Central Gvvernment may, by notification in the IS 
make rules. Ofticial Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. . 
(I) In' particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the foUow-
ing matters, namely:- ao 
(a) the places at which. and th.e manner in which the 
substance of the notification may be published under sub-leCtion 
(3) of sectiQn 3; 
I(b) the time within which and the manner in which the 
amount of compensation may ~ deposited under sulHectton (1) 25 
of section 11. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon. as may 
be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the 30 
expiry of the' session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making aRY modiftcation in the rule.:; 
or both Houses agree that the rule should nGt be made, the rule 1 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or De.of no' 
effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification 3S 
or annulment shall be with,out prejudice to the validity of anythin~ ~ 
previously done under that rule. ,. 
~ 
Application 18. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in 
of other lawa th hein ·f_ DOC bIm.1. derogation of any other law for e time g in force re~tfns to 
acquisition of land. 40 
,of I"" 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
As a result of the implementation of plans for the develop-
ment of ~troleum resources in the country, it b anticipated that in 
the next few years there will be a subs~antial increase in the 
production of crude oil, natural gas and petroleum products by the 
public sector oilfields ~nd refineries in India. It has therefore 
become necessary to lay petroleum pipelines in the country to serve 
as an efficient and cheap means of transportation and distribution oi 
petroleum and petroleum products. 
2. Although land can be acquired outright for laying such 
pipelines under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, the procedure for 
such acquisition is long-drawn and costly. Since the petrole'.l:~' 
pipelines will be laid under-ground, outright acquisition of land is 
not necessary. Therefore, in the case of these pipelines it is con-
sidered sufficient to acquire the mere right of user in the land for 
laying and maintaining the pipelines. The Bill seeks to achieve the 
above purpose. 
3. The main features of the Bill are-
(i) No right of user of land can be acquLed for the purpose 
of laying pipelines unless the Central Gc;v2rnment declares its 
intention, by notification in the Official Gazette, and unless 
objecti!>ns, if any, filed within twenty-one days of that notifica-
tion are disposed of by the competent authority. 
(ii) When final declaration about acquisition IS made the 
right to use land for the purpose of laying pipelines will vest in 
the Central Government, State Government or the corporation, as 
the case may be, but, notwithstanding such acquisition, th'" 
owner or occupier of the land shall be entitled to use the land 
for the purpose for which such land was put to use immediately 
before the declaration by the Central Government. But afte, the 
date of acqUisition he shall not construct any building or any 
other structure or construct or excavate any tank, well. 
reservoir or dam or plant any tree, on that land. 
(iii) Compensation for the damage, loss or injury sustained 
by any person interested in the land shall be payable to such 
person, Besides this, compensation calculated at ten per cent. 
9 

10 
of the market value of the land on the date of the preliminary 
notification is also payable to the owner and to any other 
person whose right of enjoyment in the land has been affected 
by -:reason of the acquisition. The compensation in both cases 
is to be determined' by the competent authority in the ftrst 
instance and an appeal lies from its decision to the District 
Judge. 
NEW DEt.m; KESHA VA DEVA MALA VIYA. 
The 6th November, 1981 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill provides for the acquisition of right of user in land fOl 
laying petroleum pipelines and for the payment of compensation 
to the persons interested in the land. All acquisitions under the Bill 
are to 'be made by the Central Gov~rnmen.t but in cases where any 
State Government or corporation is to lay the pipelines the Centml 
Government has 'power to direct that the right of -user so acquire-.l 
shall vest in that State Government or corporation. Compensation 
~ such cases will have to be paid by the State Government or 
corporation. 
The Bill lays down the principles for determination of compen-
sation which is to be paid as and when such pipelines are laid by 
the Central or State Governments or corporation, as the case may 
be. It is, tlierefore, not possible to give an estimate of the expendi-
ture which the Central Government may incur on tbis account 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The matters 
in respect of which rules may be made are specified in sub-clauSE' 
(2) and they relate to the pUblication of the substance of the notifi-
cation under ~b-clause (3) of clause 3 and the deposit of compensa-
tion'uncl~r·guf#cHrUSe '(1) of clause 11. These are matters of routine 
nature and the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
charaeter. 
• 
12 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BnL 
to provide for the acquisition of right of user in land for laying 
petroleum pipelines and for matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of cla~) of article 117 of the 
Constitution of India, recomm to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri KeihlJf}a Deoa MallJf}iya, 
Minuter of Mines and Fuel.) 