Bill No. 99 of 195,,8 @ 
THE SUPREME qOURT JUDGES (CONDI-
TIONS OF SERVICE) BILL, 1958 
(As IN'l'RODUCEO IN LOK SABHA) 

THE SUPREME COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF 
SERVICE) BILL, 1958 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
LEAVE 
3. Kinds of leave admissible to a Judge. 
4. Leave account showing the amownt of leave due. 
5. Aggregate amount of leave which may be granted. 
6. Goont of leave not due. 
7. Special disability leave. 
8. Extraordinary leave. 
9. Leave allowances. 
10. Combining leave with vacation. 
11. Consequences of overstaying leave or vacation. 
12. Authority competent to grant leave. 
CHAPTER III 
PENSIONS 
13. Pension p'.lyable to Judges. 
14. Special provisions for pension in respect of Judges who are 
members of Service. 
15. Power of President to add to the service foe pension. 
16. Extraordinary pension. 
17. Pension payable to a Judge who was in receipt of pension at 
the time of appointment as such. 

jj 
CLAUSES 
18. Con'~'ersion of sterling pension into rupees. 
19. Commutation of pension. 
20. Provident fund. 
21. Authority competent to grant pension. 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
22. Travelling allowance to a Judge. 
23. FaciliHes for rent-free houses and other conditions of service. 
24. Power to make rules. 
25. Savings. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

DiU No. 99 of 1958 
THE SUPREME COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF 
SERVICE) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to regulate certain conditions of service of the Judges of the Supreme 
Court. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republie 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. This Act may be called the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions Shert 
of Service) Act, 1958. title. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "acting Chief Justice" means a Judge appointed under 
article 126 of the Constitution to perform the duties of the Chief 
Definitions. 
10 Justice of India; 
15 
20 
(b) "actual service" includes-
(i) time spent by a Ju:ige un duty as a Judge, or in the 
performance of such other functions as he may, at the 
request of the President, undertake to discharge; and 
(ii) vacations; 
(c) "Chief Justice" means the Chief Justice of India, but 
does not include an acting Chief Justice; 
(d) "High Court" means the High Court for a State; 
(e) "Judge" means a Judge of the Supreme Court and in-
dudes the Chief Justice and an acting Chief Justice; 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act: 

2 
(g) "service 33 a Judge in India" means service rendered 
either in the Federal Court or in the Supreme CC'urt or in any 
such Court and in one or more of the High Courts, and "Judge 
in India" IQnd "service for pension as a Judge in India" shall be 
construed accordingly: 5 
(h) "service for pension" includes-
(i) actual service; 
(ii) time spent by a Judge of a High Court in attending 
the sittings of the Supreme Court as an ad hoc Judge under 
article 127 of the Constitution, if he is subsequently appoint- I') 
ed as a Judge; 
(iii) forty-five days or the amount actually baken, 
whichever is less, of each period of leave on full allowances; 
(i) "vacation" means such period or periods during a year 
as may be fixed as vacation by or under the rules of the 15 
Supreme Court made with the prior approval of the President. 
CHAPTER II 
LEAVE 
~~~~s sf 3. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, leave granted to C\ 
admisaible to Judge may be at his option either- 2:> 
a Judge. 
Leave 
aecount 
showina 
amount of 
leave due. 
(a) leave on ful.l allowances; or 
(b) leave on oolf allowances; or 
(c) leave partly on full allowances and partly on half 
allowances. 
(2) For the purposes of this Chapter, any period of leave on full 25 
allowances shall be reckoned as double that period of leave on half 
allowances. 
4. (l) A leave account shall be kept for each Judge showing 
therein the amount of leave due to him in terms of leave on haIt 
allowances. 
(2) In the leave IQccount of a Judge-
(a) there shall be credited to him-
(i) one-fourth of the. time spent by him on actual 
service; and 
(ii) where the Judge, by reason of his h~ving bem 3.5 
detained for the performance of duties not connected .with 
the Supreme Court, cannot enjoy any vacation which he 
would otherwise have been entitled to enjoy had he not 

3 
Deen so detained, as compensation for the vacation not 
enjoyed, a period equal to double the period by which the 
vacation enjoyed by him in any year falls short of one month; 
and 
(b) there shall be debited to him all leave with allowances 
taken by him. 
(3) This section shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st 
day of May, 1958. 
5. (1) The aggregate amount of leave which may be granted to Aggregate . 
10 Ii Judge during the whole period of his service as such shall not ~~~~n~hi~l~ 
exceed in terms of leave on half allowances three years together may bf" 
with th~ aggregate of the periods, if any, credited to his leave granted. 
account under sub-section (2) (a) (ii) of section 4 as compensation 
for vacation not enjoyed. 
i5 (2) The aggregate amount of lrove on full allowances which may 
be granted to a Judge during the whole period of his service as such 
shall not exceed one-twenty-fourth of the period spent by him on 
actual service together with one-half of the aggregate periods, if any, 
credited to his leave account under sub-section (2) (a) <ii) of section 
lO 4 as compensation for vacation not enjoyed. 
(3) The maximum p!!riod of leave which may be granted at one 
time shall be, in the case of leave on full allowances, five months 
and in the case of leave with allowances of any kind, sixteen.month!!. 
6. Subject to the maximum limit specified. in sub-section (1) of Grant of 
5 I hI . leave not 25 section , eave on a f allowances may be granted to a Judge In due. 
excess of the amount at his credit-
(i) on medical certificate; or 
(ii) otherwise than on medical ~~ertjficate, for a period not 
exceeding six mont.hs, or for two or more periods not exceeding 
3° in the aggregate six months, during the whole period of his 
service as a Judge: 
Provided that no such leave shall be granted if the Judge lsnot 
expected to return to duty at the end of such leave and earn the leave 
granted. . 
3S 'J. Special disability leave may be gr.anted. to a Judge under S~~ial dis-
IUch circumstances, on such allowances and, lor such periods as may abIlity leave 
Ate prescribed. I 

Extra-
ordinary 
leave. 
l.eave 
allowances. 
4 
8. Extraordinary leave may be granted to a Judge for a period not 
exceeding six months, or for tiwo or more periods not exceeding in 
the aggregate six months, during the whole period of his service as 
a Judge in excess of any leave permissible under the foregoing provi-
sions of this Chapter. but no salary or allowances shall be payable in 5 
respect of such leave. 
9. (1) The monthly rate of leave allowances payable to a Judge 
while on leave on full allowances uall be for the first forty-fin days 
of such leave a rate equal to the monthly rate of the salary and 
thereafter two thousand two hundred and twenty rupees. 10 
(2) The monthly rate of leave allowances 
while on leave on half allowances shaU be 
hundred and ten rupees. 
payable to a Judge 
one thousand one 
lCombinin'h 10. A Judge may be permitted to combine vacation on full salary eave Wit. • 15 vacation. WIth leave, If-
(a) where the vacation consists of one continuous period, 
the leave is taken either at the commencement ar at the end 
of the vaca'tion but not at both; 
(b) where the vacation is divided into two periods, the 
leave is taken for the interval, or part of the interval, between 20 
the two periods of that vacation, or for the interval, or part of 
the interval, between the second period of th.at vacation and 
the commencement of the next ensuing vacation: 
Provided that no such permission to combine vacation with 
leave shall be granted, if it becomes necessary to appoint an acting 25 
Chief Justice during the period of vacation or if the Judge is not 
expected to return to duty at the end of such leave. 
Consequen- 11. (1) If a Judge overstays his leave or any vacation, whether 
~~~ r:::; combined with leave or not, he shall receive no salary in respect of 
or vacation. thE. period of his absence in excess of the leave granted to him or 30 
beyond the end of the vacation, as the case may be: 
Provided that, if such absence is due to circumstances beyond 
his control, the period thereof may be treated as leave and may be 
debited to his leave account. 
(2) Nothing in this Act shall' be construed as requiring a Judge 35 
to rejoin on the expiration of the period of leave when that period 
expires immediately before the commencement of a vacation, nOl' 
as authorising any acting Chief Justice to cOl'ltinue to hold the 
&cting appointment during the vacation. 

5 
12. The authority competent to grant or refuse leave ht a Judge Authority comptten t 
or to revoke or curtai.l the leave already granted to a Judge shall to grant 
5 
be the President who shall exercise the power after consultation leave. 
with the Chief Justice. 
CHAPTER III 
PENSIONS 
13. Subject to the provisions of this Act, a pension shall be PII1'-
ahle in accordance with the provisions of Part I of the Schedule to a 
Judge of the Supreme Court on his retirement if, but onl1 if,-
Pensioft 
payable to 
Judi es• 
10 (a) he has completed not less than seven years of service 
for pension as a Judge in India; or 
(b) he has attained the age of sixty-five years: or 
(c) his retirement is medically certified to be necessitated 
by ill-health. 
15 E:rplan(Jtion.--In this section, "Judge" means a Judge who is not 
a member of the Indian Civil Service or has not held any other 
pensionable civil post under the Union or a State and includes a 
person who was in service as a Judge on the 20th May, 1954, and also 
includes a Judge who being a member of the Indian Civil Service or 
2':> having held any other pensionable civil post under the Union or a 
State has elected to receive the pension payable under Part I of tt. 
Schedule. 
25 
14. Every Judre- Special pro-
VIsions for 
(a) who is a member of the Indian Civil Service shall, OD ~::8;~ ~~ 
his retirement, be paid a pension in accordaMe with the provi- Ju:fges who 
sions of Part II of the Schedule' are m~bell • of ServlCe. 
(b) who is not n member of the Indian Civil Service but 
has held any other pensionable civil post under the Union or a 
State, shall, on his retirement, be paid a pension in accordance 
with the provisions of Part III of the Schedule: 
Provided that every such Judge shall elect to receive the 
pension payable to him either under Part I of the Schedule or, as the 
case may be, Part II or Part III of the Schedule, and the pension pay-
able to him shall be calculated accordingly. 

6 
PPow~r of 15. The President may, for special reasoru;, direct that any resident to . 
add to the period not exceedmg three months shall be added to the service for 
Bervice for pension of a Judge, and any such period so added shall count for pension. 
pension purposes-
(a) in the case of a Judge who has served in thE> Supreme 
Court as Chief Justice, as service as Chief Justice; and 5 
(b) in the case of any other Judge, as 'lervice as any other 
Judge. 
EXlra-
ortlinary 
pen,ion. 
16. Extraordinary pensions and gratuities may be Iranted to • 
Judge untler such circumstances and on such scales as may be pres- 10 
cribed. 
Pb1sion pay- 17. If at the time of his appointment to the Supreme Court, a 
jUdeg/~ho a Judge is in receipt of a pensiCim in respect of Rny previous service 
was. ifn either as a Judge of a High Court or in any other pensionable civil receIpt 0 
pen,ion at post under the Union or a State, the pension payable to him under 15 
the t!mtc of this Act shall be an additional pension for service in thf' Supreme appom men! 
115 such. Court equal to the difference between his original pension and the 
pension to which he would have been entitled under this Act, if his 
service in the Supreme Court had been rendered in contmuation of 
the previous service for which his original pension was granted. 
Conversion 18. Pensions expressed in sterling only shall, if paid in India, be 
0pefns' stcr.lint g converted into rupees at such rate of exchange as the Central Gov-Ion In 0 
rupees. ernment may. from time to time, specify in this behalf. 
Commuta- 19. The Civil Pensions (Commutation) Rules for the time being 
20 
tlon of pen- in force shall, with necessary modifications, apply to Judges. 25 sion. 
Provident 
fund. 
20. Every Judge shall be entitled to subscribe to the General 
Provident Fund (Central Services): 
Provided that a Judge who is a member of the Indian Civil 
Service or has held any other pensionable civil post under the 
Un~on or a State shall continue to subscribe to the provident fund 30 
to which he was subscribing before his appointment as a Judge: 
Provided further that a Judge who was appointed before the 
commencement of this Act may continue to subscribe to the provi-
dent fund to which he was subscribing immediately before such 
oommencement. 35 
Authurity 21. Save as may be otherwise expressly provided in the rele-
competent vant rules relating to the grant of extraordinary pensions and 
to . grant gratuities, the authority competent to grant pension to a Judge pensIOn. • 
under the provisions of this Act shall be the President. 

1 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
22. A Judge shall receive such reasonable allowance to reimburse 1i'vellin, s him for expenses incurred in travelling on duty within the territory :oo:Tudae . 
• f India and shall be afforded such reasonable facilities in eonneetion 
with travelling as may, from time to time, be prescribed . 
• 23. (1) Every Judge shall be entitled without payment of rent Facilitiel for 
to the use of an official residence in accordance with sueh rules as f:~&eI f::s 
may, from time to time, be made in this behalf. ~tber condi-
to uon~ of 
(2) Every Judge and the members of his family shall be entitled lerv,,:'. 
to such facilities for medical 'treatment and for accommodation ia 
hospitals as may, from time to time, be prescribed. 
(3) The conditions of service of a Judge for which no express 
provision has been made in this Act shall be such as may be 
1,5 determined by rules made under this Act. 
(4) This section shall be deemed to have come into force on 
the 26th day of January, 1950, and any rule made under this section 
may be made so as to be retrospective to any date not earlier than the 
commencement of this section. 
24. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Power to 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. make rulel. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
25 (a) leave of absence of a Judge, including special disability 
leave; I 
(b) pension payable to a Judge, including extraordinary 
pensions and gratuities; 
(c) travelling allowances to a Judge; 
)0 (d) use of official residence by a Judge; 
(e) facilities for medical treatment and other conditions of 
service of a Judge; 
(f) any other matter which has ,to be, or may be, prescrib-
ed. 
3S (3) All rules made under this section shall, as soon as possible 
after they are made, be laid for not less than thirty days before 
each House of Parliament and shall be subject to such modifications 
as Parliament may make during the session in which they are so 
laid or the session immediately following. 

Savings 
a 
IS. Nothing contained in this Act shall have effect so as to give 
to a Judge who is serving as such at the commencement of this 
Act less favourable terms in respect of his privileges and allow-
ances or his rights in respect of leave of absence (including leave" 
a1l6wances) or pension than those to which he would have been '. 5 
emitled, if this Act had not been passed. 
THE SCHEDULJ: 
(See sections 13 and 14) 
PENSIONS OF JUDea 
PART I 
, 
1. The prOVISIons of this Part apply to a Judge who is not a 
member of the Indian Civil Service or has not held any other 
pensionable civil post under the Union or a State and also apply 
to a person who was in service as a Judge on the 20th May, 1954, and 
10 
to a Judge who, being a member of the Indian Civil Service or hav- IS 
ing held any other pensionable civil post under the Union or a 
State, has elected to receive the pension vayable under this Part. 
2. ,Subject to the provisigns of this Part, the pension payable to 
a Chief Justice to whom this Part applies and who has completed 
not less than seven years of service for pension as a Judge in India 20 
shall be an amount equal to the sum of the following amounts, 
that is to say,-
(a) an amount equal to the pension which would have 
been payable to him in accordance with the scale and provi-
sions in Part I of the First Schedule to the High Court Judges 
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1954, if his service as a Judge had 25 a8 of 19,6. 
been rendered as Ute Chief Justice of a High Court; 
(b) an additional amount of Rs. 470 per annum for each 
completed year of service as the Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court until he has become entitled to a pension of Rs. 20,000 per 30 
annum, and thereafter an additional amount of Rs. 1,200 for 
each completed year of such service: 
Provided that the aggregate amount of his pension shall in no 
ease exceed Rs. 26,000 per annum. 
3. The pension payable to any other Judge to whom this Part 35 
applies and who has Ci!ompleted not leIS than seven years of service 

9 
for pension as a Judge in India shall ee an amount equal to the 
pension which would have been payable to him in accordance with 
the scale and provisions in Part I of the First Schedule to the High 
Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954, if his service as a 
5 Judge had been rendered as the Chief Justice of a High Court. 
4. If a Judge of the Supreme Court who has served as an acting 
Chief Justice thereof is subsequently appointed Chief Justice, his 
service as acting Chief Justice shall, for the purposes of paragraph 
2 of this Part, be treated as service a. Chief Justice. 
lO 5. Where a Judge to whom this Part applies retires without 
being eligible for a pension under any other provision of this Part, 
then, notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provi-
sions, a pension of Rs. 7,500 per annum shall be payable to such a 
Judge: 
IS Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to a Jud~ 
who at the time of his appointment is in receipt of a pension (other 
than a disability or wound pension) in respect of any previous 
service under the Union or a State. 
PART II 
20 1. The provisions of this Part apply to a Judge who is a mem-
ber of the Indian Civil Service and who has not elected to receive 
the pension payable under Part I. 
2. The pension payable to such a Judge shall be-
(a) the pension to which he is entitled under the ordinary 
2S rules of the Indian Civil Service if he had not been appointed a 
Judge, his service as a Judge in India being treated as service 
therein, and 
(b) an additional pension of Rs. 1,400 per annum for each 
completed year of servic.e for pension in the Supreme Court : 
30 Provided that the aggregate amount of his pension shall in no 
case exceed Rs. 20,000 per annum. 
PART III 
1. The provisions of this Part apply to a Judge who has held any 
pensionable civil post under the Union or a State (but is not a mem-
35 ber of the Indian Civil Service) and who has not elected to receive 
the pension payable under Part I. 

10 
2. The pension payable to such a Judge shall be-
(a) the pension to which he is entitled under the ordinary 
rules of his service if he had not been appointed a Judge, his 
service as a Judge in India being treated as service therein for 
the purpose of calculating that pension; and S 
(b) a special additional pension of Rs. 500 per annum in 
respect of each completed year of service for pension as a Judge 
in India but in no case such additional pension together with 
the additional or special pension, if any, to which he is entitled 
under the ordinary rules of his service shall exceed Rs. 2,500 10 
per annum. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under clause (2) of article 125 of the Constitution, every Judge of 
the Supreme Court is entitled to "such privileges and allowances 
and to such rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as may 
from time to time be determined by or under law made by Parlia-
ment" but neither the privileges nor the allowances of a Judge nor 
his rights in respect of leave of absence or pension can be varied to 
his disadvantage after appointment. 
2. This Bill seeks to determine the rights of the Judges of the 
Supreme Court in respect of leave of absence, pension and other con-
ditions of service: 
3. At present, a Judge of the Supreme Court is entitled, during the 
whole period of his service in such Court, to leave on medical certifi-
cate on Rs. 1,110 per month, to leave otherwise than on medical certI-
ficate on Rs. 1,110 per month, and to extraordinary leave without 
allowances, in each case for a period of six months. It is now pro-
posed to allow them the same leave tenns as are admissible to High 
Court Judges with slight modifications. They will now earn leave 
on half allowances for a period equal to one-fourth of the time 
spent on actual service subject to a maximum of three years during 
the entire period of service, leave on full allowances being treated 
as double the period of leave on half allowances. The maximum 
amount of leave that may be granted at one time shall not exceed 
five months, in the case of leave on full allowances and sixteen 
months, in the case of leave on half allowances. The aggregate 
amount of leave on full allowances which may be granted to a Judge 
during the whole of period of service shall not exceed one-twenty-
fourth of the period spent by him on actual service. 
Leave not due may also be granted to a Judge up to a specified 
limit with or without a medical certificate provided the Judge is 
expected to return to duty and earn such leave. Extraordinary 
leave without allowances may be taken up to a period of six months 
during the entire period of service. 
During leave on full allowances, the Judge will be paid full 
salary for the first 45 days of such leave and Rs. 2,220 per month 
for the remaining portion of such leave. During leave on half 
allowances, the Judge will get Rs. 1,110 per month. 
JJ 

12 
4. No substantial change is proposed in the rates of pension 
hitherto admissible to the Judges of the Supreme Court. Rates of 
pension have, however, been expressed in Indian currency and not 
in sterling. P:rOvisiOll has also been made that a Judge would be 
entitled to a minimum pension of Rs. 7,500 per annum, if he is not 
entitled to any other pensjon. 
5. Special provision has also been made to govern certain other 
subsidiary conclitions of service, such as medical attemlance facili-
ties which are enjoyed by all Government servants and which up to 
the eommencement of the Constitution, were admissible to Judges 
Gf the Pederal Court Ul\der parl\8l'aph 23 of the Government of 
India (Federal Court) Order, 1937. These matters will now bp. 
provided for .by rules to be made under the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
G. B. PAN'!'. 
The 25,th A¥guat, lQJ8. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill provides for the rights of the Judges of the Supreme 
Court in respect of leave of absence, pension and other conditions 
of service. 
The leave terms admissible to Judges have been Improved and 
clause 9 of the Bill prescribes the leave allowaneea payable to them. 
This may involve some extra expendJture to (;()vemment but it is 
not possible to calculate the additional burdeft an thtI aeeount. The 
extra expenditure is not, however, expected to be appreciable. 
Clauses 13, 14, 16 and the Schedule specify the amounts payable 
to Judges as pension. The rates of pension will be more or less the 
same as are now admissible to them under the Government of India 
(Federal Court) Order, 1937. It is, however, proposed to introduce 
a new provision assuring a minimum pension of RI. 7,500 per 
annum to a Judge. This might lead to some extra ekpenditure but 
it is not possible to give any estimate of such expenditure. 
Clauses 22 and 23 (1) and 23 (2) provide for travelling allowances 
and facilities for rent-free houses and medical treatment. The 
Judges are already enjoying these facilities and no extra expendi-
ture is likely to be caused on these accounts. 
The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, might involve 
some additional expenditure. It is not, however, possible to give 
any precise estimate of such expenditure, but it is not likely to be 
appreciable. Under article 112 (3) (d) of the Constitution, any ex-
penditure involved on account of this Bill shall be charged on the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
.1 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to makt: 
rules in respect of matters specified therein. They relate, inter alia, 
to leave, pension and travelling allowances of Judges, use of official 
residence by them and facilities for medical treatment and other 
subsidiary conditions of their service. The matters in respect OI 
which rules may be made are of a routine and administrative 
character. Moreover, the rules to be made shall be laid both before 
the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha and shall be subject to the 
scrutiny of Parliament. The delegation of legislative power is thus 
of a normal character. 
. 14 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to regu]ate certain conditions of selvice cf the Judges of the 
Supreme Court. 
The President has, in pursuance ofcJauses (I) and (3) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Govind Ballabh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 