4 As INTRODUCED In Lok SABHA oN

, 28 MAY i990

| ®

THE JUTE MANUFACTURES DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990

A
BILL

to amend the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of:
dia as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Jute Manufactures Development: Short’

Council (Amendment) Act, 1990, title and:
com-

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government नरक ‘

9, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. eae

2. In section 2 of the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, Amends
, for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— mee of
ret
“()_ “year” means the year commencing on the Ist day of April! of 1983..
and ending on the 31st day of March next following.’_


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 2

The Jute Manufactures Development Council (JMDC) was estab-
lished with effect from May, 1984 under the Jute Manufactures Develop-
ment Council Act, 1983 (27 of 1983). At the time of enactment of the
Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, it was felt that the JMDC
should follow the Jute Year, which commences on 1st July and ends on
“30th June of the following year, so that the annual cycle of activities of
‘he JMDC run concurrently with the Jute Year. In the Jute Manufac-
tures Development Council Act, 1983, the relevant provision as stated tn
‘section 2(f) reads as follows:—

year” means the year Commencing on the Ist day of July and
ending on 30th day of June next following.’.

2. Although the funds for JMDC’s activities are provided from the
cess collected on jute manufactures, the budget provisions for the JMDC
‘are made by the Government on financial year basis. Grants are also
veleased to the JMDC on the same basis, This leads to certain accounting
problems in the JMDC as there is variance between the Government’s
financial year and the accounting system followed by the JMDC on the
basis of the Jute Year. The auditing of accounts of the Council leads to
avoidable confusion and delay due to two different years of accounting
followed by the Government and the Council.

3. In view of the above, if is proposed to amend the Jute Manufactures
Development Council Act, 1982 by changing the definition of the word
“year” as mentioned in clause (f) of section 2 of the Act to “financial
year”. -

New Detut; E SHARAD YADAV.
‘The 15th May, 1990.



ANNEXURE

Extract FROM THE JUTE, Manuracrures DeveLopment Councr.

Act, 1983
(27 oF 1983) ‘4
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Defini-
* * FS i * tions.

(0) “year” means the year commencing on the ist day of July
sand ending on the 30th day of June next following.

* ES + * *



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to amend the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983:

(Shri Sharad Yadav, Minister of Textiles.)