BlU No. "olIN' 
THE DISPLACED PERSONS 
(COMPENSATION AND REHABILI-
TATION) SECOND AMENDMENT 
BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 15m DECEMBER, 1959) 

5 
44 of 1954. 
10 
20 
Bill No. 9! of '959. 
TIlE DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND 
REHABILITATION) SECOND AMENDMENT 
BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA, 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Displaced Penons (Compensatio-n. and 
Rehabilitation) Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Displaced Persons (Compensation Short title. 
and Rehabilitation) Second Amendment Act, 1959. 
. Amendment Z. In section 2 of the Displaced Persons (Compensabon and Reha- ot section 2. 
biIitation) Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in 
clause (d), after sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(iiia) ~my dues payable, whether in one lump sum or in 
instalments, to a co-operative society, registered as such under 
any law for the time being in force, by the displaced person on 
account of loans granted to him by the co-operative society, 
where such loans have been granted out of funds placed at the 
disposal of the co-operative society by the Central Government 
or a State Government and such dues have been declared by the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to be 
public dues;". 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act.,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "a Deputy Chief Settle-
meni CommissioJl("r and as many SeHlement Commissioners", the 
'words "and as mnny Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioners, 
Settlement Commissicmers" shall be substituted; 
Amendment 
of section 3. 

2 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words, "the Deputy Chief 
Settlement Commissioner and all Settlement Commissioners", 
the words "all Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioners, Settle-
ment Commissioners" shall be substituted. 
~en~ment 4. In section 19 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the 5 
o 8eCbon 19. following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
r 
... 
"(4) Where a managing officer or a managing corporation is 
satisfied that any person, whether by way of allotment or lease, is, 
or has at any time been, in possession of any evacuee property 
acquired under this Act to which he was not entitled, or which 10 
was in excess of that to which he was entitled, under the law 
under which such allotment or lease was made or granted, then, 
without prejudice to any other action which may be taken against 
that person, the managing officer or the managing corporation 
may, having regard to such principles of assessment of rent as IS 
may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government, by 
order, assess the rent payable in respect of such property and that 
person shall be liabJe to pay the rent so assessed for the period for 
which the property remains or has remained in his possession: 
Provided that no such order shall be made without giving to 20 
the person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(5) Where any person is, or has at any time been, in 
unauthorised possession of any evacuee property acquired under 
this Act, the managing officer or the managing corporation may, 
having regard to such principles of assessment of damages as may 25 
be specified in this behalf by the Centml Government, assess the 
damages on account of the use and occupation of such property 
and may, by order, require that person to pay the damages within 
such time and in such instalments as may be specified in the 
order: 30 
Provided that no such order shall be made without giving 
to the person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard.". 
~en4ment 5. In section 20 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the 
of seCbOD 20. following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(lA) For the purpose of transferring any property out of 3S 
the compensation pool under sub-section (I), it shall be lawfuJ 
for the managing officer or the managing corporation to transfer 
the same to a displaced person jointly with any other person or an 
association of displaced persons or otherwise.". 

31 of 19So. 
64 of I9SI. 
S 
10 
3 
S. After section 20A of the principal Act, the following section Inaertion of new section shall be inserted, namely:- 2oB. 
"20B. (1) Where any person is entitled to the restoration of Restrictions . . on restora-any property by VIrtue of an order made by the Custodian- tion of 
General under section 27 of the Administration of Evacuee Pro- certain 
perty Act, 1950, or by the competent officer under the Evacuee property. 
Interest Separation Act, 1951, and the Central Government is of 
opinion that it is not expedient or practicable to restore the whole 
or any part of such property to that person by reason of the pro-
perty or part thereof being in occupation of a displaced person or 
otherwise, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the said 
Acts or this Act, it shall be lawful for the Central Government-
(a) to transfer to that person in lieu of the property to 
be restored or any part thereof, any immovable property in 
15 the compensation pool or any part thereof, being in the 
opinion of the Central Government as nearly as may be of the 
same value as the property to be restored or, as the case 
may be, any part thereof, or 
(b) to pay to that person such amount in cash from the 
20 compensation pool in lieu of the property to be restored or 
part thereof, as the Central Government having regard to the 
wlue of the property to be restored or part thereof, may in 
the circumstances deem fit. 
(2) Where in pursuance of sub-section (1) any person has 
2S been granted any immovable property from the compensation 
pool or has been paid any amount in cash from the compensation 
pool, his right, title and interest in the property to be restored 
shall be deemed to have been extinguished.". 
7. In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after the Amendment 
30 words "is barred", the words, brackets and figures "or was, at the ofsection 21. 
commencement of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Reha-
86 of 1956. bilitation) Amendment Act, 1956, barred" shall be inserted. 
8. In section 26 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), Amendment 
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: - of section 26. 
35 "(1A) Every officer appointed under this Act may, for the 
purpose of making an inquiry under this Act and generally for 
the purpose of enabling him satisfactorily to discharge any of the 
duties imposed on him by or under this Act, require any person 
to submit to him such accounts, books or other documents or to 
40 furnish to him such information relating to any evacuee property 
\lcquired under this Act as he may reasonably think necessary.". 

4 
~ ..,t J.. ID section 31 of the principal Act, after subllection (4), the 
of IIICdoa 31• following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(5) If at any time the Central Government is of opinion that 
the continued existence of the Board is unnecessary, it may, by 
notification in the Official .Gazette, declare that the Board shall 5 
be dissolved with effect from such date as may be specified in the 
notification and the Board shall be deemed to be dissolved 
accordingly.". 
:r.=e~~. 14. In section 34 of the principal Act, in subpsection (2), for the 
words "the Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner", the words "a 10 
Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner" shall be substituted. 
Amendment 
of KCtioD 40. 11. In section 40 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2),-
(i) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inser-
ted, namely:- IS 
"(hh) the manner in which any dispute as to who 
are the successors-in-interest of any deceased claimant 
to a rehabilitation grant or other grant, and as to the 
apportionment of such grant among persons entitled 
thereto, may be determined"; 
(ii) after clause (n), the following clause shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(nn) the fees payable in respect of appeals, revi-
sions or other applications made under this Actj" j 
20 
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 25 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as 
soon as may be after it is made before each House of Par-
liament while it is in session for a period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two successive 30 
sessions and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is 
so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule, or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no 3S 
effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modi-
fication or annulment shall be without prejudice to the vali-
dity of anything previously done under that rule.". 

12. (1) Any fees in respect of appeals, revisions or other appli- Validation of 
cations which, before the commencement of this Act, have been ~~:n weD. 
levied under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilita-
tion) Act, 1954, shall be deemed to have been validly levied, as if 
S this Act and the amendments made thereby were in force when 
such fees had been levied. 
(2) No order made, no action taken and nothing done before the 
commencement of this Act by any person exercising the powers of 
a Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner shall be invalid or shall be 
10 deemed ever to have been invalid merely by reason of any defect in, 
or invalidity of, the appointment of such person and such appoint-
ment shall be deemed to have been validly made, as if this Ad 
and the amendments made thereby were in force on the date of 
such appointment. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Certain difficulties are being experienced in the administration 
of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 
1954, and they are hindering the smooth working of the compensa-
tion scheme and its early completion. It is proposed to amend the 
Act suitably to remove these difficulties. 
2. A large amount of money has been advanced by the Central 
Government and State Governments to displaced persons through 
co-operative societies. It is considered necessary that these loans 
should be treated as public dues within the meaning of section 2 (d) 
of the Act so that they may be adjusted against the compensation 
payable to such persons. It is proposed to amend the defiuition of 
"public dues" suitably for the purpose. There have been cases 
where displaced persons have obtained allotment of excess land by 
fraudulent means, mis-representation or otherwise. It is but proper 
that these displaced persons should pay rent at an enhanced rate 
for such excess land, but there is no provision in the existing Act 
for the recovery of such rent. There is also no specific provision 
for the recovery of damages from unauthorised occupants of 
evacuee property acquired under the Act. It is proposed to amend 
section 19 for these purposes. 
3. Instances have come to notice where some properties were 
wrongly declared to be evacuee property and they were also acquired. 
In such cases, the Custodian-General is empowered under section 27 
of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950, to restore such 
property to the non-evacuee owner. Similarly, a competent officer 
has also power under the EV'lcuee Interest Separation Act, 1951, 
to declare a share in a property to be non-evacuee after the whole 
of it has been declared to be evacuee property and has been 
acquired. It is not sometimes possible to restore the original pro-
perty to the non-evacuee owner because of its transfer to a 
displaced person. To overcome this difficulty, it is proposed to 
insert a new section 20B on the lines of section 20A. There is no 
provision in the existing Act for the dissolution of the Advisory 
Board which has been constituted under section 31. It is considered 
necessary to empower the Central Government to dissolve the Board 
when it considers that the continuance of the Board is no longer 
necessary. Section 31 is proposed to be amended accordingly. 
G 

7 
4. The present Bill also seeks to make some other minor amend-
ments for the removal of certain doubts and difficulties which have 
arisen in the working of the Act. 
MEHR CHAND KHANNA. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 9th December, 1959. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for appointment of more than one 
Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner. In section 3 of the existing 
Act, reference has been made to a Deputy Chief Settlement Commis-
sioner. In actual practice, three Deputy Chief Settlement Commis-
sioners have had to be appointed to cope with the work. The extra 
expenditure which the Government had incurred up to the 30th 
November, 1959 on two additional posts of Deputy Chief Settlement 
Commissioners came to approximately Rs. 75,000. The recurring 
expenditure on these two posts would be approximately Rs. 30,000 
per annum. 
8 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Under clause 4 of the Bill which seeks to amend section 19 of the 
Act, the Central Government has been empowered to specify the 
principles of assessment of rent and damages which will be taken 
into consideration by the managing officer or the managing corpora-
tion for such assessment. Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to amend 
section 40 of the Act in order to enable the Central Government to 
make rules for the levy of fees in respect of appeals, revisions and 
other applications. These are matters of detail and the delegation of 
legislative power is thus of a normal character. 
9 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DISPLACED PERSONs (COMPENSATION AND REHA-
BILITATION) AA:r, 1954 
(No. 44 OF 1954) 
• • • 
CHAPTER II 
PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION GRANTS TO DISPLACED 
PERSONS 
~po~tmCDt 3. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Set~~~!nt Official Gazette, appoint a Chief Settlement Commissioner, a Joint 
9>mmis- Chief Settlement Commissioner, a Deputy Chief Settlement Com-
11000r, etc. missioner and as many Settlement Commissioners, Additional Settle-
Recovery of 
cenainlUml 
.. aueano! 
land reve-
DUe. 
ment Commissioners, Assistant Settlement Commissioners, Settle-
ment Officers, Assistant Settlement Officers and managing officers as 
may be necessary for the purpose of performing the functions assign-
ed to them by or under this Act and may, by general or special 
order, provide for the distribution or allocation of work to be per-
formed by them under this Act. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Joint Chief Settle-
ment Commissioner, the Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner and 
all Settlement Commissioners, Additional Settlement Commissioners, 
Assistant Settlement Commissioners, Settlement Officers, Assistant 
Settlement Officers and managing officer shall perform the functions 
assigned to them by or under this Act under the general superinten-
dence and control of the Chief Settlement Commissioner. 
• • • 
21. 
• • • 
(3) For the purposes of this section, a sum shall be deemed to 
be payable to the Custodian, notwithstanding that its recovery is 
barred by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, or any other law for the 9 of 1908. 
time being in force, relating to limitation of actions. 
• • • 
10 

II 
34. 
• • • 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the rules and 
orders made thereunder, the Chief Settlement Commissioner may, 
by general or special order, delegate all or any of his powers under 
this Act to the Joint Chief Settlement Commissioner, the Deputy 
Chief Settlement Commissioner, a Settlement Commissioner, an 
additional Settlement Commissioner or an Assistant Settlement 
Commissioner, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified 
in the order. 
• • • 
40. 
• • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the fol-
lowing matters, namely:-
• • • 
(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid for not less 
than thirty days before both Houses of Parliament, as soon as possi-
ble after they are made, and shall be subject to such modifications 
as Parliament may make during the said period of thirty days . 
• • .. 
Delegation 
of powers. 
Power to 
makerulea. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Displaced Persons (Compensation and 
Rehabilitation) Act, 1954. 
The President has, in pursuance i)f clauses (I) and (3) of artiCle 
117 of the Con~titution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the introduction and consideratimi ofthc Bill. 
M. N. Kaul, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Mehr Chand Khanna, 
Minister of Rehabilitation 
and Minority Affairs.) 