BW .0. 99 of 1962 
'THE KHADI AND OTHER BANDLOOM INDUSTRIES 
(DEVELOPMENT) CESS BILL, 1952 
(As INTRODUCED IN TUB Bouss OF TUB PEOPLE) 
A 
HILL 
to provide for the levy and oollection. of a oe88 for raising fun.ds for the 
purpose 0/ developing khadi and other han.dloom industries and for 
promoting the Bale of ',hadi and other handloom cloth. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as fonows :-
1. Short title and utent.-(1) This Act may be called the Khadi and 
-other Handloom Industries (Development) Cess Act, 1952. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of ,Jammu and 
Kashmir. 5 
2. De!lD1ttons.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) 'handloom· cloth' means any cloth woven from any material, 
including Rilk, artificial sille, staple fibre and wool, on looms worked 
by manual labour; 
(b) 'hBndloom industries' means industries which manufacture 10 
handloom cloth ; 
(c) 'khadi' means any cloth woven on looms worked by manual 
lIabour, from yarn hand-spun iq India. 
a. Levy of cel •• -(1)" Wltll &fleet from luch date as the Oentru 
Government may, by uotulcatlon in the Ofllcl&l Gasette. appoint, there 15 
shall be levied and collected on all cloth manu~tured in the terl'ltorlea 
to which thiS Act utenda a cell In the nature of an e:iEcise duty at the 
rate of three pies per ys.rd. 
(2) The celS 8hall be in addltton to the duty of ezci8e Chargeable on 
cloth under the Oentral _zcUe. and Salt Act, 1946 (1 of 19"), aDd 111&11 20 
be levied and coU8ICted in the same manner &I the duty of RCise on cloth 
II levied and colleCted lUlder that Act. 
(3) In thil section, Icloth' haa the meanlDg all8lgD.ed. to it in the I'il'st 
&:hedule to the Central JlzcJaea and Salt Act, 19M (I of 19M). 
,. AppUcatiOID of proceeds or c8I8.-The Central Government may 25 
utilise the net proceeds of the cess for meeting the costs of such measures 
as it considers necessary or expedient to take for developing halldloom 
industries and, in particular, measures for......, 
(a) undertaking, assisting or encouraging handloom industries; 
(b) encouraging the adoption of improved methods of manu- 30 
iacturing khadi and other handloom cloth ; 
(c) encoura.gin~ and developing research in, the technique, of 
production of khadl and other handloom oloth and m the ·art of deSigns 
relating thereto .:. 

2 
(d) mairiiaining or assisting in the maintenance of institutes for-
. the cleve10pmenll of bandloom indus~ea ; , 
(,,) promoting the aale and marketing of khadi and 'other handloom 
cloth; 
5 (f) fixing the grades and standards of khadi and other handloom 
cloth and enforcing quality oontrol; 
(g) promoting and encouraging co-operative effort among manu-
faeturers of khedi and other handloom cloth. 
6. l'oW8I' k» mae ralI&--(l) The Central Government may, by 
10 notification in the Offioial Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes. 
of this Act. 
15 
(I) In partioular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for ,-
(a) the manner in which the proceeds of the cess levied under 
this Act may be applied for all or any of the purposes specified in 
section 4 ; 
(b) the making of grants or loans from such proceeds to State-
Government. for all or any of the said purpoua; 
(c) the &location of the net proceed!! of the ceRS between khadi 
20 Rnd other handloom industries: ' 
(p) the manner in which acoounte relating to the proceeds of the 
ceo shall be maintained; 
(e) the exemption from the whole or any part of the ceBR levied 
under thiB Act of any variety of cloth whioh is for the time being 
e1l:empt from the duty of B1I:Ciae imposed under, the Oentral ExoiaeB and . 
BaIt Act, 1944 (I ol1944). 

3 
STATE)f.ENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
:eo~ ~e Xhadi and the Handloom Cloth Industry have a deftn1te place 
In our national eoonomy. Xhadi makes it. contribution towards the relief 
of l'Ul'&l unemployment and provides a supplementary source of livelihood 
to our agricultural population. The handloom industry has a substantial 
part to play in supplying the demand for cloth in the country. Both those 
industries, however, have been suffering from many handicaps of late, 
mainly in finding an adequate market for their products. They have to 
cater to certain special markets and to individual and beat tastes. For this 
purpose they need assistance in order to obtain adequate supplies of cotton 
and yarn a~ reasonable rates, to effect improvement in their methods and 
technique of production and for organizing the sale and marketing of their 
goods. In order to finance the development of these industries on these 
lines, it is proposed that a cess of three pies per yard Rhould be imposed on 
all mill-made cloth, whether exported or consumed in this country. The 
cess would take the form of a duty of excise and is expected to yield more 
than rupees six crores per year. 'l'he proceeds of the cess will be allocated 
by Government for the development of the khadi and the handloom 
Industry, the proportions being determined each year according to 
circumstances. Legislation is required for imposing this cess as a duty 
of excise. 
" T. T. KRlt)HNAM;ACtrARI. 
N.w DBLJIJ; 
The 28th Ootober, 1952. 

4 
FINANCIAL M;E1(OlJ,ANDU;M 
The Ministry of Commerce and Industry proposes to introduce a Bill 
. to provide for the levy and collection of a cess for raising funds for the 
purpose of developing handloom industry and for promoting the sgIe of 
khadi and other handloom cloth. The cess would be in the nature of a 
duty of excise. 
2. The Bill provides for a levy of cess of 8 pies per yard of mill-made 
cloth produced in the country. On the basis that the cess would be levied 
on more than 4,000 millon yards it is expected that the cess will yield more 
than Rs. 6 crores per annum. 
3. The above ceBB will be collected in the same manner as the duty of 
excise on cloth, by the Central Excise Department, and the net proceeds 
will be nvailable for distribution for developing the Handloom and Khadi 
Industries. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
• BILL 
to provide for the levy and collection of a cess for raising funds 
for the purpose of developing Kbadi and other handloom 
industries and for promoting the sale of khadi and 
other handloom cloth. 
The President haa, in pUl'8uance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the 
HOU88 of the People the introduction and consideration of the 
Bill. 
M.N.RAUL. 
BD"IlIlI7I. 
(87ri T. T. Kril1l7ltlmczc1&Gri. 
MlaIIl.,./or OommcrGl."cllmJu",) 