& lNTRODVCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
BII No. 99· of 1989 
,I 
THE PRASAR BHARATI (BROADCASTING CORPORATION O!' 
i INDIA) BILL, 1989 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
'. to(, 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINA,RY 
CLAvsm 
1. Short title, extent and commencement~ 
2,. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
3. Establishment and composition of Corporation. 
4. Appointment of Chairman and Board of Governors. 
5. Powers and functions of Chairman and Executive Governor. 
6. Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairman and other 
Governors. I 
7. Removal and suspension of Chairman and Governors. 
8. Meetings of Board of Governors. .. 
9. Officers and other employees of Corporation. 
10. Establishment of Recruitment &ards. 
11. Transfer of service of existing employees to Corporation. 
12. Functions and powers of Corporation. 
13 .. Establishment of Broadcasting Council, term of offi-ce and re-
moval, etc., of members thereof. 
14. JUrisdiction of. and the procedure to be followed by, Broadcast-
ing CounctL 

CLAUSES 
(ii) 
CHAPTERm 
AssttS, FINANCES AND ACOOU'NTI 
15. Transferoi certain assets, liabilities, etc., of Central Govern-
ment to Corporation. 
\6. Grants, etc., by Central Government. 
17. Fund of Corporation. 
18. Investment of moneys. 
19. Budget of Corporation. 
20. Accounts and audit of Corporation. 
21. Corporation Dot liable to be taxed. 
CHAPTER IV 
MlscELLAm:o'US 
22. Power of Central Government to give directions. 
23. Chairman, Governors. members, etc., to be public servants. 
24. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
25. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Corporation. 
26. Delegation of powers. 
27. Annual Peport. 
28. Powe.r to make rules. 
29. Power to make' regulations. 
30. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parli~ent. 
31. Powe~ to remov~ diftlc~t~s. 

BiD No, 99 of 198~ 
THE PRASAR. l3HARATI (BROADCASTING CORPORATION OF 
INDIA) BILL, 1989 
A 
BILL 
to prouide fof' the establishment of a Br04ti£asting Corpo1'ation for India, 
te be kM'lD1\ 4S Pf'GIo:r Bharati, to define its composition, fu1tC'ti&nl 
and powers and to provide for matters connected therew-ith or 
incidental thef'eto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in ~ Fortieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:- I 
CHAPTER I 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Cor-
10 
poration of India) Act, 1989. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notifl.cation, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Akashvani" means the offices, stations and other establish-
ments, by whatever name called, which, immediately before the 
appointed. day, formed part of or were under the Dir~torate-Genera1, 
All India :&dio of the Union Ministry of Information and Broad-
casting; 
8ho1; 
title, 
extent 
&nd. com· 
menc.-
men •• 
Deftnl-
tiOl1l. 

2 
(b) "appointed day" means the date appointed under s~tion 3; 
(c) "broadcasting" means the ctissemination of any form of 
communication by the wireless transmission of writing, signs. 
signals, pictures, images and sounds of all kinds by means of 
Hertzian waves intended to be received by the public either directly 5 
or through the medium of relay stations and all its grammatical 
variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly; 
(d) "Board of Governors" means the Board of Governors of the 
Corporation; 
(e) "Broadcasting Council" means the Council established under 10 
section 13; 
(f> "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Corporation appoint-
ed under section 4; I 
(g) "Corporation" means the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting 
Corporation of India) established under section 3; 15 
(h) "Doordarshan" means the offices, kendras and other estab-
lishments, by whatever name called, which, immediately bef()re the 
appointed day, farmed part of or were under the Director-General, 
Doordarshan of the Union Ministry of Information and Broadcasting; 
(i) "Executive Go:vemor" means the Executive Governor 20 
appointed under s~tion 4; 
(j) "Governor" means a Governor of the Board of GovemOTs; 
(k) "Governor (Finance)" means the Governor (Finance) 
appointed under section 4; 
(1) "Governor (Personnel)" means the Governor (Personnel> 2S 
appointed under section 4; 
(m) "kendra" means any telecasting centre with studios or 
transmitters or both and includes a relay station; 
(n) "Nominated Governor" means the Governor nominated by 
the Union Ministry of Information and Broadcasting under section 3; 30 
(0) "Non-lapsable Fund" means 1;he Fund created from the 
commercial revenues of Akashvani and Doordarshan to meet ex-
penditure on certain schemes; 
(p) "notification" me8J;ls a notification published in the OfBclal 
Gazette; I 
" I 35 
(q) "Part-time Governor" means a Part-time Gove1'Jolor of the 
Board of Governors appointed under section 4, but does not include 
the NominatedGiovernor; 
(r) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; I 40 
(s) "Recruitment Board" means a board established under sub-
section (J) of section 10; 
(t) "regulations" means regulations made by· the Corporation 
under this Act; 

3 
(u) "station" means any broadcasting station with. studios or 
transmitters or both and includes ., rel~ s~ation;. 
5 
(v) '·Whole-time Governor" means the Executive Governor, 
Governor (Finance) Or Governor (personnel) and includes the 
Chairman; 
(w) "year" means the financial year. 
CHAPTER II 
PRASAR BHARATI (BROADCASTING CORPORATION OF INmA) 
3. (1) With elect from such date as the Central Government lI1ay, 
10 by notification, appoint in this behalf, tlhere shall be established for the 
parpeses Gf dlisAd • CorpGI".,'to he Imen lIS the ........ Bharati 
(Broadcasting Corporaiticm of India). 
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid. 
having perpetual succession and a cornmon seal with power to acquire, 
15 hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to con-
tract. and shall by the said name sue and be l:lued. 
(3) The headquarters of the Corporation shall be at New Delhi and 
the Corporation may establish offices. kendr8'B or stations at other places 
in India and, with the previous approval of the Central Government. 
20 outside India. 
(4) The general superintendence. direction and management of the 
affairs of the Corporation shall vest in. a Board of Governors which may 
exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things as may be exer· 
cised or done by the Corporation under this Act. 
2S (5) The Board of Govemors shall eon_ 01-
(a) a Chairman; I 
(b) GIle Executive G~~rnorj 
(c) one Governor (FillMCe); 
,!d) 0. Geftl'llOl' ~); 
30 (e) six Part-time Governors; and 
<f) one .representaUve of . the Uniea MiDistry of Jnform.atIon 
and Broadcast~ to be nominated byihat Ministry. 
(6) The Corporation may appoint such committees as may be neces-
sary for the efficient performance. exercise and discharge of its functions. 
3S powers and duties: 
Provided that all or a majority of the ,members of each committee 
shall be Governors and a member of any such committee who is not a 
Governor shall have only the right to attend meetings of the committee 
and take part in the proceedings thereof. but shall not have the right to 
40 vote. 
r.tablisll-
ment and 
composi-
tion of 
Corpora-
tion. 

Appoint-
mftlt 
01 Chair-
.IrUU1 and 
Board 
otGov-
ctrDOrs. 
Pewel'8 
and 
tuoctions 
ot 
Chairman 
.and .i 
Executive 
Governor. 
Term of 
office, 
<:ondi-
tionaot 
.ervice, 
etc., of 
Chair-
man and 
other 
Gov-
~Orl. 
4 
(7) The Corporation mlty associate with itself, in such manner snd 
:ler such purposes as may be PJ'ovided by regulations, any person w~ose 
assistance or advice it may need in complying with any .of the provislons 
of thill Act and a person so associated shall have the nght to take part 
in the discussions of the Board of Governors relevant to the purposes for 5 
which he has been associated, but shall not have the right to vote. 
(8) No act or proceeding of the Board of Governo.rs or. of any com-
mittee appointed by it under sub-section (6) shall be mvahdated merely 
by reason of- ,I 
(4) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 10 
Board of Governors or such committee; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a 
Governor or a member of such committee; or 
(c) any in:egulari~y in the procedure of the Board of Governors 
or such committee not affecting the merits of the case. 1 S 
4. (1) The Chairman and the other Governors shall be appointed by 
the President of India on the recommendation of a committee consist-
ing 01-
(a) the Chairman of the Council of States; 
(b) the Chairman of the Press Council of India 
under section 4 of the Press Council Actt 1978; and 
(c) one nominee of the President of India. 
established 20 
37 of '1978. 
(2) No appointment of a Governor shall be invalidated merely by 
reason of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the com-
mittee appointed under sub-section (1). 2S 
(3) The Chairman and the Part-time Governors shall be persons of 
eminence in publi{! life; the Executive Governor shall be a person having 
special knowledge or practical e~perience in respect of such matters as 
administration, management, broadcasting, education, literature, culture, 
arts, music, dramatics or journalism; the Governor (Finance) shall be 30 
a persun having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of 
financial matters and the Governor (Personnel) shall be a person having 
:special know ledge or practical experience in respect of personnel manage-
ment and administration.' I 
5. (1) The Chairman shall perform t exercise and discharge such func- 35 
tionst powers and duties of the Corporation as the Board of GovernoI1l 
may delegate to him. . 
(2) The Executive Gcri'ernor shall be the Chief Executive of the Cor-
poration and shall, subject to the control and supervision of the Chairman, 
exercise such powers and discharge such functions of the Board of Gov- 40 
ernors 1m it may delegate to him. 
6. (1) The Chairman, the Executive ,Governor, the Governor (Fin. 
anee) and the Govemor (Personnel) shall be Whole-time Governors and 
every such Governor shall hold office for a term of six years from the 
date on which he enters upon his office. 4' 
(2) The term of office of Part-time Governors shall be six years, but 
one-third of such Governors shall retire on the expiration of every 
second year. I ., 
~ 
(3) As soon as may be after the establishment of the Corporation the' 
President of India may, by order, make such provision as he -tllinb fit SO 

s 
(4) Where befOre 
ing the office of Chairman, or any 
any reason whatsoever,' such vacancy shan be deemed to be . 
vacancy and the person.' appointed to flU such vacancy shall hold otftce 
for the unexpired period of the term for which his predecessor in office 
would have held office if such vacancy had not arisen. 
10 (5) The Chainnan and othe:ti\ Whole-time Govemor. shall be entitled 
to such salaries and allowances and shaD, be subject to such conditions 
of service in respect of leave, pensiml (if any), provident fund and other 
matters as may be prescribed; 
Provided that the salaries and allowances and the conditions of service 
1 S shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment. 
20 
(6) The Part-time Governors shall be entitled to such allowances as 
may be prescribed. I 
7. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the Chairman or 
any othe.r Governor shall only be removed from his office by order of 
the President of India on the gronud of misbehaviour after the Supreme 
Court, on a reference being made to it by the President, has, on inquiry 
held in accordance with such procedure as the Supreme Court may by 
rules provide, reported that the Chairman or other Governor, as the 
case may be, ought, on such ground, be removed. 
25 (2) The President may, after obtaining the approval of the Supreme 
Court, suspend from office the Chairman 01' other Governor in respect 
of whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court 'Under 
sub-section (1) until the President has passed orders on receipt of the 
report of the Supreme Court on such reference. 
30 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Bub-section (1), the 
President may. by order. remove the Chairman or any other Whole-time 
Governo;r from his office if such Chairman or such other Whole.1iJae 
Govemor-
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or 
3S (b) engages during his term of omce in aay paid employmat 
40 
outside the duties of his office; or 
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in otftce 
by reason of infinnity of body or mind: 
Provided that the President may, by order, remove any Part-time 
Governor from his office if he is adjudged an insolvent or where he is, in 
the opinion of the President, ~nfit to continue in oftice by reason of in-
firmity of body o;r mind, .. 
Removal 
8I1d I~ 
pension 
of Chair. 
man and 
Gov-
ernorl!l. 

Appoint-
ment 
of Chair-
man and 
Board 
IiIfGov-
ernors. 
Pewel'8 
and 
fuoctiona 
of 
Chairman 
.nd .~ 
Executive 
Governor. 
Term of 
office, 
i:Ond.1-
tiona of 
service, 
etc., of 
Chair· 
tnanand 
other 
Gov-
.rnol'l. 
(7) The Corporation m'ay associate with itself, in such manner and 
tor such purposes as may be provided by regulations, any person whose 
assistance or advice it may need in complying with any of the provisions 
of thi15 Act and a person so aSSOCiated shall have the right to take part 
in the discussions of the Board of Governors relevant to the purposes for 5 
which he has been associated, but shall not have the right to vote. 
(8) No act or proceeding of the Board of Governors or of any com-
mittee appointed by it under sub-section (6) shall be invalidated merely 
by reason of- I 
(4) an)" vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 10 
Board of Govern.ors or luch committeej or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a 
Governor or a member of such committee; or 
(c) any irregulari~y in.the procedure of the Board of Governors 
or such committee not affecting the merits of the case. 1 S 
•. (1) The Chairman and the other Governors shall be appointed by 
the President of India on the recommendation of a committee consist-
mg~- ' 
(a) the Chairman of the Council of States; 
(b) the Chairman of the Press Council of India established 20 
under section 4 of the Press Council Act, 1978; and 37 of '1978. 
(c) one nominee of the President of India. 
(2) No appointment of a Govemor shall be invalidated merely by 
reason of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the com-
mittee appointed under sub-section (1). 25 
(3) The Chairman and the Part-time Governors shall be persons of 
eminence in public life; the Executive Governor shall be a person having 
special knowledge or practical ex:perience in respect of such matters as 
administration, management, broadcasting, education, literature, culture, 
arts, music, dramatiC'S or journalism; the Governor (Finance) shall be 30 
a person having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of 
financial matters and the Governor (Personnel) shall be a person having 
:special knowledge or practical experience in respect of personnel manage-
ment and administration.' I 
5. (1) The Chairman shall perforIl)" exercLte and discharge such func- 35 
tions, powers and duties of the Corporation as the Board of Governors 
may delegate to him. 
(2) 'The Executive Governor shan be the Chief ExecutiVe of the Cor-
poration and shall, subject to·the control and supervision of the Chairman, 
exercise such powet's and discharge such functions of the Board of Gov- 40 
ernors 1m it may delegate to him. 
6. (1) The Chairman, the Executive Governor, the Governor (Fin, 
anee) and the Governor (Personnel) shall be Whole-time Governors and 
every such Governor shall hold office for a term of six years from the 
date on which he enters upon his office. 4$ 
(2) The term of office of Part-time Governors shall be six years, but 
one-third of such Governors shall retire on the expiration of every 
second year. I . 
I 
(3) AB soon as may be after the establishment of the Corporation the": 
President of India may, by order, make such provision as he ,tllinks fit 50 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
for curtailing the term of oftice of some of the Part-time Governors tilen 
appointed in order that one-third of the Governors holding office as such 
Part-time Governors shall retire in every second year thereafter. 
(4) Where before the expiry of the term of office of a person hold-
ing the office of Chairman, or any other Governor, a vacancy arises. for 
any reason whatsoever, such vacancy shall be deemed to be a casual 
vacancy and the person appointed to fill such vacancy shall hold oftlce 
for the unexpired period of the term for which his predecessor in office 
would have held office if such vacancy had not arisen. 
(5) The Chairman and othel'l Whole-time Governors shan be, entitled 
to such salaries and allowances and shall be subject to such conditions 
of service in respect ot leave, pensiml (if any), provident fund and other 
matters as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the salaries and allowances and the conditions of service 
shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment. 
(6) The Part-time Governors shall be entitled to such allowances as 
may be prescribed. I 
7. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the Chairman or 
any othe.r Governor shall only be removed from his office by order of 
the President of India on the gronud of misbehaviour after the Supreme 
Court, on a reference being made to it by the President. has, on inquiry 
held in accordance with such procedure as the Supreme Court may by 
rules provide, reported that the Chairman or other Governor, as the 
case may be, ought, on such ground, be removed. 
2S (2) The President may, after obtaining the approval of the Supreme 
Court, suspend from office the Chairman or other Governor in respect 
of whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court under 
sub-section (1) until the President has passed orders on receipt of the 
report of the Supreme Court on such reference. 
30 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
President may, by order. remove the Chairman or any other Who1e-ti.e 
Governor from his office if such Chairman or such other Whole-be 
Governor-
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or 
3S (b) engages duringrus term of offtce in aay paid employtneat 
outside the duties of his office; or 
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office 
by reason of infirmity of body or mind: 
Provided that the President may, by order, remove any Part-time 
40 Governor from his office if he is adjudged an insolvent or where he is, in 
the opinion of the President, l,mfit to continue in office by reason of in-
firmity of body or mind, 
Removal 
and BUB-
pension 
of Chair_ 
man and 
Gov-
ernors. 

. , 
.,'"" 
.. ; ,f •• ~ 
. ~ .' 
14eetiftgs 
of':' . 
BOard 
of Gov~ 
ernon. 
Of6ee11l 
and 
other 
employees 
of Corpo-
ratiog. 
6 
. . (4)· If. the Chairman· or any other Whole .. time ,Governor is, 
or becomes in any way concerned or interested in any contract or ~~~~ 
ment made by or on behalf of the Corporation or the Government of 
India or the Government o·f a State or, par~icipates in any way in the 
profit thereof, or in any benefit or emolument arising therefrom than 5 
as a member, and in common with other membel's of an incorporated 
eompany, he shall, iOl the pU':PP8es of illb~ection (1), be deemed to he 
gLlilty of misbehaviour.' 
(5) If a Part-time Governor is, or becomes in any way concerned. 
.or interested in any cont~ct, or agreement made by or on behalf of 10: 
the Corporation, he shall, for the purposes of sub-section (1), be deemed 
to be guilty of milbehaviour. 
(6) The Chairman or any other Governor may resign his office by 
giving notice thereof in writing to the President of lndUt· and on ~ch 
resignation being aC<!ePt;ed.· the Chairman or other Governor shall be 1 S 
deemed to have vacated his office . 
8. (1) The Board of Governors shall meet at such times and places and 
shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of 
business at its meetings (inc1u~ing the quorum at meetings) as may be 
provided by regulati'ons: I f 20 
Provi,ded that there shall not be less than six meetings every year 
b:\it three months shall not intieweIle -between one meeting and the next 
meeting. ' 
(2) A Governor shall be deemed to have vacated his office if he 
absents himself for three consecutive meetings of the Board of Governors 2S 
without the leave of the Chairman. 
(3) The Chairman sb,a-ll pJ:eside at the meetings of the Board of 
Governors and if for any reason he is unable to attend any meeting. the 
Executive Governor and in the absence of both, any other Governor 
elected by the Governors present at s~h meeting. shall preside at the 30 
meeting. 
(4) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board of 
Governors shall be decided by a majority 9f the votes of the Governors 
present and voting and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chair-
maD, or in hjs abs.ence.. the person presiding, shall have and exercise a 35 
second or casting vote. 
9. (1) Subject to such control, restrictions and· ooruiitions as may be 
prescribed, the Corporation may appoint, after consultation with the 
~cruitment Bo~rd, such ,.officers and othel" employees as Illaype neces-
·sary.. ! 40 
(2) The method of ,recruitment of such omc",.san~emplQyees Ilud 
• ' • 'I ~. -! . 
alloth"l' matters c()nnected, therewith aDd the CQlAdltioDs of service of 

7 
...... ..... . aDd, other employees ahall be .udl .... ay ... pNvkIed bJ 
~. . . 
10. (1) The Corporation shall, as soon as may be, after the appointed 
day and in such manner and subject to Imch conditions and restrictions 
5 as may be prescribed, establish for the purposes of section 9, one or 
more Recruitment Boards consisting wholly of persons other than the 
Governors, officers and other employees of the Corporation: 
Provided that for the purposes of appointment to the posts carrying 
acales of pay cor,responding to the scales of pay of Group 'A' posts in 
10 the Central Government, the Recruitment Board shall consist of the 
Chairman. other Governors and the Nominated Governor. 
(2) The qualifications and other conditions of service of the memberS 
constituting the Recruitment Board and the period for which such mem-
bers shall hold office, shall be such as may be prescribed. 
15 11. (1) Where the Central Government has ceased to per-
form any functions which under section 12 are the functions of the 
Corporation, it shall be lawful for the Central Gove1'l11ment to transfer, 
by order and! with effect from suc'h date or dates as may be specified in 
the order, to the Corporation any of the officers or other employees 
20 serving in the Akashvanl or Doonlarshan and engaged in the perform-
anee of those functions: I 
Provided that no order UJIlder this sub-section shall be made in rela-
tlon to any offtcer or other employee in the Akashvani or Doordarshan 
who has, in respect of the proposal of the Central Government to trans-
2S fer such offtcer or other employee to the Corporation, intimated within 
such time as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government, 
his intention of not becoming an employee of the Corporation. 
(2) The prOvisions of sub-section (1) shall also apply to the members 
of the Indian Information Service, the Central Secretariat Service or 
30 any other service or to persons borne on cadres outside Akashvani and 
Doordarshan who have been working in Akashvani or Doordarshan 
immediately before the appointed day: 
Provided that where any such member intimates, within the time 
specified in sub-section (1). his intention of not becoming an employee 
35 of the Corporation but to continue on deputation, he may be allowed to 
continue on deputation in accordance with such terms and conditions 
II may be prescribed. 
(3) In making an order under sub-section (1), the Central Govern-
ment shall, as far as may be, take into consideration the functions 
40 which the Akashvani or, as the case may be, Doordarshan has ceased 
or ceases to perform and the area in which such functions haVe been or 
are performed. 
(4) An officer or other employee transferred by an order under sub-
section (1) shall, on and from the date of transfer, cease to be an em-
4S ployee of the Central Government and becomes an employee of the 
Corporation with such designation as the Corporation may determine and 
shall, subject to the prOvisions of sub-sections (5), (6) and (7). be 
governed by such regulations as may be made as respects remuneration 
aDd other conditions of service including pension, leave and provident 
Dtab1i6* 
IDIDtwt 
RecnDt-
mat 
Dowda. 
TraMte 
of ser-
vice of 
e:rdstin, 
emplo-
Y" to 
Corpan.. 
tioa. 

8 
fuftd aDd shall 'eon.tinue to -be an a&loer or ,other • ,....."...." *"" 
Corporation unless and until his employment is tenninatecl1., '",.a.: 
'Corporation. 
(5) Every officer or other e1;llployee transferred by an order made 
under subo-section (1) shall, within six months from the dateof-,traD6tt •. 5 
exercise his option, in writing, to be governed-
(a) by the seale of,pay apptieaJlie, to"ihe poItheld.·by.,~".ua 
the Akashvani or Doardarshan immediately before the date of trans-
fer or by the scale applicable to the post under the' Corporation -to 
which he Is transferred; I :·,10 
(b) by the leave, pro'9'tden,t fund, retiftllltlM,or otiler WlrNIiIl 
Benefits, -admissible to employees of the Central Go~ernment in 
accordance with the rules or orders of the Central Government,a. 
amended from time to time, OJ' the leave" proVident flmd or 'other 
terminal benefits admissible to the employees of the Corporatiolf 1 S 
under the regulations. 
and such option once exercised under this Act' shall be final: 
Provided that the option exertUed URder'e!altle 'a~ by 1Ul • .ofBMr. or 
other employee shall be applicable <:aly ill !'8IpeCtf,of "til. post ~ tU 
Corporation to whieh such ofIlcer 'or' Other, empieree,ia: tramfernd...C!d 20 
on appointment to a higher post under the Corpowaam -.e.abaU . be 
eligible only for the scale of pay applicable to such higher posf: 
Provided futther that if immediatelybeiere. c U1e dat,t,oIlU$ truster 
any such officer or other employee is oIiieiatini I in a:.b.iiber post an. 
the Government either in a leave vacaeq ,or any other VU8llcy of a 2S 
specified duration, his pay on transfer shall be. proiected for the \1Il-
expired period of such va caney aftd thereafter he, shall be eJltitled to 
the ~ of- PIiY applicable to the post under the Government to which 
he would have reverted or to. the scale of pay applieable t()tBe ·,.ast 
1IDder the Corporation to which he is transferred, whichever. he may· ept,- 30 
Provided also that when an oftlceIt or other EY.nployee..~ in tbe 
Union Ministry of Information and: BrOMieatting -or.: i:a"~11 of ,ita. attach., 
ed. or subordinate oftices is promoted to officiate in a higher post in the 
Ministry or ofRcesubsequent to the transfer to the Corporation ~Of any 
01her o.fticeror employee senior to him in that Ministry or ~,.~ 35 
5UCa transfer, theoftlcer or other employee who is prtmtoted··u,-6fBiefate 
in. such higher post shall, on transfer to the Corporatic)D,be errli.tted:-ott" 
to the scale of pay applicable to the post he would have beld ltut· fM' 
such FToinotion or the scale of pay appUcable tot_ poet under -'the 
Corporation to which he is transferred, whichever be·eay opt , 40 
(6) No officer or other employee transferred by an ord~ made u:miW . 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2),-
(a) shall be disrnieaed or removed by. au. authox;ty subordinate 
to that competent to make asimilrar .. or 'equiyalent ".apPoin~ent 
under-the OoI\J)(lr~ Hi may ,be •. -ip~fted illthe,l'agu.l.tions; 4S 
(b) shall be dismissed or remtJYed or l"edueed' in'nmk',If I 1'* 
after an inquiry, in which he has 'been . ·informed'Of;,.e!~ 
against him and given a reasonable opportunity 'of'betni- ~."'''''' 
~4~~t of fbose char~~ 

.t., '9 
'~'d 1 ~ where nis propoted after Buell inquilsy w impose 
upon himi" eueh~ •• ,such penalty may be impoaed on the basis 
of evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary 
to give 8Uehpe1"'801'1 an opportunity of making representation on the 
S proposed penalty: 
~vtded further that clause (0) shall not apply,-
(i) where an officer or other employee is dismissed .or removed 
or 'reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his 
CODviction on a cnmilUlI ehar8e; or 
10 (it) wbare the autlaority empowered to dismiss or remove an 
ofttDel" 'or other employee or reduce him in rank is satisfied that 
for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is 
not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry. 
(7. If,. in reapect of any officer or other employee referred to in sub-
15 ~.-.a ~)~ the ,question arlHs whether it is reasonably practicable to 
hold such inquiry as is referred to in, that sub-section, the decision 
a __ of tbe authority empowered to dis1n.ias or remove him or reduce 
lUJa in::raDk, :tbAll befiDal. 
12. (1) Subject to the provisions of this; Act, it shall be the primary Function. 
20 "1itr.;olthe ·CorpDl!ation to ,organise andconcillct public b1'GEldcasting a.nd power. 
services to inform, educate and entertain, the public and to ensure a ot Cm--
balanced development of broadcasting on radio and television. poration. 
(2) The Corporation shall, in the discharge of ..its functions, be guided 
by the following objectives, namely:-
25'· (a) upholding the unity and integrity of the country and the 
democratic and social values enshrined in the Constitution; 
(b) safeguarding thedtizen'sright ,to be informed freely, truth-
fully and objectively on all matters of public interest, national or 
international and presenting a fair and balanced flow of informa-
30" t!oIa'ltnwluding contraatingvfews. without advocating any opinion or 
~ of ita own; 
(c)paying special attention to the fields of education and spread 
Of ltteraey, agrieultilre. rural development. environment, health 
anlt -'flinf:1y. welfare and Science and technology; 
35 (d) providing adequate coverage to the diverse cultures and 
languages of the various regions of the country by broadcasting 
appropriate programmes; 
(~ providing adequate coverage to sports and games so as to 
enaaaage 'healtby competi~ and the spirit of sportsmanship; 
40" <f) prOViding appropriate programmes keeping in view the 
special needs otth-e youth: 
(g), informing and stimulating the national consciousness In 
regard to the status and problems of women and paying special 
attention to the upliftment of women; 
45,. (h) ,promotiBg sodal jultke and combating exploitation. in-
ecpJ,Hty &ad ,such -ewe as, ~habi1ity and advancing the welfare 
of . .ihe .. ~ sectiON of the 'Ioetety: 
(i)·,.af~ the"rights of the working classes and advanc-
ing their welfare; 

10 
(j) serving the rural and weaker seetiens oftbe peGple aDd 
those residing in border regions, backward or remote areas; 
(k) providing suitable programmes keeping in view the special 
needs of the minorities and tribal communities; 
(l) taking special steps to protect the interests of children, the , 
blind, the aged, the handicapped and other vulnerable sections of· 
the people; 
(m) promoting national integration by broadcasting in a manner 
that facilitates communication in the languages in India; and facilita-
~i the distribution of regional broadcasting services in every State 10 
in the language of that State; 
(n) providing comprehensive broadcast coverage through the 
choke of appropriate technology and the best utilisation of the 
broadcast frequencies available and em;uring high quality reception; 
(0) promoting research and development activities in order te IS 
ensure that radio and television broadcast technology are con-
stantly updated; and 
(p) expanding broadcasting facilities by establishing additional 
channels of transmission at various levels. 
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore- 20 
going provisions, the Corporation may take such steps as it thinks fit-
(a) to ensure that broadcasting is conducted as a public service 
to provide and produce programmes; 
(b) to establish a system for the gathering of news for radio 
and television; 25 
(c) to negotiate for purchase of, or otherwise acquire, pro-
grammes and rights or privileges in respect of sports and other events, 
films, serials, occasions, meetings, functions or incidents of public 
interest, for broadcasting and to establish procedures for the alICIA-
tion of such programmes, rights or privileges to the services; 30 
(d) to establish and maintain a library or libraries of radio, 
television and otl)er materials; 
(e) to conduct or commission, from time to time, programmes, 
audience research, market or technical service, which may be re-
leased to such persons and in such maIm.er and subject to such terms 35 
and conditions as the Corporation may think fit; 
(t) to provide. such other services as may be specified by 
regulati ons. 
(4)' Nothing in sub-sections (2) and (3) I'hall prevent the Corporation 
from managing on behalf of the Central Government the broadcasting 40 
of External Services and monitoriDf of broadcasts made·· by organbJa- .~. 
tions outside India on the basis of arrangements· mlld.e· for· reimburse-
lIlent of expenses by the Central Government. " . . 

(i) The Corporati( shall be subject to no civil liability on die 
ground merely that iiailed to comply with any of the provisioDS. '.,of 
this section. 
(6) The Corporatn shall have power to determine and levy fees-and 
S other service charg( for or in respect of the advertisements and such 
programmes as ma~be specified by regulations. 
13. (1) There sdi be established, by notification, as soon as may be 
after the appointe day, a Council, to be known as the Broadcasting 
Council, to receivr'and consider complaints referred to in section 14 and 
10 to advise the ColOration in the discharge of its functions in accordanee 
with the objecti~ set out in section 12. 
(2) The Brcdcasting Council shall consist of a President and ten 
other members 0 be appointed by the President of India in consultation , 
with the Chaiflan, from amongst persons of eminence in pUblic life. 
IS (3) The pesident of the Broadcasting Council shan be a whole-time 
member and ~very other member shall be a part-time member and the 
President orthe part-time member shall hold office as such fora term 
of three yepS from the date on which he enters upon his office. 
(4) Th. Broadcasting Council may constitute such number of 
20 Regional councils as it may deem necessary to aid and usist the 
Council irthe discharge of its functions. 
(5) oJae Preside·nt of the Broadcasting Council shall be entit~ to 
such salry andl allowances and shall be subject to such conditions of 
service in respect of leave, pension (if any), provident . fund and other 
25 matter! as may be prescribed: . 
Privided that the salary and allowances and the conditions of 
servi.re shall not be varied to the disadvantage of the President of the 
Broalcasting Council after his appointment. 
(6) The other members of the Broadcasting Council and the members 
30 o~ the Regional Council constituted under sub-section (4) shall be 
entitled to such allowances as may be prescribed. 
14. (1) The Broadcasting Council shall receive and consider Clom-
. plaints from-
(i) any person or group of persons alleging that a certain pro-
gramme or broadcast or the functioning of the Corporation in specific 
cases or in general ismo t in accordance with the objectives for which 
the Corporation is established; I 
(ii) any person (other than an officer or employee of the Cor-
poration) claiming himself to have been treated unjustly. or unfai~ly 
in any manner (including unwarranted invasion of prlvacy, DU8-
representation distortion or lack of objectivity) in connection with 
any program~e broadcast by the Corporation. 
EBt&~ 
liahm8Dt 
of Broad-
castinl 
Council, 
term ~ 
oftlce and 
removal, 
etc., of 
membel'l 
thenof. 
.,1' 
.! 
JuriIdie-
tion of. 
and tbe 
~ 
ceduzoe 
to be 
followed 
bT. Broad· . 
c ...... · 
CouDIit 1 

!. "'.-
~ 
fer of 
cenatn 
...... liabili-' 
ties. ete., 
otCen-
tralOOv-
emmeDt 
to 
CaI'po-
ratlca. 
GruIta .,' . ' . 
etc.,' 
bJ~' 
tr .... ,~· 
.-mD8Dt. 
\ 12 \ , 
\ . 
.' {2.;'A complaint ander sub-semon (!) shall ~~ in suoh mt)'lnet 
'and rWltbhlNch period as may be speolfied by re\lations. 
(3) The Broadcasting Council shall follow suchrocedure as it thinks 
a.tfor the diBpOSal.,of 'complaints received by it. \ 
(4) If the complaint :i£ found to be justified e~r wholly or is 5'· 
part, the Broadcasting Council shall advise the Ex\utive Governor to 
take-18ppI'o:P!'iate acti"On. \, 
(6~ If the Executi.ve Governor is unable to a~~ recomm. 
tiGIl .. of ·the Broadcasting Council, he shall place suc\, recommendetioD ;~' 
before the Board of Governors for its decision there~ 10 
(6) If the Board of Governors is also unable to a\,ept ~ recom-
mendation of the Broadcasting Council, it shall record i\ reasons theu-
for. and inform the Broadcasting Council accordingly. \ 
\ ,. 
CHAPTER HI 
AlNBtRs. FlNA:NCES AND ACXDUNTS 
u. As from the appointed day,-
IS 
(4) ~ property and assets (inclu~ the Non-lap~1e Faild) -
which immediately before that day vested in the Central ~vernment 
101' . the purpose of Akashvani or Doordarshan or both ~11 .tand 
t1'MI8fei're4 Co the Corpot'atlon; 20 
(b) all debts, obJ.igations and liabi1~ incurred, all t;.tractl. 
entered into and all matters and things engaged to be dOlle ly, with' 
or f_ the Central Government inunediately before such ~,for or 
in' cOQDection with the purposes of Akashvani or ~"or 
t)oth sIud1 be deemed to have been inCUl'I'ed, eateNd iato.w..en:- 25 
pged to be done by, with or for the Corporation; 
(C'), all .\llDS of ~ due to the Central GOvermnentht nIa-'~' 
don to the Akashvant or Doordart91uln or both immediately ~ 
lam clay shall be deemed to be due to the Corporation; 
(a,' all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or whidl 30 
could have been instituted by or against the Central Governm:e~t 
immediately before such day for any matter in. relation to the Akash· 
vani or Doordarshan or both may be continued or instituted by or, 
against the Corporation. -
16. For the purposes of enabling tire Corperation to dikbairge its func- 3S 
.tieDa eftidently, UDder. tNs Act, ,the, Central' Gov~,ma¥. after due 
~datioa made< hy ParliaJn8nt by Jaw in tbis behaHy . MY1 ,to the 
.corporation .in' each 'finaacial yeur- :... 
(~ the proceechndthe brotrckast reeelver. iicen:ee ~,.tt:~YJ as 40 
redaeed by the eollediftcharps;aIld .' , 

, .. , 
5 of 19'10. 
(Oaf 1980. 
(ii)~...ach other -lBS.ef ... ~mtey as.that '.~ 0:12 ..... 
·, ... ann~. 
bJ way of equity, grant-ill-aid or loan. 
17. (1) The Corporation shall have its own Fund and all the receipt. 
S ot, diw Corporation (induding the amounts which stand tranderrfld to 
the ,COI'pOJlaUoll under section l~) shall be credited to the Fu.D4, and ..u 
~tsby the Corporation shall be made therefrom. .. 
(2) A11 moneys belonging, to the FWld shall be deposited in one ,Of 
more nationalised banks in such manner as the Corporation may decide. 
" 
10 (3) The Corporation may spend such sums as it ,thinks fit for per.fo.rJn-
ip.g its fW;1ctions under this Act and such sumssh~ be treated. as. ex-
pendbure pqa.ble out of the Fund of the Corporation. 
EIrp'nation.~For the purposes of this section, "nationa1iled bank" 
means a cotresponding new bank specified in the First Schedule to the 
IS aanking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under~gs) Act, 
1970 or a corresponding new bank specified in the First Schedule to the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act. 
1~. ) 
18. The Corporation may invest its moneys in the securities of the 
20 Central Government or any State Government or in such other manner 
IilS may be prescribed. 
19.(1) The Corporation shall, before ute commencement of ,udl 
year, p~pare a statement of programme of its activities during, thetoJtb. 
coming year as well as financial estimates in respect thereof. 
2S (2) The statement prepared under sub-section (1) shall, not less than 
three mOnths before the commencement of each year. be submitted to 
the Central Government for it!; approval. 
(3) The statement and the financial estimates of the Corporation 
J;C!iened to in sub-section (1) may, with the approval of the CeBtral. 
30 Government, be revised by the Corporation. 
'lll. (1) The Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and other 
i'elevant records and prepare an annual statement of aceountsin sUch 
form and in meh manner as may be Prescribed. 
(2) The accounts of the Corporation shall be audited by the., Comp-
3S troller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be ~ 
by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the OQrporation to the Comptroller and Auditor-
(;eneral.) . 
(3) The Comptr.oUer and Auditor-General and any ~ 
40 .lW~inted ,by h~ID in .connectio.n with the audit Gf . the accounts, cd ".the 
Corporation shall have the same rights and privileges and ?1J+G:mty, in 
Inwd-
mentor 
~~'.' 
Bu __ ' 
af ' .. , 
~-. tion. ' 
A ....... _ 
and- 'It 
of 
c~ 
tiA 

:J ',._' 
...,... 
tloIi. 
not 
liable 
to be 
tued. 
Pow~ of 
Central 
GoveJ'D-
ment 
to .ave 
dlrec-
uone. 
Chair-
man;-
Govw-
nOt'll, 
m-' 
ben,etc., 
to be 
public 
aervants. 
Protee-
tion of 
action 
taken In 
Ioocl 
faith. 
14 
~ with 8uch audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General hu 
in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, 
shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, COD-
nected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of 
the offices of the Corporation. 
(4) The accounts of the Corporation as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in 
thia behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause 
the same to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
Zl. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961, 
or any other enactment for the time being in force relating fo income. 
taX or any other tax on income, profits or gains, the Corporation shall 
not be liable to pay any income-tax or any other tax in respect of-
5 
10 
(4) any income, profits or gains, accruing or arising odt of the IS 
Fund of the Corporation or any amount received in that Fund; and 
(b) any income, profits or gains, derived or any amount received, 
by the Corporation. I ' 
CHAPTER IV 
MISC'EU.A.NEOUS 
22. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time as and when 
occasion arises, issue to the, Corporation such directions as it may think 
necessary in the interest of the security of the State or preservation of 
public order requiring it not to make a broadcast on a matter specified 
20 
in the direction or to make a broadcast on any matter Of public impor- 2S 
tance specified in the direction. 
(2) Where the Corporation makes a broadcast in pursuance 
of the direction issued under sub-section (1), the fact that such broadcast 
has been made in pursuance of such direction may also be announced 
I.ong with such broadcast, if the Corporation so desires. 30 
(3) A copy of every direction issued under sub-section (1) shall be 
laid before each House of Parliament. ! ' 
23. The Chairman and every other Governor, every officer or other 
employee of the Corporation and every member of a committee thereof, 
the President and every member of the Broadcasting Councilor every 3S 
member of a Regional Council or a Recruitment Board shall be deemed 
to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code. I * ol'l880, 
K. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Corporation, 
the Chairman or any Governor or officer or other employee thereof or 40 
the President or a member of the Broadcasting Council or a member of a 
'Regional Councll or a Recruitment Board for anything which is in. good 
faith done or intended to be done ill pursuance of this Act or of any rules 
or· regulations made thereunder, 

15 - ,< 
~. All orders and decisions of the Corporation shall be au,thenticated 
by' the -slgnature" of the Chairman or -any other Governor authorised by 
the Corporation in this behalf and all other instrwnents exeCuted by the 
CorpOration shall be' authenticated by the signature of the Executive 
S Governor or by any officer of the Corporation authorised by him' iu' this 
behalf. 
26. 'l'he Corporation may, by general or special order, delegate to the 
Chairman 01' any other Governor or to any officer of the Corporation, sub-
ject to such c'onditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified there-
10 in, such of its powers and duties under thii Act as it may deem tit. 
27. The Corporation shall prepare once in every calendar ~ar, in such 
form and within such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving 
a full account of its activities (including the recommendations andsug-
gestions made by the Broadcasting Council and the action taken thereon) 
IS during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the 
Central Government and that Government shall cause the 'i&JDe to be 
laid before each House of Parliament. 
28. (1) 14he Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carry:ing out the provisions of this Act. 
20 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
aoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the followina 
matters, namely:-
(a) the salaries and allowances and conditions 01. service in rea. 
pect of leave, pension (if any) I provident lund and other matters in 
2S relation to the Chairman and the Whole-time Governors under sub-
section (5) of section 6; 
(b) the allowances payable to the Part-time Governors under 
5ub-section (6) of section 6; I ! 
(c) the control, restrictions and conditions subject to which the 
30 Corporation may appoint officers and other employees under sub-
aection (1) of section 9; 
(d) the manner in which and the conditions and r.tnctiona 
subject to which a Recruitment Board may be establilhed under tub· 
section (1) of section 10; 
35 . (e) the qualifications and other conditions of service of the 
members of a Recruitment Board and their period of ofllce under 
lIub-section (2) of section 10; I I 
(f) the terms and conditions in accordance with which tho depu-
tation may be regulated under sub-section (2) of section 11; 
40 (g) the salary and allowances and conditions of service in res-
45 
pect of leave, pension (if any), pro.vident fund and other matlers in 
relation to the President of the Broadcasting Coundl Under aub-
section (5) of section 13; j 
(h) the allowances payable to other members of the Broadca.t-
ing Council and the members of the Retional Counoils, undet tub-
-.section (6) of section 13; 
Autberl· 
ticaUon 
of orden 
and 
other 
instru-
ments of 
Corpo-
ration. 
Dele,a-
tion of 
POW8r1. 
AllnuAt' 
repo~. 
Pow .. 
to make 
ru1ea. 
\ ' 

Power 
tomalee 
rep-
latUftit. 
16 
(i) the manner iIi whtch the Corporation may ilWest its money. 
1inder section 18; : 
, (j) the form and the manner in whlch the annual statement of 
. accounts shall. be p.repared under sub-section. (1) of section 20; 
(k) the form in, and the time within, which the Corporation may 5 
prepare an annual report under section 27; 
(1) any other matter which is required to be, or may be. pres-
cribed. 
29. (I) The Corporation may, by.notiication, make regulationl not 
inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder for enabling 10 
i~ to perform its functions under thil Act. 
,.(2)Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
feaulaUons may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the manner in which and the purposes for which the Cor-
porationmay associate with itself any person under sub-section (7) IS 
of section 3; 
(b) the times and places at which meetings of the Board of 
Governors shall be held and, the procedure to be followed 
thereat, ~d the quorum necessary fQr the transaction .,f thebuatness 
at a meeting of the BOBrd of Governon under sub.section (1) of 20 
section 8; 
(e) the methods of recruitment and conditions of service of 
ofBcers and. other employees of the Corporation under sub-section 
(!) of section 9; 
. . (d).the remuneration and other conditions of service, including 25 
, penSion, 'leave and provident fund in relation to an ofticer or 9ther 
employees of the Corporation under sub-section (4) of section 11; 
. ,(e) the authority competent to make certain appointments 
referred to in clause (a) of sub.section (6) of section 11; 
,(f) the services which may be pl'ovided. by the Corporation 30 
. ~under clause (f) of lulHlection (.J) of. seetion 12; 
(g) the detennination and levy of fees and other service charges 
in rel!'ea of ad~rtisements and other programmes under sub· 
s~ (6) of section 12; 
(h) the manner in which and the period within which com· 3$ 
plaints may be made under sub-section (2) of seetion 14; 
(i) Qny other matt~r in respect of which provision is, in the 
opinioI) of the Corporation, necessary for the perfol'lllaDOe of ita 
functions under this Act: 
~Qvided ~t the regulations under clause (c) or clause (cl) 40 
,shall be lXl,ade only with the prior approval ot the Central Govern. 
raent. 

17 
30. Every rule an~. every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after: it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be com· 
prised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
5 the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the suc· 
cessive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or regulation, or both Houses agree that the rule or regula· 
tion ~hould not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in Buell modified form or be of no effeet, as the case may be; 
10 80, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation. I ' 
U. It any difficulty arises i~ giving effect to the provisions of this Ad, 
the C~tral Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, 
15 lIlake s~chpro~ions, not in.c<Ul8iatent with the provisions of tlIJs Act, 
M it Jl).ay deeD). neC(!1;sary, for the removal of the di:fJiculty: 
Provided that no st*:h order shall be made after the expIry. of a 
period of three years from the appointed day. . 
Rules 
and 
regula-
tions to 
be laid 
before 
Pal'lia' 
ment. 
Power to 
remOVe 
difficuI-
tiel. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It is the Government's declared policy to confer autonomy on Akash-
vam and Doordarshan thereby ensuring that they function in a fair, ob-
jective and creative manner. It is in this context that it is proposed to 
provide for the establishment of an autonomous Corporation to be known 
as 'Prasar Bharati' (Broadcasting Corporation of India) and to entrust to 
it the functions which are at present discharged by Akashvani. and 
Doordarshan . The intention is that the proposed Corporation should 
function as a genuinely autonomous body-innovative. dynamic and 
flexible-with a high degree of credibility. It must function fna de-
mocratic manner which enriches our democratic traditions and institu-
tions, being responsible to the people and Parliament 'of India and 
keeping in mind the variegated traditions, languages and cultures of the 
country. . 
2. The Corporation is eonceived of as a single unit with two distinct 
wings-Radio and Television respectively. The proposed structure takes 
into account the need for ensuring that Radio and Television, which 
belong to two distinct cultures, are enabled to evolve ana grow in terms of 
thelr own genius whil~, at the same time, ensuring a commonality in over-
all apprOB'Ch which alone can ensure that the requirements of the people 
in terms of entertainment. information and education are met. 
3. The Corporation win have a Board of Governors comprisIng a. 
Chairman, an Executive Governor, a Govel"nor who would be responsible 
for finance and a Governor incharge of personnel matters. Besides, these 
full-time functionaries, the Board will also have six part-time Governors-
people of eminence drawn from diverse walks of me. The Governors 
will be appointed bv the President of India on the recommendations of a 
Committee headed liy the CliaIrman of the RaJya Sablia and con.tin~ 
of the Chairman of the Press Counell of India arid a nominee of the Pre-
sident of India. 
4. The Corporation will, while discharm.n~ its functions. be guided by 
speclflea objectives. with emphasis on uplioldfng the unity ana Inte~ty 
of the country, nurturin~· the democratic and social values f>nshrined In 
the Consti,utfon and projectin~ the varied cultural tradition<; of different 
re~ons of the country. 
5. The Executive Governor shall be the Chief Executive of the Cor-
poration, responsible for its day-to-day administration. 
/' 6. The Bill also provides fOr the establishment of a Broadeastin'/i! 
Council, consfstin~ of a President and ten other Memtiers Itppointed by 
the President of India, Thi~ Council will ensure that th~ ritlzen'fI rijlbt to 
be informed freely, truthfully and' obiectivelv is fully protecte<! 
and that tne COI'pOl'ation aoeR not stt'ay from the olijec-
18 

19 
tive of ensuring adequate coverage to the countryts diverse culture, 
and of catering to the various sections of society. This Council will 
consider complaints about programmes broadcast by the Corporation in 
this context and render suitable advi'Ce to the Board of Governors. 
7. In addition to making provisions regarding establishment and com-
position of the Corporation, appointment and removal of the Governors 
of the Corporation, the Bill also provides for transfer of properties 
and funds at present vested in the Central Government for the purpose of 
Aka-shvani and Doordarshan to the Corporation, transfer of employees of 
Akashvani and Doordarshan to the Corporation and other ancillary mat-
ters and the establishment of RecrUitment Boards for recommending the 
appointment of ofticers and other employees of t)1e Corporation. 
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
Nzw DELHI; P. UPENDRA. 
The 26th December, 1989. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2 seeks to define certain expreisions used in tpe Bill. 
Clavae 3 provides for the estabaishment eI. the Broadcalting Corpora-
tion to be known as 4Prasar Bhuati' and for its composition. 
Claus.es 4 to 6 provide for the appointment of the Chairman and the 
Board of Governors. powers and functions of the Chairman and the Ex-
ective Governor and also the term of office and conditions of service of 
the Chairman and other Governors. 
("'"lGu.ae 7 deals with the removal and suspension of Chairman and other 
Governors. The grounds of removal as provided in. the clause are 
the same as those provided in article 317 of the Constitution with respect 
to removal of the Chairman or other members of a Public Service Com-
mission. The Chairman and other Governors may be removed 
from office by an order of the President on the ground of misbehaviour 
after the SuPl'f!me Court on a reference made to it by the President 
has on inquiry held in accordance with sueh procedure as the Supreme 
Court may by rules provide, reported that tile Chairman or other 
Governor ought. on any such ground to be removed. The President may 
suspend from office the Chairman or other Governor where a reference 
r..as been made to the Supreme Court for inquiry as to whether he should 
be removed on the ground of misbehaviour. The President cannot 
pxercise the power to suspended the Chairman or other Governor with-
(lut obt~ininP.' the nrior anproval of thp Supreme Court. The President 
may remove the Chairman or any Whole-time Governor from office 
if he is adjudged as an insolvent or enga.~s during rjs 
term of office in any paid employment outside th(' duties of 
his office or if he is. in. the opinion of the President. unfit to continue fm 
office by reaRon of infirmitv of body or mind. As in the case of a 
member of Public Service Commission, the ~ound of misbehaviour 
includes a case in which the Chairman Or a Whole-time Governor is ot' 
becomes in any way concerned or interested in anv contract or a~ee­
ment made bv or on, qehalf of the Corporation Or the Government of 
India or the Government of a State or participates in any wav in the 
profit thereof or in any benefit or pmolument arising therefrom other-
wiSe than as 8 member and in common with the other members of an 
incorporated company. .A Part-time Governor will also incur similar 
disqualification if re is or be<:omes interested in anv contract or aqreement . 
with the Corporation. 
Clause 8 deals with thp. meetings of the Board of Governors. 
Clause 9 empowers the Corporation to appoint. in consultation with 
the Recruitment Board. such officers and other employees as may be 
necessary. 
Claat.'Ie 10 provides for the establishment of one or more Recruitment 
Boards for thE' purpose of selection of candidates to the pests of officers 
and other employees under the Cnrporation. 
I, .......... ~ 
20 

Claust 11 deals with the :transfer of aervWe of the 9i1Uni empleyee. 
of the Akaahvani and DoordarBhan to the Corporation by order of the 
Central Government. It also provides that no auch order shall be made 
in relation to any officer or other eID.Ployee if he has intimated the Cen-
tral Government. within the time specifted. his intention of not becoming 
an employee 01 the Corporation. 
CLause 12 anumeratu the functionS of the Corporation. Sub..clauae 
(1) provides that it shall be the primary duty of the Corporation to 
organise and conduct public broadcasting services, to inform, educate and 
entertain the public and to ~nsure a balanced. development of radio and 
television. Sub-ciaule {Z) of this clause enumeratea the various objec-
tives by which the Corporation shall be guided in the discharge of itl 
functions. 
<':Lauses 13 and 14.-Clause 13 provides for the establishment by the 
Corporation of a Broadcasting Council consisting of a President aad ten 
other members. Clause 14 empoweri the Broadcasting Council to re-
ceive and consider complaints from any person or group of pe1'IOa5 
aUeging that a programme broadcast by the Corporation or the function-
ing of the Corporation generally or in a speciftc iNtame is net in 
accordance with the objectiyes for which the CorporationiseltabHlhed 
and also from any person claiming himself to have been treated unjustly 
or unfairly in any manner in connection with any programme broaoast 
by the Corporation or unjustly or unfairly treated in any malUle!' in 
connection with any programme by the corporation. The clause also 
empgwers the Broadcasting Council to follow such procedure as it thiDks 
tit for disposal of complaints. 
<.:Lause 15 deals with the transfar of certain auets and liabWUes, etc., 
held for the purposes of Akashvani and Doordarshan to the Corporation. 
<':la.'Ule 16 provides for the payment by the Central Government, after 
due appropriation made by Parliament by law, to the Corporation, in each 
financial year, the proceeds of the broadcast receiver lieence fees, if 
any. after deducting the collection charges, and such other sums of 
money as the Govemment considers necessary by way of equity, grant-
in-aid or loan. . 
C'lau.~e 17 provides for the Fund of tM Corporation. 
Clause 18 relates to the investment of the money. of the Corporation. 
C'LCl'Use 19 lays down that the Corpor.tion may prepare a statement of 
programme of activities during the forthcoming year as well as financial 
estimate'S in respect thereof before the commncement of each year. 
Clause 20 lays dOWh that the Corporation. shall maintain proper ae .. 
counts and other relevant records and prepare an Annual Statement of 
Accounts which shall be audited by the Comptroller and AUditor-General 
of India. 

c C~a",e 21 seeks to exempt th~ Corporation from the payment of in-
Iome-taxor any other tax in respect of any income/ profits or gains, 
derived by the Corporation. 
Clause 22 empow&s the Central Government to issue such directions 
as it may think necessary, in the interest of security of the State or pre-
servation of public order, requiring it not to make a broadcast or, on 
any matter of public importance, specified in the direction. A copy of 
each such direction shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
CLau.se 23 provides for the Chairman, Governors and ol:iicers or other 
employees of the Corporation, etc., and every member of its committees, 
the President and every member of the Broadcasting Council. or a Re-
gional Counc:il, thereof or a member of a Recruitment Board to be pub1i! 
servants within the meaning of sedion 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
Clause 24 seeks to give protection for anything which is in good faith 
done oT.' intended to be done in pursuance of the Act or any rules and 
regulations made thereunder by the persons referred to in section 23. 
CLause 25 provides fOr the authentication of orders and decisions of 
the Corporation by the sipature of the Chairman or o~er Governor 
authorised by the Corporation in this behalf and all other instruments 
by the signature of the Executive Governor or by any other officer of the 
Corporation authorised by him. 
Clause 26 provides for the delegation, by general or special order, of 
the powers of the Corporation to the Chairman or any other Governor or 
to any officer of the Corporation subject to such conditions and limitations, 
if any, as may be specified in the order. 
(..1ause 27 provides for the preparation by the Corporation of an annual 
report giving a full account of its activities during the previous year. 
The Central Government has to cause the same to be laid before ea~ 
House of Parliament. 
Clause 28 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carry-
ing out the provisions of the Act. 
Clause 29 empowers the Corporation to make regulations not incon-
sistent with the Act and the rules made theteunder for enabling it to dis-
charge i+8 functions under the Act. 
ClaUBe 30 provides for laying of the rules and regulations made under 
the Act before Parliament. 
Clause 311 provides for removal of difficulties in giving effect to the 
~visions of the Act. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
According to sub-clau,se (5) of clause 3 of the Bill, the Board of Gov-
ernors of the . Corporation shall consist of one Whole-time Chairman, ~e 
WhOle:..time Executive Governor two other Whole-time GOVe1'hors, six . " - ' J 
Pad-Ume Governors and one Nominated Governor. AccorcUng'to ftb-
clause (-5) of clause 6 of the Bill, the Chairman, the Executive Governor 
and the other two full-time Governors shall be entitled to such salatietl 
and allowances as may be prescribed. According to clause 10 of the Bill, 
the Corporation would have one or more boards to be known as tMo 
Recruitment Board. or Boards. The conditions of service of theMPtnbers 
of the Recruitment :Boards would be as may be prescribed. According 
to clause 13 of the Bill, there will be a Broadcasting Council to reeeive 
complaints. The Council shall consist of a President who shall be a 
whole-time member and ten other part-time members. Expenditure 
on the Board of Governors of the Corporation, the Broadcastin~ Council 
and t.'le Recruitment Boards is estimate~ to be about Rs. 1.0 crare per 
annum recurring and Rs. 40 lakhs non-recurring. 
z~ According to clause 15 of the Bill, all properties and assets, in-
cluding the Non-Iapsable Fund, are to be transferred to the proposed 
Corporation along with all de.bts, obligations and liabilities. The total 
value of the assets of Akashvani and Doordarshan have not yet been 
assessed and, therefore, cannot be indicated. The estimated b8Iance in 
the Non-lapsable Fund on 1-4-1990 is estimated to be Rs. 111 crores. . 
3. Clause 16 of the Bill provides for payment by the Government to 
the proposed Corporation of the proceeds of Broadcast Receiver Licence 
Fee. if any. as reduced by collection charges and such pther sums bf 
money as the Government considers necessary by way of equity, grant-
in-aid or loan. 
4. Broadcast Receiver Licences have been aiscontinued from 1985-86. 
So, at present, there is no income from Broadcast Receiver Licences 
which can be paid to the proposed Corporation. The main receipt of 
the Corporation will be the income from commercial advertisement 
which is about Rs. 230 crores (gross) in 1989-90. 
5. At 1989-90 level of expenditure on Akashvani and Doordarshan the 
Central Government is fundin.g them to the extent of Rs. 55.28 crores 
on Non Plan Account (net, after taking into account receipts and re-
coveries of Rs. '313.17 crores) and Rs. 408.01 crores on Plan Accoun.t (net). 
6. The Corporation will, over a period of time, strive to reduce its 
dependence on ("..overnment budgetary support. 
2) 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA'nON 
ClaUSe 28 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central GOvernment to 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act. The matters in 
reaped of which such rules may be made relate inter dill to the salary 
and allowances and conditions of service and other matters in relation 
to th~ Chairman and the Whole~time Governors, the allowances payable 
to the Part-time Governors the control, restrictions and conditions sub-
ject to which the Corporation may appoint ofRcers and other employees. 
the manner in which and the conditions and restrictions subject to which 
a RecruUment Board may be established, the quallftcations and other 
conditions of serv1ce of the members of such a Board, the salary, al1ow~ 
ances., etc., of the President of the Broadcasting Councll, the manner of 
investment of the Corporation's money. etc. 
2. Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to empower the Corporation to make 
regulations not inconsistent with the Act and the rules thereunder for 
enabling it to perform its functions under the Act. The matters in 
respect of which such regulations may be made relate inter alia to 
the manner in which and the purposes for which the Corporation may 
associate with itself any person in complying with any of the provisions 
of the Act. to the time and place at which meetings of the Board of 
Governors shall be held and the procedure to be followed thereat, and 
the quorum necessary at such meetings, the recruitment and conditions 
of service of officers and other employees of the Corporation. 
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under clause 
28 of the Bill and the matters in respect of which regulations may be 
made under clause 29 of the Bill are all matters of detail or procedure 
or matters for which it is not practicable to make prOVision in the Act. 
Further, as provided in clause 30 of the -Bill, the rules and regulations 
have to be laid before Parliament. Hence the delegation of legislative 
power is of a normal character. 

LOK SABRA 
BILL 
to provide fOl' the establishment. of a Broadcasting Corporation for India, 
to be known as P.rasar Bharati, to define its composition. functions 
and powers and to provide for matters connected. -therewith or inci-
dental thereto. 
(Shri P. Uperrdra, Minister Of Information and Broadcasting.) 