‘As wrropucen in Lok SABHA ON

1 4 JUL 1992

Bill No. 99 of 1992

a

THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF
UNDERTAKINGS) AMENDMENT BILL, 1992

A
BILL

| to amend the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1910 and the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Amendment Act, 1992.

5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertak-
ings) Act, 1970,—

(a) in section 3, sub-section (2A), in the proviso, for the words
“rapees five hundred crores”, the words “rupees one thousand five
hundred crores” shall be substituted;

(0) in section 9, in sub-section (2), in clause (4), for the words
“rupees five hundred crores”, the words “rupees one thousand five
hundred crores” shall be substituted.

Short
title

and
commen-
cement.

Amend-
ment of
Act 5 of
1970.


2)

Amend- 3. In the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Us |
ment of takings) Act, 1980,—

Act 40 of

1980. (@) in section 3, in sub-section (2A), im the proviso, for the
“rupees five hundred crores”, the words “rupees one thousand
hundred crores” shall be substituted;

(0) in section 9, in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for the wort

“rupees five hundred croves”, the words “rupees one thousand
hundred crores” shall be substituted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Committee, on Banking ‘Regulations and ‘Supervisory Prac-

appointed by the Bank of international Settlements (BIS) has pres-
ribed certain capital adequacy standards to be followed by commercial
ks, The BIS standards seek to measure capital adequacy in terms of
tatio of capital to risk-weighted assejs. This ratio is arrived at by
ding the capital of the bank comprising of paid-up capital, reserves,
, by the amount of risk-weighted assets and expressing the result in
centage terms. The risk-weighted assets are calculated by assigning
erent weightages to the different categories of assets on the basis of
e risk element involved therein. The recommended BIS norm is that

internationally operating banks must acquire a capital-to-risk weight-
-assets ratio of 8 per cent. by March, 1992. These standards have been
accepted for implementation by several countries.

2. The Committee on Financial System under the Chairmanship of
4 M. Narasimham has also inter «ia recommended in its report that
6 banks in India should reach the BIS norms for capital adequacy in
shased maancr. The Committee has recommended that norms should
achieved as early as possible and in any event by March, 1994
n the case of banks with an international presence. The other banks are
ised to achieve the capital adequacy norm of 4 per cent, by March.
908 and 8 per cent. by March, 1996.

3, At present the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Indertakings) Act, 1970 and the Banking Companies (Acquisition: and
ransfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 provide that the paid-up capital of

corresponding new bank under the Acts may be increased by the
atral Government from time to time provided that the paid-up eapital
any such bank shall in no case be in excess of rupees five hundred
The above ceiling of rupees five hundred crores was provided
s in 1988. As a result of contri-

capital of the banks in the last

pores.
‘ough the amendments made to the Act:
ion of the Government to the paid-up
“yw years, the above ceiling has alresdy been reached by one bank and
more banks are likely to reach the maximuin limit in the near
ture. Further contribution in respect of these banks would be possible
nly if the present limit is revised upwards.

4, The Biil therefore provides for enhancement of the ceiling on the
id-up capital from the present level of rupees five hundred crores
to rupees one thousand five hundred crores.

New DELHI; MANMOHAN SINGH

the 29th June, 1992.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

At present, ihe Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer

Undertakings) Act, 1970 and the Banking C
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 i
every corresponding new bank as are i
Schedule to the aforesaid Act may b
ernment, from time to time, provided
bank shall in no case be in excess 0.
above ceiling of rupees five hundred crores was provided through
amendments made to the Acts in 1988, The Government. has
contributing to the paid-up capital of the said banks in the last
years with a view to enable them to achieve over a period internation-
ally accepted capital adequacy norms. As a result, in the case of o;
bank, the paid-up capital has already reached the present statutory
limit of rupees five hundred crores, Some more banks are likely
reach the maximum limit in the near future. Further contribution i

respect of these banks would be possible only if the present limit
revised upwards.

2. The Bill therefore Proposes to enhance the existing ceiling from
rupees five hundred crores to Tdpees one thousand five hundred crores,

3. A sum of Rs. 70) crores has been provided for this purpose in the
Budget Estimates of the current year as investment in the equity capital
of the Nationalised Banks. The expenditure will be met from out
the Consolidated Fund of India. This investment will be simul
ously re-invested by the said banks in interest bearing special securi S
to be issued by Government of India and there would therefore be no
net cash outgo from Government funds.

4. The provisions of the Bill do not involve any other expenditure
of a recurring or non-recurring nature except for Payment of interest
on special securities.


ANNEXURE

Exrracts rroM THe Banking Companies (Acquisition AnD TRANSFER OF
Unoerraxines) Acr, 1970

(5 or 1970)
* 2 * ® रू
CHAPTER वा

TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF EXISTING BANKS
eet) के * * * x
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in stb-section (2),

the paid-up capital of every corresponding new bank constituted under
section (1) may from time to time be increased by—

(a) such amounts as the Board of Directors of the corresponding
new -bank may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank and with
the previous sanction of the Central Government, transfer from
the reserve fund established by such bank to such paid-up capital.

(b) such amounts as the Central Government may, in consui-
tation with the Reserve Bank, contribute io such paid-up capital:

Provided that the paid-up capital of any such bank shall in no case
be in excess of rupees five hundred crores.
* * * * कर

9. (7) * * 2 * *

(2) Im particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, the said scheme may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:— y

(a) the capital structure of the corresponding new bank, so how-
ever that the paid-up capital of any such bank shall not be in excess
of rupees five hundred crores;

* * * * *

Exraacis FROM THE Bangine Companies (Acquisizion AnD TRANSTER OF
Unpertakines) Act, 1980

(40 or 1980)
* * = * *
CHAPTER IT
‘TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS oF Existinc Banks
3. (1) * + के & हु

(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
the paid-up capital of every corresponding new bank constituted under
sub-section (1) may frora time to time be inereased by—

(a) such amounts as the Board of Directors of the corresponding
new bank may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank and with

5

Establish-
ment of
corres-
ponding
new banks
and busi-
ness
thereof.

Power of
Central
Govern-
ment to
make
scheme.

Establish.
ment of
corres.
pond-

ing new
banks
and
Business
thereof.


Power of

Govern-
ment to
make

scheme.

(6) such amounts as the Central Government may, in 001
tion with the Reserve Bank, contribute to such paid-up capil

Provided that the paid-up capital of any such bank shall in no
be in excess of rupees five hundred crores,
eS = . * *
9. (7) * # * *

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
going power, the said scheme may provide for all or any of the 4010:
matters, namely: —

हू + ® * e


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer

Undertakings) Act, 1970 and the Banking Companies (Acquisit
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980. s

(Dr, Maninohan Singh, Minister of Finance)