THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUN DRED AND TENTH  AMENDMENT)
 BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Tenth Amendment)
Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 243D of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause (2), for the word “one-third”,  the word “one-half” shall be substituted;
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of article
243D.
 TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 99 of  2009

2
(ii) in clause ( 3), for the word “one-third”, the word “one-half” shall be
substituted;
(iii) for clause (4), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or
any other level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes
and women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide:
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in
any State shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number
of such offices in the Panchayats at each level as the population of the Scheduled
Castes in the State or of the  Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to the total
population of  that  State:
Provided further that not less than one-half of the total number of offices
of Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in
the Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes:
Provided also that not less than one-half of the total number of offices of
Chairpersons (including the number of offices reserved for women belonging  to
the Scheduled Castes and  the Scheduled Tribes) in the Panchayats at each level
shall be reserved for women:
Provided also that the number of offices reserved under this clause shall
be allotted by rotation to different Panchayats at each level.”.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Panchayats have a vital role to play in the welfare and development of the weaker
sections of society, including women. The representation of the marginalised sections
of the society in Panchayati Raj Institutions serves to enhance their voice within these
bodies and promotes inclusive governance which is essential for inclusive growth.
2. It needs to be recognised that women suffer multiple deprivations of class,
caste and gender. The existing  provisions in the Constitution relating to reservation
for women in Panchayats have facilitated women, in general, and women from even the
most marginalised communities, becoming politically active. Further, reservation of
offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats for women has brought them into leadership
positions. This has enhanced the image of women in the society, especially in rural
areas, and has made Panchayati Raj Institutions more inclusive institutions.
3. Article 243D of the Constitution provides that not less than one-third of the
total number of seats, and seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes as well as offices of Chairpersons in Panchayats at each  level, shall be reserved
for women. There is a further need to enhance women's participation in Panchayats, as
it would serve the twin purpose of empowering women and making Panchayats more
inclusive institutions.
4. Accordingly, it is proposed that the reservation for women in Panchayats in the
total number of seats, offices of Chairpersons and in the seats reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes across three tiers should be raised from not less than
one-third to not less than one-half.  Reservation for women belonging to the Scheduled
Caste and  Scheduled Tribe categories in the offices of Chairpersons in Panchayats at
each level should also be not less than one-half.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; C.P. JOSHI.
The 6th November,  2009.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
243D. (1)* * * * *
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (1) shall
be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the
Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less then one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats
to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat shall be reserved for women and such
seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat.
(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or any other level
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in such
manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide:
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in any State shall bear, as
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of such offices in the Panchayats
at each level as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled
Tribes in the State bears to the total population of the State:
Provided further that not less than one-third of the total number of offices of
Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women:
Provided also that the number or offices reserved under this clause shall be allotted
by rotation to different Panchayats at each level.
* * * * *
4
Reservation of
seats.

LOK  SABHA
lok sabha————LOK   SA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri C. P. Joshi, Minister of Panchayati Raj)
GMGIPMRND—4586(S-5)—19.11.2009.