1
THE FISHERMEN (WELFARE) BILL, 2012
By
SHRI S.S. RAMASUBBU, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of fishermen in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Fishermen Welfare Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Board" means the Fishermen Welfare Board established under section 3.
(ii) "fisherman" means a person engaged in fishing and fishing related works
such as repairing, maintaining and manning boats, nets and other equipments used in
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 99 of  2012
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
fishing or peeling, drying and selling of fish and solely dependent on the income
earner from selling of fish; and
(iii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up a
Board to be known as the Fishermen Welfare Board.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of properties, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The Board shall consist of,—
(i) a Chairperson and four other members to be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) not more than one representative each from the littoral States and
Union territories to be nominated by the respective State Governments and
Union territories Administrations;
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall provide to the Board such number of officers and
staff as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board.
4. (1) The Board shall formulate a scheme for the welfare of fishermen.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such a scheme shall
also provide for—
(i) provision of  boats, nets, jetties and life boats at concessional rates;
(ii) provision of loan facilities for purchasing of  boats, nets and life boats;
(iii) provision of cold storage facilities for fish and other ‘catches’ by fishermen
at subsidized rates;
(iv) facilitating the export of fish;
(v) transportation facility of  processed fish to seaport or airport for the purpose
of export at concessional rates;
(vi) insurance facilities;
(vii) free health care facilities to fishermen and their family members;
(viii) old age pension;
(ix) subsistence allowance during such situations as floods, storms or rains
when fishermen cannot go into sea for fishing; and
(x) housing facilities at concessional rates.
5. Notwithstanding anything in this Act or any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall pay compensation of—
(i) rupees ten lakh to the nearest kin of a fisherman in case of his death, or;
(ii) rupees five lakh to the fisherman in case of a serious injury to him due to
any accident while catching fish on the high seas or actions of the pirates.
6. (1) Where a fisherman while fishing is imprisoned by a foreign country on account
of straying into territorial waters of that country or is kidnapped by any person including
pirates, the Central Government shall take all necessary measures to facilitate the early
release and transportation of fishermen to his home.
Fishermen
Welfare
Board.
Board to
formulate a
scheme for
welfare of
fishermen.
Compensation
in case of
death or
serious injury.
Release of
fishermen
from
imprisonment
by a foreign
country.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) The Central Government shall pay a subsistence allowance of rupees three thousand
per month in such manner as may be prescribed to the family of a fisherman imprisoned
under the circumstances referred to sub-section (1) till the fisherman is released and
brought home.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf,  provide to the Board by way of grants such sums of money as the
Central Government may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Grants by the
Central
Government.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Fishing is an important occupation for lakhs of people in our country since ancient
times. The fish is processed and exported to many countries thereby generating a considerable
monetary benefit to the country. Fishing industry provides employment to lakhs of people
directly or indirectly. Fish is consumed by many people and fish oil is also used in making
medicines.
Lakhs of fishermen are involved in this occupation. But the difficulties the fishermen
are facing are manifold. Fishing is seasonal occupation in the sense that fishermen cannot go
into sea throughout the year for fishing. There is also no facility for processing, storage,
marketing, transportation and export of fish. Moreover, a fisherman has to pay huge rent for
boats, etc. which he has to hire during fishing and on a given day, he may not earn anything.
Besides, in the recent times, fishermen are facing another grave situation of being fired upon,
killed or attacked either by mistake or deliberately by defence forces of another country on
the plea of intruding into the territorial waters of that country. There have been many instances
when our fishermen were killed or captured or imprisoned and tortured. The chances of being
kidnapped by pirates on the high seas also add to their problems.
No compensation or subsistence allowance is given by the Government in such cases.
A mechanism for the welfare of fishermen is absolutely essential and the Bill aims at in that
direction.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; S. S.  RAMASUBBU
August 7, 2012.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of a Fishermen Welfare Board. Clause 4
provides that the Board shall formulate a scheme for the welfare of fishermen. Clause 5
provides for compensation to a fisherman in case of death or serious injury. Clause 6 provides
for subsistence allowance to the family of fishermen while they are imprisoned in a foreign
country. Clause 7 provides for grants by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve
a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of fishermen in the country and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri S.S. Ramasubbu, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2563LS(S3)—30.08.2012.