5
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 99 of 2025
THE PROMOTION OF NATURAL AGRICULTURE  
BILL, 2025
By
Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary, M.P.
a
BILL
to promote natural farming by the farmers devoid of chemical fertilizers and 
pesticides and for matters connected therewith.
 Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Promotion of Natural Agriculture Act, 2025. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—  
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government 
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Definitions.

2
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
Appropriate 
Government 
to measures 
for promoting 
Natural 
farming.
Promotion 
of Natural 
Farming 
by the 
Appropriate 
Government.
(b) “agricultural produce” includes wheat, paddy, pulses, sugarcane, cotton, 
oil seeds, coarse grains like maize, millet, jowar, bajra, gram, soyabean, fruits 
and vegetables such as potato, onion, tomato, cauliflower, cabbage including 
such other agricultural or horticultural produce which are used for human 
consumption or for any medicinal purposes;
(c) “chemical fertilizers” means substances synthesized chemically that are 
added to soil to supply one or more plant nutrients essential to the growth of 
plants; 
(d) “natural farming” means a method of farming that excludes the use of 
synthetic chemicals, fertilizers, pesticides, and genetically modified organisms 
and relies on techniques such as crop rotation, green manure, compost and 
biological pest control; and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The appropriate Government shall promote natural farming by encouraging 
farmers under its jurisdiction to adopt eco-friendly farming technology in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 
Provided that the natural farming shall be voluntary and not binding on the 
farmers.
4. The appropriate Government shall, for promoting natural farming in 
the country,—
(a) provide research, training and demonstration of latest agricultural 
techniques and practices on natural or organic farming to the farmers;
(b) diversify the agricultural produce grown with natural and organic 
manure;
(c) test and certify the quality of organic manure and pesticides used in 
natural farming;
(d) conduct research on soil health, crop production and pest 
management used in natural farming;
(e) provide assistance to the farmers practising natural farming and 
affected from natural calamities including floods and drought;
(f) give priority to the farmers practising natural farming in irrigation 
facilities;
(g) provide high-yielding and pest resistant seeds to farmers practising 
natural farming;
(h) put a check on fragmentation of land holding and improve land use 
efficiency for natural farmers;
(i) conduct skill development programmes to train rural youth in 
natural farming; and
(j) create employment opportunities in rural areas by promoting 
natural farming.

5
10
15
20
25
30
35
3
Establishment 
of Natural 
Agricultural 
Produce 
Market.
Appropriate 
Government 
to open 
procurement 
centre.
Appropriate 
Government 
to promote 
industries 
involved 
in natural 
farming.
5. (1)The Central Government shall fix the minimum support price (MSP) for 
natural agricultural produce which shall not be less than twice of the price fixed for 
the agricultural produce in ordinary farming.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the farmers practising 
natural farming have benefits of crop insurance two times in comparison to farmers 
practising usual farming.
6. The appropriate Government shall establish National Agricultural 
Produce Market in all agricultural markets including the Agricultural Produce 
Market Committees established by the State Government concerned under its 
jurisdiction for sale of natural agricultural produce. 
7. The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of 
procurement centres for storage and transportation of agricultural produce 
cultivated by natural farming.
8. The appropriate Government shall promote,—
(a) making of food items from natural agricultural produce in rural areas; 
and
(b) cottage and small-scale industries to use agricultural produce grown 
from organic and natural manure.
9. The appropriate Government shall ensure that revenues generated from the 
purchase of carbon credit limits by the companies generating carbon emission in 
excess to the prescribed limit to promote natural farming in the country.
10. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty.
 Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two 
years from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, 
be laid before each House of Parliament.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,  for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
Power to 
remove 
difficulty.
Power to make 
rules.
Minimum 
support price 
and insurance 
for natural 
agricultural 
produce.
Use of 
revenues 
generated 
from purchase 
of excess 
carbon credit 
for promoting 
natural 
farming.

4
5
or the successive  sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is necessary to implement the Natural Agriculture Bill 2025 for raising and 
protecting the prices of natural agricultural produce, increasing the participation 
of farmers in the development of natural agriculture, producing food items in 
accordance with health requirements, liberalizing agricultural services for farmers 
adopting natural farming and other purposes. It will be an important step to raise the 
income of farmers adopting natural farming.
Hence, this Bill.
 N ew Delhi; DARSHAN SINGH CHOUDHARY
July 8, 2025.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appropriate Government to take measures 
for promoting natural farming in the country. Clause 6 provides for the establishment 
of Natural Agricultural Produce Market by the appropriate Government. Clause 7 
provides for the establishment of adequate number of procurement centres for storage 
and transportation of agricultural produce cultivated by natural farming. Clause 8 
provides for promoting food items produced from natural farming in rural areas. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crore will be involved as 
recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A sum of rupees one hundred crore will also be involved as non-recurring 
expenditure. 

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail 
only. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to promote natural farming by the farmers devoid of chemical fertilizers and 
pesticides and for matters connected therewith.
(Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary, M.P.)