AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 99 of 2022
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2022.
2. After section 379 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the following sections shall
be inserted, namely:—
“379A. (1) Whoever, with the intention to commit theft, suddenly or
quickly or forcibly seizes or secures or grabs or takes away from any person
or from his possession any moveable property, and makes or attempts to
escape with such property, is said to commit snatching.
Short title.
545 of 1860. Insertion of
new sections
379A and
379B.
Snatching.

(2) Whoever, commits offences of snatching under sub-section (1) shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
five years but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine
of rupees twenty five thousand.
379B. Whoever, in order to commit snatching, or in committing the
snatching, causes hurt or wrongful restraint or fear of hurt; or after committing
the offence of snatching, causes hurt or wrongful restraint or fear of hurt in
order to effect his escape, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment which
shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to fourteen years, and
shall also be liable to fine of rupees twenty five thousand.”
5
10
2
Snatching with
hurt, wrongful
restraint or fear
of hurt.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Statistics show that there has been a multi-fold increase in the cases of snatching
in the country. Every incident of snatching poses a threat to the law and order situation
in the area and also affects the freedom of movement of people after a certain time in
the evening. Some parts of the country have become notorious for their snatching
incidents. This is emblematic to a larger crisis and has kept the police on edge.
Snatching is one of the worst forms of street crimes and measures must be taken
to control their occurrence. The present law is unclear and does not apply uniformly
throughout the country. Therefore, there is a need to have a single law with stringent
punishment for the snatchers. The snatchers are mostly repeat offenders who have
benefitted from the ill equipped legal system of the country.
This Bill draws inspiration from Haryana which saw a drop in the cases of snatching
after they introduced a specific section in Indian Penal Code for snatching with
increased punishment. In the end, we all desire and aim for a safe environment for the
men and women of our country with the freedom to roam on the streets without fear.
Hence this Bill
     NEW DELHI;          NISHIKANT DUBEY
22  November, 2022.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
[ACT NO. 45 OF 1860]
 *   *  * *
379. Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
 *   *  * *
Punishment for
theft.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
—————
(Dr. Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)