1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 99 of  2015
THE  CULTURAL HERITAGE CONSERV ATION BILL, 2015
By
SHRI DILIP KUMAR MANSUKHLAL GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the conservation of cultural and natural
heritage and for matters connected therewith.
WHEREAS the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization
Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage was held
in Paris in 1972, which India ratified in 1977, to ensure effective and active measures for
protection, conservation and presentation of the cultural and natural heritage situated on
the territory of each State Party;
A
ND W HEREAS, it is expedient and necessary to enact a law for the purpose of
implementing the decisions to take appropriate legal, scientific, technical, administrative
and financial measures necessary for the identification, protection, conservation,
presentation and rehabilitation of cultural and natural heritage.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Cultural Heritage Conservation Act, 2015.
(2) It  extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
Cultural
Heritage
Conservation
Board.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘Board’ means the Cultural Heritage Conservation Board constituted under
section 3;
(b) ‘Convention’ means the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural
Heritage held in Paris in 1972 and ratified by India in 1977;
(c) ‘cultural heritage’ includes the following:—
(i) ‘ancient monument’ and ‘archaeological sites and remains’ defined in
clauses (a) and ( d), respectively, of section 2 of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958;
(ii) monuments, that is to say, architectural works, works of monumental
sculpture and painting, elements or structures of an archaeological nature,
inscriptions, cave dwelling and combinations of features, which are of outstanding
universal value from the point of view of history, art or science;
(iii) groups of buildings, groups of separate or connected buildings which,
because of their architecture, their homogeneity or their place in the landscape,
are of outstanding universal value from the point of view of history, art or
science;
(iv) sites, that is to say, works of man or the combined works of nature and
man, and areas including archaeological sites which are of outstanding universal
value from the historical, aesthetic, ethnological or anthropological point of
view;
(d) “natural heritage” includes,—
(i) natural sites or precisely delinerated natural areas which are of
outstanding value from the point of view of science, conservation or natural
beauty;
(ii) geological and physiographical formations and precisely delineated
area which constitute the habitat of threatened species of animals and plants
and are of outstanding value from the point of view of science or conservation;
(iii) natural features consisting of physical and biological formations or
groups of such formations, which are of outstanding  value from the aesthetic or
scientific point of view; and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2) The words and expressions used in this Act but not defined herein and defined in
the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 or the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have the same meaning, respectively,
assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1)  The Central Government, shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Cultural Heritage Conservation Board.
(2) The Board shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government, from amongst the
persons having such knowledge and experience, as may be prescribed;
(b) fourteen other members to be appointed by the Central Government from
amongst the persons who have knowledge and experience in the field of archaeology,
history, architecture, conservation, science and technology, environment science,
town and country planning or public administration:
24 of 1958.
24 of 1958.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Provided that the Chairperson and the members of the Board shall be appointed
in consultation with theLeaders of Opposition of both the Houses of Parliament.
(3) The Chairperson and every member of the Board shall hold office for a period of
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and the members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The terms and conditions of the office of, including the method of filling casual
vacancies in the Board, and the procedure for removal or disqualification of the Chairperson
or a member of the Board, shall be such as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify.
(6) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, make regulations for
regulating its own procedure.
(7) The Board shall have a Secretariat consisting of such number of officers and
employees as may be prescribed.
(8) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and employees shall be such as may be prescibed.
4. The Board shall perform the following functions:—
(i) to monitor the implementation of obligations under the Convention and issue
such directions as it may consider necessary and expedient for the effective
implementation of such obligations;
(ii) to advise to the Central Government on identification, safe-keeping,
conservation and preservation of cultural heritage and natural heritage;
(iii) to issue such directions as it considers necessary to ensure safety, security,
conservation and management of cultural heritage and natural heritage;
(iv) to cause or undertake an inquiry and initiate legal action in consultation with
the Central Government, in case of offences relating to cultural heritage and natural
heritage sites;
(v) to take such measures as it may consider necessary for implementation of the
provisions of this Act; and
(vi) to undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. Whoever—
(i) damages or causes any damage to cultural heritage or natural heritage site;
(ii) indulges in any propaganda with the intention of causing any damage to a
cultural heritage or natural heritage site;
(iii) commits any offence under section 30 of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958; or
(iv) commits or omits to commit any act in relation to cultural heritage or natural
heritage sites, which is an offence under any other law for the time being in force;
shall be guilty of committing an offence under this Act.
6. (1) Any person who commits any offence under section 5 shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, which may
extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
(2) A penalty awarded upon conviction for an offence under this section shall be in
addition to any penalty, which upon conviction is provided for such offence under any other
law for the time being in force.
Functions of
the Board.
Offences.
Punishment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
24 of 1958.

4
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
proceedings of committing an offence under this Act may be instituted after the expiry of the
period of limitation.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an
offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed to be a cognizable offence.
9. It shall be the duty of every person holding a civil post in connection with the affairs
of the Union or a State to assist the Board in discharge of its functions.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Board shall prepare an annual report, in such form and manner, as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Board shall submit the annual report to the Central Government.
(3) The annual report shall be laid by the Central Government, as soon as may be after
it is received, before each House of Parliament:
Provided that the Board may also submit interim report or reports to the Central
Government, which shall cause the report to be laid, as soon as  may be after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Proceedings
after the
expiry of the
period of
limitation.
An offence
under the Act
to be a
cognizable
offence.
Every person
holding a civil
post to assist
the Board.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Provisions of
the Act to be
in addition to
other laws.
Annual
report.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in its
17th General Assembly meeting on 16th November, 1972 adopted a Convention relating to
the conservation of world cultural and natural heritage. India has ratified this convention on
14th November, 1977. It is in our own interest to implement this convention and enact a law
to give effect to the provisions of the Convention. For the conservation of cultural heritage,
a suitable mechanism for vigilance and monitoring is needed. These purposes would be
better served if a Board to be known as the Central Heritage Conservation Board is set up to
work as a watchdog agency for the conservation of the cultural heritage and natural heritage
sites in the country.
The terms 'cultural heritage' and 'natural heritage' have been given a very comprehensive
meaning to include all cultural and natural heritage, provided for in the Convention and the
terms also cover the ancient monuments and archaeological sites and remains defined in the
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958.
Our cultural and natural heritage sites are a vulnerable lot. We all know that people
who visit such sites are not sensitive enough to try and keep such sites well maintained. It is
a common practice to deface our monuments by inscribing names on them. There have also
been other cases of vandalism against our cultural and natural heritage sites. Keeping in
view the increasing number of crimes against such sites, there is a need to provide for
punitive action for such crimes.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; DILIP KUMAR MANSUKHLAL GANDHI
March 20, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Cultural Heritage Conservation
Board for the conservation of the cultural sites in the country. It also provides for a secretariat
for the purpose of assisting the Board. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees
one hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred and fifty crores is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 3(6) of the Bill empowers the Board to make regulation for regulating its own
procedure. Clause 13 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are
matters of administrative details and procedure and, as such, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the conservation of cultural and natural
heritage and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Dilip Kumar Mansukhlal Gandhi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—25LS(S3)—16-04-2015.