1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  99 of  2016
Amendment of
section 16.
THE CONSUMER PROTECTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI DUSHYANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-Seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 16 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words “is, or has been a Judge of a
High Court”, the words “is a Judge of a High Court or an Advocate for at least ten years in a
High Court or of two or more such Courts in succession,” shall be substituted.
3. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words “is
or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court”, the words “is a Judge of the Supreme Court or an
Advocate for at least ten years in a High Court or of two or more such Courts in succession,”
shall be substituted.
68 of 1986.
Amendment of
section 20.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The concept of separation of powers was proposed by Montesquieu in the sixteenth
century and the concept of equal opportunity has been highlighted by the framers of the
Constitution through various provisions. These two ideas are required to be incorporated in
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 which provides inter alia for better protection of the
interests of consumers and for that purpose to make provision for the establishment of
consumer councils and other authorities for the settlement of consumer disputes and for
matters connected therewith.
The executive, the legislature and the judiciary are known as the three pillars of
democrary. It is expected that the three should function independently without major
intervention of each other and that would ensure that the respective duties are discharged in
the best possible manner. However, at the same time, there should be sufficient check and
balances on these three wings so as to avoid any one of them from becoming totalitarian in
nature. In India, the checks and balances system has been working effectively. However, it
has come to notice that some of the Tribunals and Commissions have exclusive provisions
where only retired judges of the Supreme Court or the High Courts are being appointed by
the executives. This lies absolutely against the spirit of Constitution.
Therefore the amendment seeks to remove the provision for appointment of retired
judges as the Chairperson and members. Thus only a sitting judge of the Supreme Court or
a High Court, as the case may be, can be appointed to this post if that judge wishes to leave
his office of Judge voluntary and assents to join Tribunal or Commission.
The Bill also proposes to insert wherein an advocate with not less than ten years of
practice becomes eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson of the Tribunal. The rational of
such could be found in our Constitution which provides for appointment of advocates with
certain years of practice as Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court. The same should be
applied for Tribunals. This will facilitate the speedy disposal of the cases pending in Tribunals
because the positions in the Tribunals shall not remain vacant for long. This also captures
the idea of providing equal opportunity to people with equal experience and eligibility.
The proposed amendment seeks to ensure that the doctrine of checks and balances
and right to equality is maintained.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
February 11, 2016.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986
* * * * * * *
16. (1) Each State Commission shall consist of—
(a) a person who is or has been a Judge of a High Court, appointed by the State
Government, who shall be its President:
Provided that no appointment under this clause shall be made except after
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court;
* * * * * * *
20. (1) The National Commission shall consist of—
(a) a person who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court, to be appointed
by the Central Government, who shall be its President:
Provided that no appointment under this clause shall be made except after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India;
* * * * * * *
Composition
of the
National
Commission.
Composition
of the State
Commission.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—35LS(S3)—25.04.2016.