AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 99 of 2023
THE HEALTHCARE PERSONNEL AND HEALTHCARE 
INSTITUTIONS (PROHIBITION OF VIOLENCE AND 
DAMAGE TO PROPERTY) BILL, 2023
By
Dඋ.Sඁൺඌඁං Tඁൺඋඈඈඋ , M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit violence against healthcare personnel and damage or loss to property 
of healthcare Institutions and for matters connected therewith 
and incidental thereto.
 Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Healthcare Personnel and Healthcare
Institutions (Prohibition of Violence and Damage to Property) Act, 2023.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, 
extent and 
Commencement.
5

 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
 ( a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of State, the Government of 
that State and in all other case, the Central Government;
 ( b) “Healthcare Institutions” means— 
(i) a hospital, maternity home, nursing home, dispensary, clinic, sanatorium, 
mobile medicare units, e-medicine and tele-medicine centres or an institution 
by whatever name called that offers services, facilities requiring diagnosis, 
treatment or care for illness, injury, deformity, abnormality or pregnancy in any 
recognized system of medicine established and administered or maintained by 
any person or body of persons, whether incorporated or not; or 
(ii) a place established as an independent entity or part of an institution 
referred to in sub-clause (i), in connection with the diagnosis or treatment of 
diseases where pathological, bacteriological, genetic, radiological, chemical, 
biological investigations or other diagnostic or investigative services with the 
aid of laboratory or other medical equipment, are usually carried on, established 
and administered or maintained by any person or body of persons, whether 
incorporated or not; and shall include a healthcare institution owned, controlled 
or managed by –
(a) the Government or a department of the Government; or a Public 
Sector Undertaking or Autonomous Body of the Government;
(b) a trust, whether public or private;
(c) a corporation (including a society) registered under a Central, or 
Provincial or State Act, whether or not owned by the Government;
(d) a local authority; and
(e) a single doctor.
 Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, a mobile medical unit or an 
ambulance shall be deemed to be a healthcare institution if such vehicle is fitted 
with medical equipment and is used for providing healthcare service. 
 ( c) “healthcare personnel” include—
  ( i) a registered medical practitioner, possessing a recognized medical 
qualification as defined in clause (r) of section 2 of the National Medical 
Commission Act, 2019, and enrolled in a State Medical Register as defined in 
clause (v) (w) of that section;
  ( ii) a medical practitioner registered for practising in any other system of 
medicine which is recognized under any law for the time being in force;
  ( iii) a registered dentist, registered dental hygienist and registered dental 
mechanic shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the Dentist’s Act, 
1948;
  ( iv) a registered nurse, midwife, auxiliary nurse-midwife and health visitor 
who is registered as such under section 15A of the Indian Nursing Council Act, 
1947;
Definitions.
30 of 2019
16 of 1948
48 of 1947
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

  ( v) a medical student who is undergoing education or training in any system 
of medicine recognized by any law for the time being in force; 
  ( vi) a nursing student who is undergoing education or training in nursing 
profession; 
  ( vii) para-medical workers, para-medical student;
  ( viii) diagnostic services provider, and ambulance driver and helper;
  ( ix) security personnel designated by the healthcare institution;
  ( x) administrative and other staff of the healthcare institution;
  ( xi) Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA); and
  ( xii) any other category of persons notified by the appropriate Government 
from time to time;
 ( d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
 ( e) “property” means any property movable or immovable or medical 
equipment or medical machinery owned by or in possession of, or under the control 
of any healthcare personnel or healthcare Institution;
 ( f) “verbal abuse’ means the words used with the intention to insult or humiliate 
the healthcare personnel;  
 ( g) “violence” includes any of the following acts committed by any person 
against healthcare personnel which causes or may cause—
 ( i) harassment impacting the living or working conditions of such 
healthcare personnel and preventing them from discharging his duties; 
 ( ii) harm, injury, hurt, intimidation or danger to the life of such healthcare 
personnel, either within the premises of a healthcare institution or otherwise; 
 ( iii) obstruction or hindrance to such healthcare personnel in the discharge 
of his duties, either within the premises of a healthcare institution or otherwise; 
or 
 ( iv)  loss or damage to any property or documents in the custody of, or in 
relation to, such healthcare personnel; and
 ( h) words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860 or in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have the 
same meanings, respectively as assigned to them in those Codes.
 3. No person shall indulge in any act of violence against a healthcare personnel 
or cause any damage or loss to any property in a healthcare institution.
 4. ( 1) Whoever commits an act of verbal abuse to a healthcare personnel shall 
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend up to three 
months, or with fine which may extend up to fifty thousand rupees, or with both.
 ( 2) Whoever commits violence or abets or incites commission of violence 
Prohibition of 
violence.
Offences and 
penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45 of 1860
 2 of 1974

against any healthcare personnel or abets or incites or causes damage or loss to 
any property of a healthcare institution, shall, upon conviction, be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may 
extend up to five years, and with fine, which shall not be less than fifty thousand 
rupees but which may extend up to five lakh rupees;
 ( 3) Whoever, while committing violence as referred to in sub-section (2) 
causes grievous hurt as defined in section 320 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 to 
any healthcare personnel, shall, upon conviction, be punished with imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend up to seven 
years, and with fine, which shall not be less than two lakh rupees, but which may 
extend up to ten lakh rupees.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973,—
(i) upon a written request of the aggrieved healthcare personnel, it shall be 
mandatory for the person in charge of a healthcare institution to inform the officer 
in charge of the concerned police station of the commission of an offence under this 
Act; 
(ii) on receiving a complaint either from the institution or the affected 
healthcare personnel, a First Information Report should be registered within one 
hour of receiving the complaint;
(iii) any case registered under this Act shall be investigated by a police officer 
not below the rank of Inspector and investigation of such cases shall be completed 
within a period of thirty days from the date of registration of the First Information 
Report and such investigation shall be supervised by senior police officer not below 
the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police;
(iv) in every inquiry or trial of a case under this act, the proceedings shall be held 
as expeditiously as possible, and in particular, when the examination of witnesses 
has once begun, the same shall be continued from day to day until all the witnesses 
in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds the adjournment of the 
same beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded, and an 
endeavour shall be made to ensure that the inquiry or trial is concluded within a 
period of one year: 
Provided that where the trial is not concluded within the said period, the Judge 
shall record the reasons for not having done so:
Provided further that the said period may be extended by such further period, 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, but not exceeding six months at a time;
(v) for the purpose of providing for speedy trial, all cases registered under this 
Act shall be tried in designated special courts, which the State Government shall, 
with the concurrence of the High Court by notification in the official Gazette, set up 
in each district; and
(vi) for every Special Court the State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, designate Special Prosecutor for the purpose of conducting cases 
in that court. 
45 of 1860
2 of 1974
2 of 1974
Offence to be 
cognizable and 
non-bailable.
Information, 
investigation and 
trial of offences.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

 7. Where a person is prosecuted for committing an offence punishable 
under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of section 4, such offence may, with the 
permission of the Court, be compounded by the personnel against whom such act of 
violence is committed. 
 8. ( 1) Where a person is prosecuted for committing an offence punishable 
under sub-section (3) of section 4, the Court shall presume that such person has 
committed such offence, unless the contrary is proved. 
 ( 2)  In any prosecution for an offence under sub-section (3) of section 4 which 
requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the Court shall presume 
the existence of such mental state, but it shall be a defence for the accused to prove 
the fact that he had no such mental state with respect to the act charged as an offence 
in that prosecution.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
  ( a)  a fact is said to be proved only when the Court believes it to exist 
beyond reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence is established by a 
preponderance of probability; and 
  ( b) “culpable mental state” includes intention, motive, knowledge of a fact 
and the belief in, or reason to believe, a fact.
 9. (1) In addition to the punishment provided for the offence punishable under 
sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of section 4, the convicted person shall be liable 
to pay, by way of compensation,—
 ( i) such amount, as may be determined by the Court for causing hurt or 
grievous hurt to any healthcare personnel.
 ( ii) in case of damage to any property, or loss caused, the compensation 
payable shall be twice the amount of fair market value of the damaged property 
or the loss caused, as may be determined by the Court.
 ( 2) If the convicted person does not pay the compensation granted the said sum 
shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue under the Revenue Recovery Act, 
1890 in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not, save as otherwise 
expressly provided, in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
 11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
 ( 2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
1 of 1890.
Composition 
of Certain 
Offences.
Composition 
for acts of 
violence.
Application of 
other laws not 
barred.
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Presumption 
as to certain 
offences and 
culpable mental 
state.

 12. (1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out 
the provisions of this Act in respect of matters which do not fall within the purview 
of section 11.
 ( 2)  In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
 ( a) installation of CCTV cameras and round the clock Quick Reaction 
Teams with effective communication, security gadgets particularly at casualty, 
emergency and areas having high footfalls;
 ( b) security of sensitive healthcare institution to be managed by a designated 
and trained force;
 ( c) entry restriction of entry of undesirable persons in the healthcare 
institution premises and other areas as may be specified;
 ( d) display of important information addressing the stakeholders in every 
healthcare institution and police station;
 ( e) appointment of Nodal Officer to monitor registered cases of medical 
negligence; 
 ( f) expeditious filling up of vacant posts of doctors and para-medical staff 
in healthcare institution and Primary Health Centres (PHCs) to avoid excessive 
pressure on doctors and to maintain global doctor-patient ratio;
 ( g) better infrastructural facilities and medical equipment and provision 
of extra monetary incentive for the doctors and para-medical staff serving in 
remote areas as compared to major and metro cities with better career prospects; 
and
 ( h) standard operating procedures regarding the manner in which persons 
in custody, accused or otherwise are to be presented in healthcare institution 
and before healthcare personnel. 
 
6
Power of State 
Government to 
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The increasing and repeated instances of violence against healthcare personnel 
represents a complex and grave challenge that must be addressed on a priority basis. 
Violence in any form and in any setting is reprehensible. However, acts of violence 
against medical professionals and on healthcare institutions are the most extreme 
and should be dealt with an iron hand. 
While there is no central data on the number of assault cases against healthcare 
personnel or health facilities, the Indian Medical Association (IMA) estimates that 
75 percent of all doctors face some form of verbal and physical abuse during their 
service, with cases of violence severely underreported. International organizations, 
such as the World Health Organization (WHO) and the International Council of 
Nurses (ICN), have also recognized the issue of violence against healthcare workers 
as a global concern.
The legislative lacunae only further complicate our ability to address this 
challenge. Currently, no national-level law, including the Indian Penal Code 
(IPC), 1860 and Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC), 1973 comprehensively and 
categorically addresses the issue. State Laws vary: the existing laws are weak in 
their implementation, vary a lot and lack scope to protect all Healthcare personnel. 
Infact, several States and Union Territories have no laws at all.
It is submitted that while ‘Health’ and ‘Law and Order’ are state subjects, the 
Parliament is competent to legislate on matters related to ‘Legal, Medical and other 
professions’ as listed in Entry 26, List 3 (Concurrent List) of the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution of India.  Infact, in 2019, the Central Government had introduced 
a draft bill titled the Healthcare Service Personnel and Clinical Establishments 
(Prohibition of Violence and Damage to Property) Bill which would have made 
such violence a non-bailable and cognisable offence with a jail term of up to five 
years. But this was withdrawn before it could be considered by Parliament.
Our healthcare professionals are neither adequately appreciated nor protected 
and it is imperative to realise that this is not just a medical fraternity issue. Violence 
against them also weakens the healthcare ecosystem and affects the quality of 
services provided to patients, in turn, leading to a further risk of violence.
On May 10, 2023, a young doctor, committed to using her training and education 
in the serve of humanity, had her life tragically taken away from her at the hands 
of a patient she was seeking to heal. Her death must not just serve as a reminder of 
the consequences of our inaction but become a call to action, particularly towards 
ensuring that the legislative lacuna is addressed so that no doctor has to worry about 
their own safety in the line of duty. 
This, therefore, necessitates a comprehensive central legislation to put a check 
on such violence at the earliest, to promote a safe work environment for doctors and 
other healthcare personnel and to serve as a model for state laws.
Hence  this  Bill.
 Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                    SHASHI THAROOR 
   July 3, 2023.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 and Clause 12 of the Bill empower the Central Government and the 
State Government respectively to make rules for carrying out the purposes of this 
Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative 
power is of a normal character. 
8

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to prohibit violence against healthcare personnel and damage or loss to property of 
healthcare Institutions and for matters connected 
therewith and incidental thereto.
(Dr . Shashi Tharoor , M.P .)