1
THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Commissions of Inquiry (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952,—
(a) in sub-section (1), after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
''Provided further that the time specified in the notification issued for the purpose
of appointment of Commission of Inquiry shall not be more than three years.''; and
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words ''six months'', the words ''three months'' shall
be substituted.
Short title.and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 99 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 3.
5
10
60 of 1952

2
\\SERVER3 \ E \ BILL2010 \ LS \ 3924LS
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 empowers the Central Government and the
State Governments to appoint Commissions of Inquiry to inquire into any definite matter of
public importance involving cases of irregularities, etc. The objective behind appointment of
such Commissions of Inquiry is to find out the truth behind the alleged irregularities, ensure
justice for the victims and identification of the guilty.
However, experience has shown that Commissions of Inquiry take very long time
period to submit their reports thereby defeating the purpose for which they are appointed.
By the time they give their report, the issue has often lost its relevance. Hence, the aim of
giving justice to the victims gets diluted and it does not serve any purpose. Moreover, due
to inordinate long terms and repeated extentions given to the Commissions of Inquiry, the
financial burden on the appropriate Government increases enormously thus causing waste
of public money.
To overcome the aforesaid problem, it is necessary to amend the Commissions of
Inquiry Act, 1952 to ensure that the report of the Commission of Inquiry is submitted within
a period of three years from the date of its appointment and also to provide for laying, before
each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, the Legislature of the State, the Report of
the Commission together with a memorandum of action taken thereon by the Government
within a period of three months of the submission of the report.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT  PREMJIBHAI  SOLANKI
July 14, 2010.

3
\\SERVER3 \ E \ BILL2010 \ LS \ 3924LS
Appointment of
Commission.
ANNEXURE
Extract from the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952
(Act No. 60 of 1952)
* * * * * *
3. (1) The appropriate Government may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary so to
do, and shall, if a resolution in this behalf is passed by each House of Parliament or, as the
case may be, the Legislature of the State, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a
Commission of Inquiry for the purpose of making an inquiry into any definite matter of public
importance and performing such functions and within such time as may be specified in the
notification, and the Commission so appointed shall make the inquiry and perform the functions
accordingly:
Provided that where any such Commission has been appointed to inquire into any
matter—
(a) by the Central Government, no State Government shall, except with the
approval of the Central Government, appoint another Commission to inquire into the
same matter for so long as the Commission appointed by the Central Government is
functioning;
(b) by a State Government, the Central Government shall not appoint another
Commission to inquire into the same matter for so long as the Commission appointed
by the State Government is functioning, unless the Central Government is of opinion
that the scope of the inquiry should be extended to two or more States.
* * * * * *
(4) The appropriate Government shall cause to be laid before each House of Parliament
or, as the case may be, the Legislature of the State, the report, if any, of the Commission on
the inquiry made by the Commission under sub-section (1) together with a Memorandum of
the action taken thereon, within a period of six months of the submission of the report by the
Commission to the appropriate Government.
* * * * * *

GMGIPMRND—3924LS(S3)—18-08-2010.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)