1
THE  AUTHORITY  FOR  ADV ANCE  RULINGS  ON  CENTRAL
TAXES BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of an Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes as a
substitute of the Authority for Advance Rulings constituted under section 245-O of
the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Excise,
Customs and Service Tax) constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act, 1962,
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes
Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) This section shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of this Act
shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 99 of 2007

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ''appointed day'' means the date with effect from which the Authority is
constituted under section 3;
(b) ''Authority'' means the Authority constituted under section 3;
(c) ''Central taxes'' means taxes or duties levied or collected under the Central
Excise Act, 1944, the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Customs Act, 1962, the Customs Tariff
Act, 1975, Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1994, and taxes or duties chargeable under
any other law for the time being in force in the same manner as taxes or duties under
any of the said Acts, as the case may be;
(d) ''Chairperson'' means the Chairperson of the Authority;
(e) ''Member'' means a Member of the Authority and includes the Chairperson;
(f) ''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules.
CHAPTER II
A
UTHORITY FOR ADV ANCE RULINGS ON CENTRAL TAXES
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an
Authority for giving advance rulings on Central taxes, to be called as the Authority for
Advance Rulings on Central Taxes.
4. The Authority shall consist of the following Members appointed by the Central
Government, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson, who is a retired Judge of the Supreme Court;
(b) an officer of the Indian Revenue Service, who is, or has been, or is qualified
to be, a Member of the Central Board of Direct Taxes;
(c) an officer of the Indian Revenue Service (Customs and Central Excise), who
is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Member of the Central Board of Excise and
Customs;
(d) an officer of the Indian Legal Service, who is, or has been, or is qualified to
be, an Additional Secretary to the Government of India:
Provided that for giving advance rulings—
(i) under the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Authority shall exclude the Member
under clause (c); and
(ii) under the Acts other than the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Authority
shall exclude the Member under clause (b).
5. The Chairperson or other Member shall hold office as such for a term of five years
from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains,—
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of seventy years; and
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-five years,
whichever is earlier.
6. The salary, allowances and pension payable to, and other conditions of service of,
the Members shall be such, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
7. No proceeding before, or pronouncement of advance ruling by, the Authority shall
be questioned or be invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect
in the constitution of the Authority.
Definitions.
1 of 1944.
43 of 1961.
52 of 1962.
51 of 1975.
32 of 1994.
Constitution
of Authority.
Composition
of Authority.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
Term of office
of Members.
Salary,
allowances,
pension and
other
conditions of
service of
Members.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings.

3
8. (1) The Authority shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions, as have
been conferred on it under the Central Excise Act, 1944, the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Customs
Act, 1962, the Finance Act, 1994, this Act, or any other Act.
(2) The Authority shall, for the purposes of exercising its powers regarding discovery
and inspection, summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath, issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents, compelling
production of books of accounts, other records and documents, have all the powers of a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
9. Every proceeding before the Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian
Penal Code, and the Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
10. The Authority shall have power to regulate its own procedure in all matters arising
out of the exercise of its powers.
11. The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Authority, provide the
Authority with such officers and staff, as may be necessary, for the exercise of the powers
and discharge of the functions of the Authority.
12. The office of the Authority shall be located in Delhi.
CHAPTER III
M
ISCELLANEOUS
13. (1) On and from the appointed day, the Authority for Advance Rulings constituted
under section 245-O of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Authority for Advance Rulings
(Central Excise, Customs and Service Tax) constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act,
1962 shall stand abolished.
(2) The Chairperson and other Members of the Authorities under sub-section (1) shall
be deemed to be the Chairperson and other Members of the Authority constituted under
section 3 for the remainder of their respective tenures in the Authorities abolished.
(3) The officers and other employees of the Authorities under sub-section (1), appointed
to the sanctioned posts, shall be deemed to be the officers and other employees of the
Authority constituted under section 3.
14. Every application or other proceeding pending before the Authority for Advance
Rulings constituted under section 245-O of the Income-tax Act, 1961, functioning as such
and as the Central Sales Tax Appellate Authority under sub-section (1) of section 24 of the
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, and the Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Excise, Customs
and Service Tax) constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act, 1962, shall stand
transferred to the Authority on the appointed day.
15. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Authority, or
against the Chairperson or other Member, or any other person authorised by any of them for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any
rule or order made thereunder.
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for salary, allowances and pension payable to, and other conditions of
service of, the Members under section 6.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
Powers and
functions of
Authority.
1 of 1944.
43 of 1961.
52 of 1962.
32 of 1994.
5 of 1908.
Proceedings
before
Authority to
be judicial
proceedings.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Procedure of
Authority.
Staff of
Authority.
Location of
Authority.
Abolition of
existing
Authorities.
Transfer of
pending cases.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
make rules.
43 of 1961.
52 of 1962.
43 of 1961.
74 of 1956.
52 of 1962.

4
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
17. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the appointed day.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER IV
A
MENDMENT OF CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
18. In the Central Excise Act, 1944,—
(a) in section 23A, for clause ( e), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
'(e) ''Authority'' means the Authority constituted under section 3 of the
Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Act, 2007;';
(b) sections 23B, 23G and 23H shall be omitted.
19. In the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956,—
(a) in section 19, for sub-section ( 2A), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
''(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), the
Chairperson or a Member holding a post as such in the Authority for Advance
Rulings on Central Taxes appointed under clause (a) or clause (d), as the case
may be, of section 4 of the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Act,
2007 may, in addition to his being the Chairperson or a Member of that Authority,
be appointed as the Chairman or a Member, as the case may be, of the Authority
under this Act.'';
(b) in section 24,—
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words, figures and letter ''the Authority for
Advance Rulings constituted under section 245-O of the Income-tax Act, 1961'',
the words and figures ''the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes
constituted under section 3 of the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central
Taxes Act, 2007'' shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words ''the Authority for Advance Rulings'',
the words ''the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes'' shall be
substituted.
20. In the Income-tax Act, 1961,—
(a) in section 153, in sub-section (3), in Explanation I, for the words ''Authority
for Advance Rulings'', at both the places where they occur, the words ''Authority for
Advance Rulings on Central Taxes'' shall be substituted;
(b) in section 153B, in sub-section (1), in Explanation, for the words ''Authority
for Advance Rulings'', at both the places where they occur, the words ''Authority for
Advance Rulings on Central Taxes'' shall be substituted;
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Amendment
of Central
Excise Act,
1944.
Amendment
of Central
Sales Tax Act,
1956.
Amendment
of Income-
tax Act,
1961.
1 of 1944.
74 of 1956.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.

5
(c) in section 245N,—
(i) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(d) ''Authority'' means the Authority constituted under section 3 of
the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Act, 2007;';
(ii) clauses (e) and (f) shall be omitted;
(d) sections 245-O, 245P, 245U and 245V shall be omitted.
21. In the Customs Act, 1962,—
(a) in section 28E,—
(i) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
'(e) ''Authority'' means the Authority constituted under section 3 of
the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Act, 2007;';
(ii) clauses (f) and (g) shall be omitted;
(b) sections 28F, 28G, 28L and 28M shall be omitted.
22. In the Finance Act, 1994, in Chapter VA,—
(a) in section 96A, for clause ( d), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
'(d)'' Authority'' means the Authority constituted under section 3 of the
Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Act, 2007;';
(b) sections 96B, 96G and 96H shall be omitted.
Amendment of
Customs Act,
1962.
Amendment of
Chapter V A of
Finance Act,
1994.
52 of 1962.
32 of 1994.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, there are two Authorities for Advance Rulings, one constituted under
section 245-O of the Income-tax Act, 1961, which has under section 24 of the Central Sales
Tax Act, 1956, also been notified as the Central Sales Tax Appellate Authority, and the other
constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act, 1962, which is also an Authority for
Advance Rulings under the Central Excise Act, 1944 and  the Finance Act, 1994 for  purposes
of Service Tax. These Authorities, called as "Authority for Advance Rulings (Income-tax)"
and "Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Excise, Customs and Service Tax)", have been
established to enable applicants to obtain, in advance, binding rulings from the said
Authorities on issues which may arise in the determination of their tax liabilities.
2. While reviewing the performance of the said Authorities on Advance Rulings, it was
noticed that these Authorities did not have adequate work to justify separate Authorities
with separate establishments. A decision was, therefore, taken to constitute a common
Authority for Advance Rulings for performing the functions of these Authorities. For this
purpose, it is necessary to enact a separate legislation. Hence, the Authority for Advance
Rulings on Central Taxes Bill, 2007, for constituting an Authority for Advance Rulings on
Central Taxes.  Consequential amendments to the relevant provisions of the Income-tax Act,
1961, the Customs Act, 1962, the Central Excise Act, 1944, the Central Sales Tax  Act, 1956 and
the Finance Act, 1994 are also sought to be done through the Bill.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI;
The 30th November, 2007. P. CHIDAMBARAM.
————
PRESIDENT’S  RECOMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLE  117  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION
OF  INDIA
————
[Copy of letter No. 29/5/2005-Ad.IC, dated the 3rd December, 2007 from Shri P.
Chidambaram, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Authority
for Advance Rulings on Central Texes Bill, 2007, recommends under clause (1) of article 117
of the Constitution of India, the introduction of the above Bill in Lok Sabha.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Bill, 2007, seeks to provide for
the constitution of the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes consisting of a
Chairperson and three Members. As the Authority will be in lieu of the existing Authority for
Advance Rulings (Income-Tax) and Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Excise, Customs
and Service Tax), each consisting of a Chairperson and two Members, there will be no extra
expenditure in constituting the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes and its
supporting staff.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 16 of the Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes Bill,
2007, seeks to empower the Central Government to make, by notification in the Official
Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions of the said Bill. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
specifies that such rules may be made for salary, allowances and pension payable to and
other conditions of service of the Members, which includes the Chairperson.
2. The rules made by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after they
are made, before each House of Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made are generally matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
8

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL EXCISE ACT, 1944
(1 OF 1944)
* * * * *
CHAPTER III—A
ADV ANCE RULINGS
23A. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(e) "Authority" means the Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Excise, Customs
and Service tax) constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act, 1962.
* * * * *
23B. No proceeding before, or pronouncement of advance ruling by, the Authority
under this Chapter shall be questioned or shall be invalid on the ground merely of the
existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Authority.
* * * * *
23G . (1) The Authority shall, for the purpose of exercising its powers regarding
discovery and inspection, enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on
oath, issuing commissions and compelling production of books of account and other records,
have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(2) The Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195,
but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and every
proceeding before the Authority shall be  deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal
Code.
23H. The Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have power to
regulate its own procedure in all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers under this Act.
* * * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL SALES TAX ACT, 1956
(74 OF 1956)
* * * * *
CHAPTER VI
AUTHORITY TO SETTLE DISPUTES IN COURSE OF INTER-STATE TRADE OR COMMERCE
19. (1)* * * * *
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Chairman  or a Member
holding a post as such in the Authority for Advance Rulings appointed under clause (a) or
clause (c), as the case may be, of sub-section (2) of section 245-O of the Income-Tax Act,
1961 may, in addition to his being the Chairman or a Member of that Authority, be appointed
as the Chairman, or a Member, as the case may be, of the Authority under this Act.
* * * * *
24. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force and in section 19 of this Act, the Authority for Advance Rulings constituted under
section 245-O of the Income-tax Act, 1961 shall be notified by the Central Government in the
official Gazette, with such modifications as may be necessary, to make its composition in
Definitions.
52 of 1962.
Central Sales
Tax Appellate
Authority.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings.
Powers of
Authority.
Authority for
Advance
Rulings to
function as
Authority
under this Act.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
Procedure of
Authority.
9

10
conformity with section 19 of this Act, as the Authority under this Act till such time an
Authority is constituted under that section.
(2) On and from the date of the constitution of the Authority in accordance with the
provisions of section 19 of this Act, the proceedings pending with the Authority for
Advance Rulings shall stand transferred to the Authority constituted under that section
from the stage at which such proceedings stood before the date of constitution of the said
Authority.
* * * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961
(43 OF 1961)
153. (1)* * * * *
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (1A), (1B) and (2) shall not aply to the following
classes of assessments, reassessments and recomputations which may, subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2A), be completed at any time—
* * * * *
(ii) where the asessment, reassessment or recomputation is made on the assessee
or any person in consequence of or to give effect to any finding or direction contained
in an order under section 250, 254, 260, 262, 263, or 264 or in an order of any court in a
proceeding otherwise than by way of appeal or reference under this Act;
 (iii) where, in the case of a firm, an assessment is made on a partner of the firm
in consequence of an assessment made on the firm under section 147.
Explanation 1.—In computing the period of limitation for the purposes of this section—
(i) the time taken in reopening the whole or any part of the proceeding or in
giving an opportunity to the assessee to be re-heard under the proviso to section 129,
or
(ii)  the period during which the assessment proceeding is stayed by an  order
or injunction of any court, or
(iia)  the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing Officer
intimates the Central Government or the prescribed authority, the contravention of the
provisions of clause ( 21) or clause ( 22B) or clause ( 23A) or clause ( 23B) or  sub-
clause (iv) or sub-clause (v)  or sub-clause (vi) or sub-clause ( via) of clause ( 23C)
section 10, under clause ( i) of  of the proviso to sub-section ( 3) of section 143 and
ending with the date on which the copy of the order  withdrawing the approval or
rescinding the notification, as the case may be, under those clauses is received by the
Assessing Officer.
(iii) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing Officer directs
the asessee to get his accounts audited under sub-section ( 2A) of section 142 and
ending with  the last date on which the assessee is required to furnished a report of
such audit under that sub-section, or
* * * * *
(iva) the period (not exceeding sixty days) commencing from the date on which
the  Assessing  Officer received the declaration under sub-section (1) of section 158A
and ending with the date on which the order under sub-section ( 3) of that section is
made by him, or
(v) in a case where an application made before the Income-tax settlement
Commission under section 245C is rejected by it or is not allowed to be proceeded with
Time limit
for comple-
tion of assess-
ments and re-
assessments.

11
by it, the period commencing from the date on which such application is made and
ending with the date on which the order under sub-section ( 1) of section 245D is
received by  the Commissioner under sub-section (2) of that section, or
(vi) the  period commencing from the date on which an application is made
before the Authority for Advance Rulings under sub-section (1) of section 245Q and
ending with the date on which the order rejecting the application is received by the
Commissioner under sub-section (3) of section 245R, or
(vii)  the period commencing from the date on which an application is made
before the Authority for Advance Rulings under sub-section (1) of section 245Q and
ending with the date on which the advance ruling pronounced by it is received by the
Commissioner under sub-section (7) of section 245R,
shall be excluded:
Provided that where immediately after the exclusion of the aforesaid time or period, the
period of limitation referred to in sub-sections (1), (1A), (1B), (2) and (2A) available to the
Assessing Officer for making an order of assessment, reassessment or recomputation, as the
case may be, is less than sixty days, such remaining period shall be extended to sixty days
and the aforesaid period of limitation shall be deemed to be extended accordingly.
Explanation 2.—Where, by an order referred to in clause (ii) of sub-section (3)
any income is excluded from the total income of the assessee for an assessment year,
then, an assessment of such income for another assessment year shall, for the purposes
of section 150 and this section, be deemed to be one made in consequence of or to give
effect to any finding or direction contained in the said order.
Explanation 3.—Where, by an order referred to in clause (ii) of sub-section (3),
any income is excluded from the total income of one person and held to be the income
of another person, then, an assessment of such income on such other person shall, for
the purposes of section 150 and this section, be deemed to be one made in consequence
of or to give effect to any finding or direction contained in the said order, provided
such other person was given an opportunity of being  heard before the said order was
passed.
* * * * *
153B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 153, the Assessing Officer
shall make an order of assessment or reassessment.—
(a) in respect of each assessment year falling within six assessment years referred
to in clause (b) of section 153A, within a period of two years from the end of the
financial year in which the last of the authorisations for search under section 132 or for
requisition under section 132A was executed;
(b) in respect of the assessment  year relevant to the previous year in which
search is conducted under section 132  or requisition is made under section 132A,
within a period of two years from the end of the financial year in which the last of the
authorisations for search under section 132 or for requisition under section 132A was
executed:
Provided that in case of other person referred to in section 153C, the period of limitation
for making the assessment or reassessment shall be the period as referred to in clause (a) or
clause (b) of this sub-section or one year from the end  of the financial year in which books
of account or documents or assets seized or requisitioned are handed over under section
153C to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such other person, whichever is later.
Provided further that in the case where the last of the authorisations for search under
section 132 or for requisition under section 132A was executed during the financial year
commencing on the  1st day of April, 2004 or any subsequent financial year,—
Time limit for
completion of
assessment
under section
153A.

12
(i) the provisions of clause (a) or clause (b) of this sub-section shall have effect as if
for the words "two years" the words "twenty-one months" had been substituted;
(ii) the period of limitation for making the  assessment or reassessment in case of other
person referred to  in section 153C, shall be the period of twenty-one months from the end of
the financial year in which the last  of the authorisations for search under section 132 or for
requisition under section 132A was executed or nine months from the end of the  financial
year in which books of account or documents or assets seized or requisitioned are handed
over under section153C to the Assessing Officer having  jurisdiction over such other person,
whichever is later.
Explanation.—In computing the period of limitation for the purposes of this section,—
(i) the period during which the assessment proceeding is stayed by an order or
injunction of any court; or
(ii) the period commencing from the day on which the Assessing Officer directs the
assessee to get his accounts audited under sub-section ( 2A) of section 142 and ending on
the day on which the assessee is required to furnish a report of such audit under that sub-
section; or
(iii) the time taken in reopening the  whole or any part of the proceeding or in giving
an opportunity to the assessee of being re-heard under the proviso to section 129; or
(iv) in a case where an application made before the Settlement Commission under
section 245 is rejected by it or is not allowed to be proceeded with by it, the period commencing
from the date on which such application is made and ending with the date on which the order
under sub-section (1) of section 245D is received by the commissioner under sub-section (2)
of that section, or
(v) the period commencing from the date on which an application is made before the
Authority for Advance Rulings under sub-section (1) of section 245Q and ending with the
date on which the order rejecting the application is received by the Commissioner under sub-
section (3) of section 245R, or
(vi) the period commencing from the date on which an application is made before the
Authority for Advance Rulings under sub-section (1) of section 245Q and ending with the
date on which the advance ruling pronounced by it is received by the Commissioner under
sub-section (7) of section 245R,
shall be excluded:
Provided that where immediately after the exclusion of the afforesaid period, the period
of limitation referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of this section available to the Assessing
Officer for making an order of assessment or reassessment, as the case may be, is less than
sixty days, such remaining period shall be extended to sixty days and the aforesaid period of
limitation shall be deemed to be extended accordingly.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XIX—B
A
DV ANCE RULINGS
245N. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(d) "Authority" means the Authority for Advance Rulings constituted under
section 245-O;
(e)  "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Authority;
(f)  "Member" means a Member of the Authority and includes the Chairman.
245-O. (1) The Central Government  shall constitute an Authority for giving advance
rulings, to be known as "authority for Advance Rulings".
Definitions.
Authority for
Advance
Rulings.

13
(2) The Authority shall consist of the following Members appointed by the
Central Government, namely:—
(a) a Chairman, who is a retired Judge of the supreme Court;
(b) an Officer of the Indian Revenue Service who is qualified to be a
member of the Central Board of Direct Taxes;
(c) an Officer of the Indian Legal Service who is, or is qualified to be, an
Additional Secretary to the Government of India.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of
service of, the Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall provide the Authority with such officers and
staff as may be necessary for the efficient exercise of the powers of the Authority
under this Act.
(5) The office of the Authority shall be located in Delhi.
245P. No proceeding before, or pronouncement of advance ruling by, the Authority
shall be questioned or shall be invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy
or defect in the constitution of the Authority.
*****
245U. (1) The Authority shall, for the purpose of exercising its powers, have all the
powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as are referred to in section
131 of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section
195, but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI, of  the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 and every proceeding before the Authority shall be  deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section
196 of the Indian Penal code.
245V. The Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have power to
regulate its own procedure in all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers under this
Act.
* * * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962
(52 OF 1962)
* * * * *
CHAPTER VB
ADV ANCE RULINGS
28E. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(e) "Authority" means the Authority for Advance Rulings  (Central Excise,
Customs and Service Tax) constituted under section 28F;
(f)  "Chairperson" means the Chairperson  of the Authority;
(g)  "Member" means a Member of the Authority and includes the Chairperson;
and
* * * * *
28F. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Authority for giving advance rulings, to be called as  the Authority for Advance
Rulings Central Excise, Customs & Service Tax.
V acancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings.
Powers of the
Authority.
Procedure of
Authority.
Definitions.
Authority for
advance
rulings.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.

14
(2) The Authority shall consist of the following Members appointed by the Central
Government, namely:—
(a) A Chairperson, who is a retired Judge of the Supreme court;
(b) an officer of the Indian Customs and Central Excise Service who is qualified
to be a Member of the Board;
(c)  an officer of the Indian Legal Service who is, or is qualified to be, an Additional
Secretary to the Government of India.
(3) The salaries  and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of service of,
the Members shall be such as the Central Government may by rules determine.
(4) The Central Government shall provide the Authority with such officers and staff as
may be necessary for the efficient exercise of the powers of the  Authority under this Act.
(5) The office of the Authority shall be located in Delhi.
28G. No proceeding before, or pronouncement of advance ruling by, the Authority
under this Chapter shall be questioned or shall be invalid on the ground merely of the
existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Authority.
*****
28L. (1) The Authority shall, for the purpose of exercising its powers regarding
discovery and inspection, enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on
oath, issuing commissions and compelling, production of books of account and other records,
have all the powers of a civil court under the code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(2) The Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section
195, but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
and every proceeding before the Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the
Indian Penal code.
28M. The Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have power to
regulate its own procedure in all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers under this
Act.
E
XTRACTS FROM THE FINANCE ACT, 1994
(32 OF 1994)
* * * * *
CHAPTER V A
ADV ANCE RULINGS
96A. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(d) "Authority" means the Authority  for Advance Rulings (Central Excise, Customs
and Service Tax) constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act, 1962;
* * * * *
96B. No proceeding before, or pronouncement of advance ruling by, the Authority
under this Chapter shall be questioned or shall be invalid on the ground merely of the
existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Authority.
* * * * *
96G . ( 1) The Authority shall, for the purpose of exercising its powers regarding
discovery and inspection, enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on
oath, issuing commissions and compelling production of books of account and other records,
have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings.
5 of 1908.
45 of 1860.
Procedure of
Authority.
Vacancies, etc.,
not to
invalidate
proceedings.
Powers of
Authority.
Definitions.
2 of 1974.
5 of 1908.
Powers of
Authority.
52 of 1962.

15
(2) The Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195,
but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and every
proceeding before the Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal
Code.
96H. The Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have power to
regulate its own procedure in  all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers under this
Act.
* * * * *
Procedure of
authority.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.

LOK    SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of an Authority for Advance Rulings on Central Taxes as a
substitute of the Authority for Advance Rulings constituted under section 245-O of
the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Excise,
Customs and Service Tax) constituted under section 28F of the Customs Act, 1962, and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)
MGIPMRND—5183LS(S-5)—04.12.2007.