BID No. • of 1181 
THE FOOD CORPORATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 188'1 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Food Corporations Act, 1964. 
:s. it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Repub1le 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Food Corporations (Amendment) Act, Sbod 
1887. ~ 
o 
5 J. In section rT of the Food CGrporations Act, 1964, for 8Ub-sectioA ~ 
(1), the followine sub-section shall be substituted, namely: - moat of 
Act 37 
.. (1) A Food Corporation may, for the pu,rpose of carrying out of 1964. 
its functions under this Act.-
(a) take advances against stocks of foodgrains or other 
10 foodstuffs held by it, or borrow money-
15 
(I) from any scheduled bank, or 
(it) from any other bank or financial institution appro .. 
ed by the Central Government in this behalf, 01' 
(iU) from any other authority, organisation or inatltu-
tion or from the public on such terms and conditions as mal 
Ita approved by the Central Government, or 

2 
(b) issue and sell bonds and debentures carrying intereaL 
at such rates as may be fixed by the Central Government at the 
time the bonds or debentu"'es arc issued: 
Provided that the amount borrowed by a Food Corporation under 
this sub-section shall noL at any thne exceed ten times the paid-up 5 
capital and the reserve fU'rId establishE'~ under section 33.". 

STATEIIDtT OF.oJBJECTS AND ilEASONS 
:sertion 27 df the Food Corporations Act, 1984, empowers the' 1I"ood 
ObrpIel1ttion Of India -or a State Food Corporation estabUShed under ·the 
.ct1o take advances or borrow money from the Central 'Covernment or 
'!'Om. any scheduled bank or from any other bank or 'ftnancbtltnsfltuftrib 
""proved by -the 'Central Government in this behalf against stocks of 
foedgrltins or otherfoodstutfs held by it for the purpose of carrying out 
its fmlctions under the Act. The provisions of the Act do not pel'n'ttt 
a Tool; 'CorpO':'ation to borrow funds from other sources or to issue and 
aell bmtds or debentures. 
,2. The Food .corporations do not geDerate any internal reBOUl'Qft. 
They ;require funJs both for working capital requirements as well '. 
for inV'£:stment purposes. At present, the funds are being ,provided by 
amy the Government and ~e banking sector. 'It is proposed 'to diversify 
the sources of financing. ,~ , 
3. It is, therefore, proposed to amend section 27 Of the Food Corpora-
tions Act, 1964 (37 of 1964) to enable a Food Corporation to raise fUndi, 
as and when required, for its operational as well as investment require-
ments by the issue of bonds and debentures and also by borrowings from 
the Central and State Government institutions or public sector enter-
p,rises or bodies or from public or corporate sector, on such terms and 
condiU,ns as may be approved by the Central Govel'IUlle!lt. 
4. ""e Bill seeks to achieve the above obj,ective. 
H. K. L. BHAGAT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 18th Fe'bru.4-ry, 1987. 
3 

I'INANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
. Qia~ 2 of the Bill proposes to amend section 27 of the Food ~ 
raUoM Act, 1964, 80 as to enable the Food' Corporations established ... 
the Act to r~ise funds by the iSsue of bonds and debentures and alIO by 
~wnp .from the Central and State Government institutions or other 
organisations, institutions or from public on such terms and condittODl .. 
may be approved by the Central Government. The Central Government 
may 'give guarantee to such loanc; and advances taken and bonds and de-
~t\U"es issued by the Corporation. It is not possible to indicate the ex-
tent of borrowings that may be required by the Food Corporations as 
their need will vary from year to year. It is expected that, in the flrat 
:YHr, the borrowings from the proposed sources may be around Re. 200 
crorel. 
2. '!'be BiU deas not involve any expenditure either recurring or n ... 
~Il'. " 

Borrow-
ingpow-
~rs of 
Food 
Corpo. 
ration. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE FOOD CORPORATIONS ACT, 1964 
(37 OF 1964) 
• • • • • 
27. (1) A Food Corporation may, for the purpose of carrying out its 
functions under this Act, take advances against stocks of foodgrains or 
other foodstuffs held by it, or borrow money- . 
(i) from any scheduled bank, or 
(ii) from any other bank or financial institution approved by the 
Central Government in this behalf. 
• • • • • 
5 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
furthe.r to amend the Food Corporations Act, 1964. 
(Shri H. K. L. Bhagat, 
Minister of Parliamentary 
Affairs, Food and Civil Supplies) 