DIU No. 9 or 19$7 
THE COAL BEARING AREAS (ACQUISITION 
AND DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 19~7 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOB: SABRA) 

'tHE COAt BEARtNG AREAS (ACQUIStTION ANn 
DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 1957 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Appointment of competent authority. 
4. Preliminary notification respecting intention to prospect 
for coal in any area and powers of competent authorities 
thereupon. 
5. Effect of notification on prospecting licences and mining 
leases. 
6. Compensation for any necessary damage done under 
section 4. 
7. Power to acquire land or rights in or over land notified 
under section 4. 
8. Objections to acquisition. 
9. Declaration of acquisition. 
10. Vesting of land or rights in Central Government. 
11. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of land or 
rights in a Government company. 
12. Power to take possession of land acquired. 
13. Compensation for prospecting licences ceasing to have 
effect, rights under mining leases being acquired, etc. 
14. Method of determining compensation. 
15. COlts. 
16. Interest on awards. 
17. Payment of compensation. 

\1 
18. Prospecting and mining to be done by Central Government· 
in conformity with the Mineral Concession Rules. 
19. Power to delegate. 
20. Appeals. 
21. Power to obtain information. 
22. Power to enter and inSpect. 
23. Penalties. 
24. Service of notices and orders. 
25. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
26. Jurisdiction of civil courts. 
27. Power to make rules. 
28. Notifioations under Act 1 of 1894 in which proceedinp 
are pending to be treated as notifications under this Act. 

BiU NO.9 of 1951 
THE COAL BEARING AREAS (ACQUISITION AND 
DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 1957· 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to establish in the economic interest of India greater public control 
over the coal mining industry and its development by providing 
for the acquisition by the State of unworked land containing or 
likely to contain coal deposits or of rights in or over such land, 
for the extinguishment or mOdification of such rights accruing 
. by virtue of any· agreement, lease; licence or otherwise, and for 
matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
)f India ·asfollows:-:--
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cosl Bearing Areas 
.ion and Development) Act, 1957. 
Short title, 
(Acquisl- extent anel commence-
ment. 
(2) It ex~ends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu 
md Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
nent may, by notification.in the Offtcial Gezette, appoint. 
. . 2. In this Act, . unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "competent authority" means any person appointed to 
be a competent .authority under section 3; 
(b) "Government company" means a Government company 
as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 19~6, in which 
any land or rights in or over la~d shall have· vested under 
. *tioli it; .,.' , 
De finiti on •• 

2 
(c) "Mineral Concession Rules" means the rules for the 
time being in force made under the Mines and Minerals (Regu-
lation and Development) Act, 1948; " 011914" 
(d) the expression "person interested" includes all persons 
claiming an interest in compensation to be made on account of S 
the acquisition of land, or of the acquisition, extinguishment or 
modification of any rights in or over land, under this Act; 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(f) "Tribunal" means the TribWWll constituted under 10 
Appoint-
ment of 
competent 
authority. 
section 14. 
3. The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, appoint any person to be the competent authority for the 
purposes of this Act; and different persons may be appointed u 
competent authorities for different provisions of this Act and for 
different areas. 
:~~: 4. (1) Whenever it appears to the Central Government that coal 
!especting is likely to be obtained from land in any locality, it may, by notifl-
:r~8= }~r cation in the Oftlcial Gazette, give notice of its intention to prospect 
coal in any for coal therein. 
area and 
powen of (2) Every notification under sub-section (1) shall give a brief competent 
authorities description of the land and state its approximate area. 
thereupon. 
(~) On the issue of a notification under sub-section (1), it ahan 
be lawful for the competent authority and for his lervants and 
workmen-
(a) to enter upon and survey any land in such loea1ity; 
(b) to dig or bore into the sub-soil; 
(c) to do all other acts necessary to prospect for coal in the 
land; 
IS 
(d) to set out the boundaries of the land in which prospect- 30 
ing is proposed to be done and the intended line 'Of the work, 
if any, proposed to be made thereon; 
(e) to mark such boundari:es and line by placinr, marks; and 
<f> where otherwise the survey cannot be completed and 
the boundaries and line marked, to cut down and clear away any 3S 
part of any standing crop, fence or jungle: 
Provided that no person shall enter into any building or upon 
any enclosed court or garden attached to 8 dWelling hoUie {unltll 

3 
with the consent of the occupier thereof) without previously giving 
such occupier at least seven days' notice in writing of his intention 
to do so. 
(4) In issuing e notification under this section the Central Gov-
5 ernment shall exclude therefrom that portion of any land in which 
coal mining operations are actually being carried on in conformity 
with the provisions of any enactment, rule or order for the time 
beirig in force or any premises on which any process ancillary to 
the getting, dressing or preparation for sale of coal obtained as a 
10 result of such operations is being on ere situate. 
5. On the issue of a notification under sub-section (1) of section 4 Etr~ o~ notdicauon in respect of any land- on prospec-
ting licences 
(a) any prospecting licence granted to any person under l:'!er::ning 
the Mineral Concession Rules which authorises him to prospect 
15 for coal or any other mineral in the land shall cease to have 
effect; and 
(0) any mining lease granted to any person under the 
Mineral Concessi(}n Rules shall, in so far as it authorises the 
lessee or any person claiming through him to undertake any 
20 operation in the land, cease to have effect for so long as the 
notification under that sub-section is in force. 
6. (1) Whenever rmy action of the nature described in sub-section Compen-
(3) of section 4 is to be taken, the competent authority shall, before :~ti~~~_ 
or at the time such action is taken, payor tender payment for all ui; damqe 
25 necessary damage which is likely to be caused, and in case of ~:Ctio:rr 
dispute as to the sufficiency of the amount so paid or tendered or 
as to the person to whom it should be paid or tendered, he shall at 
once refer the dispute to the decision of the Central Government, 
and the decision of the Central Government shall be final. 
30 (2) The fact that there exists any such dispute as is referred 
to in. this section shell not be a bar to action under sub-section (3) 
of section 4. 
'I. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that coal is obtain- Pow~r to 
able in the whole or any part of the land notified under sub-section ~~f;h~~ 
35 (1) of section 4, it may, within a period of two years from the date orC!ver land 
of the said notification or within such further period not exceeding :~~:red 
one year in the aggregate es the Central Government may specify .eclion 4. 
in this behalf, by notification in the Official Gazette, give notice of 
its intention to acquire the whole or· any part of the land or of any 
40 rilhts· in or over such land, as the case may be. 

Ob,ections 
to acquisi-
tion. 
Declaration 
of acquisi-
tion. 
4 
(2) If no notice to acquire the land or any rights in or OYer 
such land is given under sub-section (1) within the period allowed 
thereunder, the notification issued under sub-section (1) of section 
4 shall cease to have effect on the expiration of three years from 
the date thereof. S 
8. (1) Any person interested in any land in respect of which a 
notification under section 7 has been issued may, within thirty days 
of the issue of the notification, object to the acquisition of the whole 
or any part of the land or of any rights in or over such land. 
Explan.ation..-It shall not be an objection within the meaning 10 
of this section for eny person to say that he himself desires to under-
take mining operations in the land for the production of coal and 
that such operations should not be undertaken by the Central 
Government or by any other person. 
(2) Every objection under sub-seetion (1) shall be made to the IS 
competent authority in writing, and the competent authority shall 
give the objector an opportunity of being heard either in person 
or by a legal practitioner and shall, after hearing all such objections 
and after making such further inquiry, if any,es he thinks 
necessary, submit the case for the decision of the Central Govern- 20 
ment together with the record of the proceedings held by him and 
a report containing his recommendations on the objections. 
(3) For the purposes of this section, .. person shal1 be deemed 
to be interested in land who would be entitled to claim an interest 
in compensation if the land or any rights in or t:1V~ such land were 25 
acquired under this Act. 
9. (1) When the Central Government is satisfied, after consider-
ing the report, if any, made under section 8 that any land or any 
rights in or over such land should be acquired, a declaration shall 
be made by it to that effect: 30 
Provided that, where the declaration relates to any land or to any 
rights in or over land belonging to a State Government which has or 
have not been leased out, no such declaration shall be made except 
after previous consultation with the State Government. 
(Z) The declaration shall be published in the O:Mclal Gazette, 35 
and-
(a) in any case where land is to be acquired; shall state the 
district or other territorial division in which the land is situate 
and its approximate area; and, where a plan shall have been 
made of the land., the place where such plan tna)" be inIpeded; 40 

5 
~ 
(~) In any case where rights in or over such land are to be 
acquired., shall state the nature and extent of the rights in addi-
tion to the matters relating to the land specified in clause (a); 
and 
a copy of every such declaration shall be sent to the State 
Government concerned. 
10. (1) On the publication in the Official Gazette of the dec1ara- Vesting of 
tion under section 9, the land or the rights in or over the land, as =t~n 
the case may be, shall vest absolutely in the Central Government. Central GovemmCDt. 10 (2) 'Where the rights under any mining lease granted by a State 
Govemrnent to any person are acquired under this Act, the Central 
Government shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed 
to have become the lessee of the State Government as if a mining 
leue under the Mineral Concession Rules had been granted by the 
IS State Government to the Central Government; the period thereof 
being the entire period for which such a lease could have been grant-
ed by the State Government under those rules. 
11. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10, the Power of 
Cemral Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government com- CeG ntral t 
~ o~m· 
pany it willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and con- to direct 
ditions as the Central Government may think fit to impose, direct, by t:~r of 
orde:r in wrltmg, that the land CYr the rights in or over the land, as rights in a 
the cue may be, shall, instead of vesting in the Central Government Govperanynment com . 
uz:der seettoll 10 or continuing to so vest, vest in the Government 
25 company either on the date of publication of the declaration or on 
sw:h other date as may be specified in the direction. 
(2) Where the rights under any mining lease acquired under this 
Act vest in a Government company under sub-section (1), the Gov-
ernment company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be 
~ deemed to have become the lessee of the State Government as if a 
mining lease under the Mineral Concession Rules had been granted 
bytbe State Government to the Government company, the period 
thereat being the entire penod for which such a lease could have 
beeR granted by the State Government under those rules; and all 
35 the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to 
.. 'the lease or the land covered by it shall, on and from the date of such 
vestinl~ be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities of the 
Government company. 
12. The competent authority may, by notice in writing, require Power to 
40 any person in ptJssession of any land acquired under this Act to sur- :~~ ~~i:d 
( render or deliver possession of the land within such period as may acquired. 

~ 
be specified in the notice, and if a person refuses or falls to comply 
with any such notice, the competent authority may enter upon and 
take possession of the land, and for that purpose may use or cause 
to be used such force as may be necessary. 
CompenBa- 13. (1) Where a prospecting licence ceases to have ded under 5 
~;:~ri ! section 5, there shan be paid to the person interested compensatioo, 
licences the amount of which shall be a sum made up of all items of reason-
~~~~~ able Hnd bona fide expenditure actually incurred in respect of the 
rights und~r, land, that is to say,-min.in8 lease. 
being acquir- (.) the expenditure incurred in obtainin, the licence; 10 cd, etc. 
. (it) the expenditure, if any, incurred in respect of the pre-
INlration of maps, charts and other documents relatil1&' to the 
land, the collection from the land of cores or other mineral 
samples and the due analysis thereof and the preparation of any 
other relevant records or material; IS 
(iii) the expenditure, if any, incurred in respect of the con-
struction of roads or other essential works on the land, if such 
roads or works are in existence and in a usable condition; 
• (iv) the expenditure, if any, incurred in respect of any other 
operation necessary for prospecting carried out in the land. 20 
(2) Where the rights under a mining lease are acquired Wlder 
this Act, there shall be paid to the person interested compelllatien, 
the amount of which shall be a Sum made up of the foliowiD&' items, 
namely,-
(&) if the lease was granted after prospecting operations had 25 
been carried out in respect of the land under a prospectinc licen-
ce, the sum of all items of reasonable and bona fide expenditure 
actually incurred with respect to the matters speciBed in claWles 
(t), (ii), (ii,) and Civ) of sub-section (1) before the date of the 
~~ ~ 
Provided that where two or more leases had been panted. 
in relation to any land covered previously by one prpspectiq 
licence, only so much of the expendi.ture aforesaid as bears to 
the total expenditure the same proportion as the area under the 
mining lease in respect of which the rights have been acquired'" 
bears tG the total area covered by the miniDC leases shall be pay-
able under this clause; 
. (ii) any reasonable and. bona fide expenditure of the natuno 
referred to in clauses (z), (it) and (iii) of sub-section (1) actual-
ly incurred in relation to the lease, tOirether with the .alarni If 40 
any, paid for obtaining the lease; 

5 
7 
(iii) the expenditure, if any, incurred by way of payment 
of deal-rent or mainimum royalty during any year or years 
when there was DO production of coal; 
(iv) interest on any such expenditure referred to in 
clauses (i), (ii) anel (;i{) as ha .. actually been incurred during 
the period commencing from the date of the lease and end-
ing with t~e year in which the rights under the lease are 
acquired, interest being calculated in the following manner, 
that is to say,-
10 interest at the rate of five per centum per annum in 
respect of the expenditure incurred during each calendar 
year for the first five years commencing from the year 
in which such expenditure was incurred plus Interest 
at the rate of four ~ centum per annum in respect of 
each subsequent year after the expiration of the first five 
years and ending with the year in which the rights under 
the lease are acquired: 
15 
2C.. 
Provided that the total sum payable under this clause shall 
not exceed one-half of the total amount referred to in clauses 
rU) and f;;i). 
(3) Where the rights under a mining lease acquired under section 
9 relate only to a part of the land covered by the mining lease, the 
amount of compensation payable shall be such as bears to the total 
compensation which would have been payable if the rights of the 
2S mining lessee in respect of the entire land had been acquired, the 
same proportion which the area of the land in respect of which the 
ril{hts are acquired bears to the total area of the land covered by the 
mining lease. 
(4) Where a m,jning lease ceases to have effect for any period 
30 under clause (b) of section 5, there shall be paid by way of com-
pensation for the period during which the lease so ceased to have 
effect, a sum equivalent to five per centum of any such expenditure 
as is referred to in clauses (i) and (iii) of sub-section (2) for each 
year during which the lease remains suspended. 
3' (5) Where aay land is acquired under section 9, there shall be 
paid compensation to the person interested the amount of which 
shall be determined after taking into consideration-
(a) the market value of the land at the date of the publi-
cation of the Dotification under sub-section (1) of section 4: 
40 Explarumo~-The value of any minerals lying in the land 
shall not be taken into consideration in determining the market 
value of any land; 

Method of 
dererminm, 
COIDpeuaa-
don. 
8 
(b) the daBua,e sustained by the person interested, by. 
reason of the taking of any staading crops of trees which may 
be on the land at the time of the taking possession thereof; 
(c) the damage, if any, sustained by tbe person interested, 
at tlie time of taking possession of tbe land, by reason of sever- 5 
iog such land from other land; 
(d) tbe damage, if any, sustaiaed by the penoa interested, 
at the time of taking possession of the land, by reason of the 
acquisition injuriously affecting his other immovable property 
in any other maner, or his earnings; Ie 
(e) if, in consequence of tile acquisition of the land, the 
person interested is compelled to challie hill residence or place 
of business, the reasonable expeDleS, if any, inddental to such 
change; and 
(f) the damage, if any, bonafide~ resuItilli from diminution 15 
of the profits of the land between the time of the publication 
of the notification under sub-section (1) of section 4 and the 
time of the publication of the declaration under sub-section (2) 
of section 9. 
(6) Where any operation carried. on by or on belaalf of the 20 
Central Government in the exercise of any powers conferred b,. 
this Act causes or is likely to C8lUSe dlllDaCe to the surface of any 
land of any works thereon and in respect thereof no pl'Ovision for 
compensation is made elsewhere in this Act, the cODlpetont au~o­
rity shall payor tender payment for all such dama,e, and, in case 25 
of dispute as to the sufficiency of the amount so paid or tendered 
. or as to the person to whom it is to be paid or tendered, be sliall 
refer the dispute to the decision of the Tribuna). 
(7) No compensation under this section in relation to maps, charts 
and other documents shall be paid unless the person to whom it is 30 
payable has delivered to the prescribed authority all the maps, charts 
and other documents. 
14. (1) Where the amount of any compensation payable under 
this Act can be fixed by agreement, it shall be paid in accordance 3~ 
with such agreement. 
(2) ""ere no IUch agreement ean be reaehed, the Central Gov-
~ ~, c:oastitute a TrlhlJlUll cousistlnJ of a perIon who is or 
hal been Ql' is l'IuaWled to be .. judge of a m.h Court for the pur-
pose of determining the amcnmt. 

9 
(3) The Central Government may in any particular case nominate 
a person having expert knowledge in mining to assist the Tribunal, 
and where such nomination is made, the person or persons interest-
ed may also nominate any other person for the same purpose. 
5 (4) At the commencement of the proceedingi before the Tribunal 
the Central Government and the person interested shall state what 
in their respective opinions is a fair amount of compensation. 
(5) The Tribunal shall, after hearing the dispute, make an award 
determining the amount of compensation which appears to it to be 
10 just, and specify the person or persons to whom the compensation 
shall be paid; and in making the award the Tribunal shall have 
regard to the circumstances of each case and to the foregoing pro-
visions of this Act with respect to the manner in which the amount 
of compensation shall be determined in so far as the said provisions 
IS or any of them may be applicable. 
(6) Where there is a dispute as to the person or persons entitled 
to compensation and the Tribunal finds that more persons than one 
are entitled to compensation, it shall apportion the amount thereof 
among such persons and in such manner as it thinks fit. 
20 (7) Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940, shall apply to any pro- 10 of 1940. 
ceedings under this section. 
15. Every award made by the Tribunal shall also state the Cost. 
amount of costs incurred in the proceedings before it and by what 
persons and in what proportions they are to be paid. 
25 16. If the lum which in the opinion of the TribUDal ought to have Inter3st on 
been awarded a. compellSation il in excess of the sum which the awar s. 
Central GOVenuD8Dt has I'tated to be a fair amOODt of compensation, 
the awrd of the TrlbUDal may di.reet that the Central Government 
shall pay int8l'811t on such excess at the rate of five per centum per 
30 IUUlUJD from. the date on which it beeame payable to the date of 
payment of luch nces •. 
. d Payment f)f 17. (1) Any compensation payable under thIS Act may be ten er- compenll-
ed or paid to the persons interested entitled thereto, and the Central non. 
Government shall pay it to them unless prevented by some one or 
35 more of the contingencies mentioned in sub-section (2). 
(I) If the persons interestea entltled thereto shall not consent 
to receive it or if there be any dispute as to the sufficiency of the 
amount of compensation or the title to receive it or the apportion-
ment thereof, the Central GovernITlp.nt shall deposit the amount of 
40 compensation with the Tribunal: 

10 
Provided that any person admitted to be interested may receive 
such payment under protest as to the sufficiency of the amount: 
Provided further that no person who has received the amount 
otherwise than under protest shall be entitled to take any matter 
under this Act before the Tribunal. 5 
(3) When the amount of compensation is not paid or deposited 
as required by this section, the Central Government shall be liable 
to pay interest thereon at the rate of five per centum per annum 
from the time the compensation became due until it shall have 
been so paid or deposited. 10 
J:'rospecting 18. Where prospecting is done under this Act by or on behalf 
and ... inin .. to be"dc;i;; of the Central Government in any land situate within the jurisdiction 
by Central of a State Government or where the Central Government or a Gov-
go~:~t ernment company has become the lessee of a State Government in 
mity with respect of any land under this Act, the terms and conditions under 15 
~== which the prospecting can be done or rights under the lease ex-
Rules. ercised shall, as far as may be, be the same as the terms and con-
Power to] 
delegate. 
ditions applicable to prospecting licences and mining leases under 
the Mineral Concession Rules; and in case of doubt or dispute, shall 
be settled by arbitration or in such other manner as the Central 2C 
Government and the State Government may decide. 
19. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct tlmt all or any of the powers or duties which may be 
exercised or discharged by it under this Act shall, in such circum-
stances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the 25 
notification, be exercised or discharged also by any person specified in 
this behalf in the notification; and any such person may, with the 
previous approval C'f the Central Government, by order in writing, 
direct that any power or duty which has been directed to be exercis-
ed or discharged by him shall, in such circumstances and under i u 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be ex-
ercised or discharged by any such person subordinat~ to him as may 
. be specified therein. 
20. (1) Any person aggrieved by any award of the Tribunal 
under section 14 may, within thirty days from the date of such ~:, 
award, prefer.an appeal to the High Court within whose jurisdiction 
the land or some portion of the land which has been acquired or the 
land or some portion of the land covered by a prospecting licence 
or by a mining lease in respect of which mining rights have been 
acquired is situate. .1' 

It 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made by a competent 
authority or by any other person in virtue of any powers exercis-
able by him under this Act may, within twenty-one days from the 
date of the order, prefer an appeal to the Central Government. 
5 (3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (2), the Central 
Government may, after calling for a report from the competent 
authority or person concerned, and giving an opportunity to the 
parties to be heard, and after making such further inquiry as may 
be necessary, pass such orders as it thinks fit, and the order of the 
10 Central Government shall be final. 
(4) Where an appeal is preferred under sub-section (2), the 
Central Government may stay the enforcement of the order of the 
competent authority or person concerned for such period and on 
such conditions as it thinks fit. 
IS 21. The Central Government or any person authorised in writing Power to 
by it in this behalf may, by order in writing, require any person to obt~in infor-
furnish to such authority as may be specified in the order such in- matton. 
formation in his possession as may be required relating to any 
property in respect of which action is proposed to be taken under 
20 tllis Act. 
22. The competent authority, rIC any person authorised in writing Power to 
by it in this behalf, by general or special order, may enter and ::~d 
inspect any property for the purpose of determining whether and, 
if so, in what manner an order under this Act should be made in 
25 relation. to any property or with a view to securing compliance with 
any order made under this Act. 
23. Whoever wilfully obstructs any person in doing any of the Penaltiea. 
acts authorised by sub-section (3) of section 4 or wilfully fills up, 
destroys, damages or displaces any mark made under section 4, or 
30 wilfully obstructs the lawful exercise of any other power conferred 
by or under this Act, or fails to comply with any order made or 
direction given under this Act. shall be punishable with imprison-
ment which may extend to six months or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees or with both. 
3S 24. Subject to any rules thet may be made under this Act, every Seryice of 
hi A h II notice. and notice or order issued or made under t s ct s a - orden. 
(a) in the case of a notice or order of a general nature or 
affecting a number of persons, be notified in the Official Gazette 
and also published in the locality in such manner as may be 
40 prescribed; and 

Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good faith. 
Jurisdiction 
of civil 
courts. 
Power to 
make rulet. 
12 
(b) in the case of a notice or order directed to ~ 
individual,-
(i) wherever it is practicable to do so by delivering or 
tendering it to that individual; or 
(ii) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by aflx.ing 5 
it 011 the door or some other conspicuous part of the rem· 
dence in which that individual lives, and a written report 
thereof shall be prepared and witDessed. by two persons 
living in the neighbourhood; or 
(iii) failing service by these means, by post. 
25. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government or any person for anything which is 
in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act 
or any rule or order made thereunder. 
10 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 15 
Government or the competent authority or any other person for any 
damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good 
faith d.one or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any 
rule or order made thereunder. 
26. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no civil 20 
court &hall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the 
CeDiral Government or the competent authority or any other per-
son is empowered by or under this Act to determine. 
2'7. (1) The Central Government may, by notiftcation in the 
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 2' 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the fG11o'W-
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the procedure to be followed in making any inquiry 30 
under this Act; 
(b) the procedw-e to be followed by the Tribunal in pro-
ceedings under section 14; 
(c) the form and manner in which appeals to the Central 
Government may be made under this Act; and 
(d) any other matter which has to be, or may be prescribed. 35 
(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid for not less 
than thirty days before each House of Parliament as soon as may 
be after they are made and shall be subject to such modifications as 
Parliament may make during th~ session in which they are so laid 
or the session immediately following. 40 

13 
28. (1) Every notification issued before the commencement of Notifications 
this Act, whether by the Central Government or by a State Gov- ~~:~:f~ I 
ernment, under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (here- whic~ pro-
I of I8S... inafter referred to as the said Act), in which lands were stated to be =l~~'t~re 
S needed for the prospecting of coal seams for the development of be tr~ted 
collieries to be worked by the Union of India shall be deemed to have ~:o~~r::;r 
been issued by the Central Government under section 4 of this Act as this Act. 
if this Act had been in force on the date of the notification. 
(2) Every notification issued before the commencement of this 
10 Act, whether by the Central Government or by a State Government, 
under section 6 of the said Aet in whieh lands were stated to be 
needed for the development of coal shall be deemed to have been 
issued under section 9 of this Act as if this Act had been in force 
on the date of the notification. 
(3) Any objection preferred under section 5A of the said Act 
IS in respect of any land covered by any notification issued under 
section 4 of the said Act shall be deemed to be an objection pre-
ferred under section 8 of this Act to the relevant competent 
authority and may be disposed of by him accordingly; and the Central 
20 Government may at any time make a declaration under section 9 of 
this Act in respect of the land or any part thereof. 
(4) Subject to the other provisions contained in this section, the 
provisions of this Act (including provisions relating to compensation) 
shall apply in relation to any such notification as is referred to in 
~S sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) as they apply in relation to any 
notification issued under section 4 or section 9, as the case may be, 
of this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
According to the Industrial Policy Resolution of 1956 the future 
development of coal is the responsibility of the State. All new 
units in the coal industry will be set up only by the State save in 
exceptional circumstances as laid down in the Resolution. 
The production of coal in India in 1955 was 38 million tons and 
the target for production for the Second Five Year Plan has been 
fixed at 60 million tons per annum. It has been decided that out 
of the additional production of 22 million tons per annum envisa-
ged, the public sector should produce an additional 12 million tons 
per annum, the balance being allocated to the private industry for 
production from existing collieries and immediately contiguous 
areas. 
Out of the additional 12 million tons in the public sector, the 
bulk (10 million tons per annum) will have to be raised by the 
development of new coalfields, such as Korba, Karanpura, Kathara 
and Jhilimili and Bisrampur. Very nearly all the coal bearing areas 
however are covered by mining leases held by private persons or 
prospecting licences which carry a right to a mining lease. Hence 
it is proposed to take power to acquire unworked coal bearing areas 
covered by private leases or prospecting licences which are found 
surplus to the production required in the private sector and to work 
the~e areas as lessees of the State Governments. 
With the acquiSition of zamindari rights by the State Govern-
ments, the rights in minerals are now vested in all areas in the 
State Governments, and it is not appropriate to use the Land Acqui-
sition Act, 1894, for the acquisition of mineral rights, particularly 
because the Central Government does not intend to acquire the 
proprietary rights vested in the States. There is no other existing 
Central or State legislation under which the Government has powers 
to acquire immediately the lessee's rights over the coal bearing areas 
required by Government for the additional coal production. It is 
accordingly considered necessary to take powers by fresh legislation 
to acquire the lessees' rights over unworked coal bearing areas on 
payment of reasonable compensation to the lessees, and without 
affecting the State Government's rights as owner of the minerals or 
the royalty payable to the State Government on minerals. 
14 

15 
The Bill provides for payment of reU<!lnable compensation for 
the acquisition of the rights of prospecting licensees and mining 
lessees. 
The principles for determining compensation are set out, in 
essence, in clause 13 of the Bill. These are similar to the principles 
contained in the rules issued with the approval of Parliament 
under section 7 of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regu-
lation) Act, 1948. In regard to the acquisition of mining leases, the 
compensation paylble under the Bill will be the actual legitimate 
expenditure incurred by the leaseholder, plus a sum, in the nature 
of interest, calculated on the expenditure incurred and not ex-
ceeding 50 per cent. of such expenditure. 
SWARAN SINGIt 
NEW DELHI; 
The lit M411, 18S'7. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Bill,1957, 
contemplates the acquisition by the State of unworked coal bearing 
lands that may be required by the Government for prospecting· and 
establishment of new cCJIlieries. The Bill, if enacted, will involve 
expell:diture from the Consolidated Fund· of India in respect of,-
(1) the payment of-
(i) compensation to be determined in accordance with 
the principles laid down in clauses 13 and 14 of the 
. Bill, 
(ii) costs in respect of any proceedings under the new law, 
(iii) interest under clauses 16 and 17; 
(2) the appointment of-
(i) a Tribunal under clause 14 (2) for determining com~ 
pensation, 
(li) experts in mining to assist the Tribunal under clause 
14(3), 
(iii) the staff that will have to be employed for the 
administration of the Act. 
The areas that will be finally acquired by the Government will 
be selected after carrying out prospecting and it is not possible at 
this stage to estimate accurately the expenditure that will be 
incurred in acquiring the lands. The acquisition of coal bearing 
areas is included in the programme of coal development during 
the Second Five Year Plan, for which a provision -of Rs. 40 crores 
has been made. On a rough estimate, the expenditure on acquisi-
tion, appointment of Tribunal, etc., is likely to be about Rs. 100 
lakhs during the Second Plan period. 
16 

M~MORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 27 of the Bill specifies the matters in respect of which 
rules may be made by the Central Government. These matters 
relate to the procedure to be followed in making inquiries under 
the Bill and the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in pro-
ceedings under clause 14 which relates to the method of determining 
compensation and the form and manner in which appeals may be 
preferred. These are all matters of detail which may well be regu· 
lated by rules and any rules made will be placed before Parliament. 
The rule-making power is of a normal character. 

Lok SABHA 
, 
BILL 
to establish in the economic interest of India greater public 
control over the coal mining industry and its development 
by providing for the acquisition by the State of unworked 
land containing or likely to contain coal deposits or of 
rights in or over such land, for the extinguishment or 
modification of such rights accruing by virtue of any agree-
ment, lease, licence or otherwise, and for matters connected 
therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article II 7 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
Sardar Swaran Singh, 
Minister of Steel, Mina and Fuel. 