5 
10 
• 
As INTRODUCED IN Lo~ SABItA ott 
. .. t-. it 28TH FEBBUARY, 1963 
8W No. , of 1"3 
THE COMPULSORY DEPOSIT SCHEME BILL, :1963 
A 
BILL 
to provide in the interest of national economic development for 
compulsory deposit and for the framing of a scheme in relGtion 
thereto. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Depollt Scheme Shan_ .. 
Act, 1963. uleDt 1.114 
eom.men.-(2) It extends to the whole of India. mmt. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, appoint. 
2. This Act shall apply to the following categories of persona, PenoM til 
namely :- whom. A-* 
(a) persons liable to payment of land-revenue under anya pplla 
law with respect to land-revenue whether or not such persona 
are liable to pay tax under the Income-tax Act; 
(b) persons liable to payment of tax und~ the Income-tax 
Act; 
(c) holders of immovable properties situated in urban areaa 
assessed to tax (whether known as property tax, houle tax or 
by any other name); 
(d) employees of-
(i) the Central and State Governmenta, 
(ii) local authorities, 
(iii) companies as defined in section 3 of the Compani_ 
Act, 1956, including Government companies as defined iJl 
section 617 of that Act, 
(iv) any othe~ corporation (including a co-operative 
society) established by or under a Central, Provincial or 
State Act, 
whose annual income from salary is one thousand five hundred 
rupees or more and who are not liable to payment of tu UDder 
the InQome-tax Act; . 
I'l81(B) LS-L 

Require-
mentasto 
compul-
~t. 
, 
(e) shopkeepers whose annual turnover, determined in 
accordance with the provisions of any law with respect to tax 
on the sale of goods, is fifteen thousand rupees or more and who 
are not liable to payment of tax under the Income-tax Act; 
(f) persons ot.her than shopkeepers liable to payment of 5 
taxes on profesSions, trades, callings or employments under any 
JInr ~tll respect to the same but not liable to pa,..,._t ~ .. 
under the Income-tax Act; 
(g) such other categories of persons [than those referred to 
til OlaWJel (a) to (I)] whose annual income is one thouIaDd·" 10 
l'mftdlied rtJIjees or more and who are not liable to p81melit 01 
tax under the Income-tax Act, as may be specified by the Centtal 
'Government by notification in tht: OfBclal Gazette. 
3. In th1a Act, unlesa the context otherwise requJrel,-
(a) "additional surcharge" means additional surchar .. fo .. 15 
the purposes of the Union referred to in the annual Finance Act; 
(b) "deposit" means a deposit of money; 
(c) "Income-tax Act" means the Income-tax Act, 1961, 
(d) "person" does not include a body of persona; 
(e) "salary" has the same meaning as in section 17 of the 20 
lticotne!·:tax Act, but in relation to a person falling under clause 
(cI) of section ~ Goes not include any gratuity; 
(j) "shopkeeper" means a person carrying on any retail 
trade or business in any premises; 
(g) "urban area" me ... any area within the local limits of 2S 
a JaDieipalit7 (bJ whatever name called), a notified area 00Dl-
m1ttee, a town area committee, a city and town commitwe, • 
small town committee, a Cantonment Board or a Panchayat and 
having a population of ten thousand or more. 
4. (1) As from such date as the Central Government may, by 30 
notiftcafloh in the Oftltial Gazette, appoint in this behalf, every 
person tu .hotn this Act applies, other than a person fall.itJg'· under 
clause (b) of section 2, shall make a compullloi'y depos1t at sueh rate 
• as may be provided for iiI a scheme framed uncler this Ad: 
Provided that different notifications may be issued under this sub- 3S 
sec~on on different dates in relation to different categories of persons: 
Pnmded further ~bat the rate of compu18ory depo1dt IlWl not 
exceed the maximum rate ipeclfted in sub-aectloD (I). • 
41 of 118L 
.1. ~' 

8 
(2) Tht mqim\UJl rate of deposit .mall be-
(a) in the case of a person falling under clause (4) .01 
seqtion ·2, Any per cent. of the land-revenue payable for the ,.ear 
lQ09-11) in respect of the land or lands held by him in tuy4W' 
in which the deposit is required to be made; 
(b) in the ~ase of a person falling under clause (c) of that 
section, three per cent. of the annual rental value .oftha pre-
.perty with reference to which the property is all8e88ed to the 
tax referred to in that clause in the year in which the depoltt 
10 is required to be made: 
Provided that where the property is assessed to such tax 
with reference to the estimated value thereof or with reference 
to ~y .otaer standard, the maximum rate of deposit under this 
clause shall be three per cent. of the annual rent at whidl that 
IS property might reasonably be expected to let fr.()lJl year to y,eerj 
(c) in the case of a person falling under clause (d) of that 
$ection, three per cent. of his annu.al income from salary; 
(d) in the cale of a person faUing under clause (e) of ~t 
1Iection, one-third of one per cent. of his tW'llGV.er .Quring . the 
20 year immediately preceding the year in which 'the d.epotit is 
required to be made; 
(e) in the case of a person falling under clause <t) of that 
section, an amount equal to the amount of the tax ·on his pro-
feSSion, trade, calling or employment payable by him during the 
as year in which the deposit is required to be made; 
<f) in the case of a person falling under clause (g) of that 
section, a sum of sixty rupees per annum. 
{il) A person falling under clause (b) ()f section 2 by.whom any 
additional surcharge is payable in respect of any assessment tr_r 
30 may make a deposit under this Act in respect of that year .eD.d .if he 
doe.s so, then, he shall, on production of proof before the inc~)ll)e.-tax 
officer concerned of the fact of such deposit having been J;nacle, be 
entitled to deduction from the adcUtional surch&:rge af a BAm wbi~h 
shall be equal to-
3S {eI) the swn 80 deposited •. or 
{b) (i) wher~ his residual ineomeis ·,ix tbo.~·ru.peN.or 
less, three per cent. of such residual incenae, « 
(ii) where his residual inc::ome ~¥c~ six.tbQ.UMJ¥i ~pe8l, 
three per cent. of the first six .thO\ls.8nd fllPe,s Pl.8Uch r~1hlal 
. AD lllcome and two per cent. of the bale.llQethe~~f. 
wbichevet' is 1 ... 
• 
,.,. , . 

• 
4 
E:rplanation.-In this sub-section "residual income" has the same 
meaning as in section 2 of the Finance Act, 1963. 
(4) Any person falling under clause (b) of section 2 who is in 
receipt of any income under the head "Salaries" during any financial 
year may make a deposit under this Act in that year and if he does 5 
so, then, notwithstanding anything in the Income-tax Act, the person 
responsible for paying that income shall, on production of proof of 
the fact of such deposit having been made, reduce the amount of 
additional surcharge included in the tax to be deducted in accord-
ance with the provisions of section 192 of that Act by a sum which 10 
Ihall be equal to-
(a) the sum so deposited, or 
(b) the sum calculated in accordance with clause (b) of sub-
aectioD (3), 
whichever is less. 
(5) Any person falling under clause (b) of section 2 who is liable 
15 
to pay advance tax under the Income-tax Act in any financial year 
may make a deposit under this Act in that year and if he does so, 
then, notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, he 
shall, on production of proof before the income-tax officer concerned 20 
of the fact of such deposit having been made, be entitled to deduction 
from the additional surcharge included in the advance tax, of a sum 
which shall be equal to-
(a) the sum so deposited, or 
(b) the sum calculated in accordance with clause (b) of sub- 25 
section (3), 
whichever is less . 
.!xplanation.-In this sub-section, "advance tax" shall have the 
lame meaning as in section 207 of the Income-tax Act. 
(6) Where any person falls under any two or more categories 30 
referred to in section 2 other than the category referred to in clause 
(b) of that section, then, he shall make a compulsory deposit at the 
rate applicable to each of those categories. 
(7) Any deposit made under this section shall bear simple interest 
at the rate of four per cent. per annum and notwithstanding anything 35 
ill the Income-tax Act, the amount of such interest shall be free of 
any tax under that Act . 
(8) Any deposit made under this section during any year shall be 
repayable with interest thereon at any time after the expiry of 
five years from the end of the year in which the deposit bas been 40 
~: . 

Provided $hat nothing in this sub-section shall prevent earlier 
repayment of any deposit with interest thereon in the event of the 
death of the depositor if the authority empowered to make such 
repayment is satisfied that genuine hardship will be caused unless 
S such repayment is made. 
(9) If any doubt or dispute arises as to tire amount to be deposited 
by any person under this Act or as to the date on which such amount 
is to be deposited or as to any other matter in relation to any deposit 
~o be made under this Act, the decision thereon of the Government or 
10 any authority empowered by the Government in this behalf shall be 
.ftnal. 
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Compul-sory Gazette, frame one or more scheme or schemes to be called Compul- Deposit 
sory Deposit Scheme or Schemes in relation to deposits under this Scheme. 
IS Act. 
30 
3S 
(2) A scheme framed under sub-section (1) may provide for,-
(a) the rates at which and the period for which compulsory 
deposits shall be made by the several categories of persons to 
whom this Act applies and the extension of such period; 
(b) the manner (including the deduction of deposits at source) 
in which and the intervals at which such deposits shall be made; 
. (c) the documents· to be issued to persons by whom deposits 
have been made as evidence of such deposits; 
(d) the authority or authorities by or through whom deposits 
may be collected; 
(e) the accounts to be maintained with respect to such deposits 
and the officers by whom such accounts shall be maintained; 
(f) the nomination of any person to receive the amount 
standing to the credit of a depositor in the event of his death and 
the cancellation or change of such nomination; 
(g) the issue of duplicate of any document issued as evidence 
of any deposit in the event of loss or destruction of the original 
and the fee on the payment of which such duplicate may be 
issued; 
(h) the repayment and withdrawal of deposits with int~rest 
thereon and the conditions, if any, under which such repayment 
or withdrawal may be made; 
(i) any other matter which may be necessary or proper for 
the effective implementation of the Scheme. 
40 6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Modiftea-
Gazette, add ~. amend or vary any scheme framed UDder this Act. ~ 
• 

RoundiDI 
off. 
Protection 
against 
attach-
ment. 
·8 
,. Where 'the amount of any deposit to be made \lnder this Act 
eontainsa part of a rupee, then, if such part is ftfty naye paise or 
more, it shall be increased to one complete rupee and if such part 
is·less the ·ftfty naye paise, it shall be ignorect 
•. (1) The amount standing to the credit of any depositor shall not S 
be liable to attachment under any decree or order of any court in 
respect .of any debt or liability incurred by the depositor. 
(2) Any amount standing to the credit of a depositor at the time 
of his death and payable to his nominee under a scheme shall vest 
in the nominee and shall be free from any debt or other liability 10 
incurred by the d.MeHed or iacurnd . b:v the I'lOmiDee before the 
deati! of the depDlitor. 
~t7ter t. (1) If any person who is liable to make a deposit underltais 
~~ to Act fails to make the same within the time specified therefor, he ,ball 
d~t. be liable to pay by way of penalty an amount equal to the amount 15 
of deposit w'bich he is liable to make: 
lleeo .. er"J' 
otarrearll 
of deposit 
and • penalt7. 
Provided. . that . before levying any such penalty such person shall 
be given a reasonable opporiuaity of being heard in respect of the 
.same. 
(2) Where any company or other corporation referred to in :0 
clause (d) of section 2 is responsible for paying any income falling 
UDder the head ""Salaries" as mentioned in the Income-tax Act, then, 
notwithstanding anything in that Act, in computing the total income 
of that company or .other corporation under that Act for any assess-
meat year .commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 1984, no as 
deduction .shall be allowed in respect of payment of any income 
under that head which in the case of any employee exceeds one 
thousand five hundred rupees but from which no tax is deductable 
under the heading liB-Deduction at source" in Chapter XVII of that 
Act uniess a sum equal to the amount which such employee is 30 
Tequired to depesitunder this Act is deducted from such income at 
801UCe and is .deposited in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and the scheme framed thereunder. 
11. luy an8M' of depesit8DCl .an,. pen.lty fer 'failure to make 
such deposit under this Act shall beNCOftI"abIe in· fIhe 1J8me manner 3' 
Nl an arreu of.J.uuL.1:e~. 
ProtectiOJl 11. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against of action tabIlka .,.,per..,n-for.~g which ja·tn good·faltb··done 1)1' Intended to 
goad. .,. Mf48Ae WIler IWa Act sOI'.aay _eme 'fNmeci tben!Under. faitL , 
• 

, 
• 11. Any scheine framed under this Act &bali be iaid, as iOon .. &:heme to 
fuay be, after it is framed before each House of Parliament while it t:f~d the 
is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised ~:'~ of 
in one session or itt two or more successive sessions, and if before ment. 
S the expiry of that session in which it is so laid 01' the aeniOlt or 
HlliDn. iDtmediate1y followlDg. both Houses apee ill makiaa any 
modification in AnI1 prOVision of the scheme or both Houses agree 
tlaat ~ provilion ia. 1111& scbeme should not Be macie, the provision 
of ihe Scheme .hall tilae.after have eftect OII1y in· such mociUied form 
10 or be of nO efIeet, .. the Clue may be, 10 however that my 1UCb· 
lDIJdifl.Daticm or aaulment shall De Without prejudice to the validit1 
ot ~, pt.moualy done tmclerrthat provisioD. 

• 
The object of the Bill is to augment the resources of the nation 
for national development. Wjth this object in view the Bill requires 
certain categories of persons to deposit a portion of their income in 
accordance with schemes to be framed for the purpose. Subject to 
the maximum rates of deposit specified in the Bill itself, the schemes 
will lay down the actual rates at which the deposits shall be made. 
The schemes will also make detailed provisions in relation to the 
deposits. The deposits will bear interest at the rate of four per cent. 
per annum and will be repayable at the end of five years. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJIDESAI. 
. The 28th Februa1'J/, 1963. 
• • 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Scheme of Compulsory Deposits is proposed to be operated 
through the existing agencies of the Central and State Governments 
and the Local Authorities. For this purpose, these agencies will have 
to be suitably strengthened. In addition, in accordance with sub-
clause (7) of clause 4 of the Bill, interest at 4 per cent. per annum 
on the deposits made under the Scheme will also have to be paid at 
the time of the repayment of the deposits. 
On the basis of an annual deposit of Rs. 65 to Rs. 70 crores, the 
additional cost on strengthening the existing administrative 
machinery is approximately estimated at Rs. 25 Iakhs non-recurring 
and Rs. 50 lakha per annum recurring and Rs. 2 to 3 crores per 
umwn on account of interest charges. 
I 
1782 CS) ~ 

• 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 5 of the Bill provides that the. Central 
Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame one 
or more scheme or schemes to be called Compulsory Deposit Scheme 
or Schemes in relation to deposits under the Act. The various 
matters which among others may be provided for in a scheme have 
been specified in items (a) to (h) of sub-clause (2) of that clause. 
The important matters in relat~on to deposits, such as the maximum 
rates of deposits, the rate of interest thereon and the period after 
which the deposits may be repaid or withdrawn have been provided 
for in the Bill itself; the various matters which may be provided for 
in a scheme are matters of procedure and administrative detail. It 
is hardly practicable to provide for all these matters of procedure 
and detail in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power 11 
thus of a normal character. 
10 • 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide in the interest of national economic development for 
compulsory deposit and for the framing of a scheme in relation 
thereto. 
The President has. in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
II7 of the Constitution of India. recommended to Lok Sabha the 
introduction and conaideration of the Bill. 
au 
!rI. N. KAUL, 
Sec,ewy. 
(Shri M ora,ji Desai. 
Minister of Fina1lce.1 