OW No. t 01 1958 
THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION 
BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABRA) 

i 
LOK SAlliA 
• 
-
CORRIGENDA 
to 
LI.FE INSURANCE CCRPORATION BILL, 1956 
(As introduced 1n Lok Salm') 
(1) Pace 4,-
in the marginal 'heading 8Ia1D.at el&a •• 6,-
atner "Functions of then .IJI4 
Corporation" 
(2) Page 18, 11n~ 14,-
m "suplus" nag "surplus" 
(3) Page 19, line 9,-
m "referenC&". ~ ~lrererenc8s'l 
(4) Page 22, line 't?7,-
attar "each" insert "with-profit" 
(5) Page 26, line a trom the bott~,­
m "deleted" ~ uftel.agated l 
NEW DELHI, 
The 17th February, 1956. 

LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA No. 2 
to 
LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION BILL, 19;6. 
(AS introduced in Lok Sabha) 
(1 ) Page 4,-
line 19, after "this .Act" insert ",". 
(2) Page 19, line 9,-
atter "ness" insert 
(3) Page 20, line 15,-
" It , . 
atter "on1y" insert ",". 
( 4) Pe ge 21, -
(a) line 9, omit "ac". 
(b) line 10, tor "count II - , read "ac.oount ". 
(c) line 28, ~ft~r "liabilities ot," 111s~rt 
"the". 
(d) 11ne 31, omit "which". ... - .... -." ... 
____ ..... \,.c UUi)lneSS; 

s 
10 
Bill No.9 of 1956 
THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to prut,ide for the nationalisation of life insurance business in India 
by transferrring all such business to a Corpora.tion established 
for the purpose and to provide for the regtJjlation and cOntrol 
of the business of the Corporation and for matters connected 
therewithoT incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of Inditt as follows:-.1 
CHAPTER I 
PREl.IMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may Ibe called the Life Insurance Corporation Short title and com-Act, 1956. mencemcnt. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(1) "appointed day" means the date on which the Corpora-
tion is established under section 3; . 
(2) "composite insurer" means an insurer· carrying on in 
addition to controlled business any other kind of insurance 
business; 
Definitions. 
IS (3) "controlled business" means-
(i) in the case of any insurer specified in sub-clause 
(a)(ii) or sub-clause (b) of clause (9) of sectiqn 2 of the 
Insurance Act and carrying on life insurance business-
(a) all his business, if he carries on no other class 
20 of insurance business; 

2 
(b) all the business appertaining to his life insurance 
business, if he carries on any other class of insurance 
business also; 
(c) all his business, if his certificate of registration 
under the Insurance Act in respect of general insurance S 
business stands wholly cancelled for a period of more 
than six months on ,the 19th day of January, 1956; 
(ii) in the case of any other insurer specified in clause 
(9) of section 2 of the Insurance Act and carrying on life 
insurance business-
(a) all his business in India, if he carries on no 
other class of insllrance business in India; 
(b) all the business appertaining to his life insurance 
business in India, if he carries on any other class of 
10 
insurance business also in India; IS 
(c) all his business in India, if his certificate of 
registration under the Insurance Act in respeet of general 
insurance business in India stands wholly cancelled for 
a period of more than six months on the 19th day of 
January, 1956; ao 
Explanation.-An insurer is said to carryon no class of 
insurance business other than life insurance bl1siness, if, in 
addition to life insurance business he carries on only capital 
redemption business or annuity certain business or both; 
and the expression "business appertaining to his life insu- 2S 
rance business" in sub-clauses (i) and, (u) shall be construed 
accordingly; 
(iii) in the case of a provident society, as defined in 
section 65 of the Insurance Act, all its business; 
(iv) in the case of the Central Government or a State 30 
Government, all life insurance business carried on by it, 
subject to the exceptions specified in section 35; 
(4) "Corporation" means the Life Insurance Corporation of 
India established under section 3; 
(5) "Insurance Act" means the Insurance Act, 1938; 3S 
(6) "insurer" means an insurer as defined in the Insurance 
Act who carries on life insurance business in India and includes 

3 
the Government and a provident society as defined in section 65 
of the Insurance Act; 
(7) "mem'ber" means a member of the Corporation; 
(8) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
5 Act; 
(9) "Tribunal" means the Tribunal constituted under section 
14; 
(10) all other words and expressions used he"::in but not 
defined and defined in the Insurance Act shall have t.lc meanings 
10 respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPl'ER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION OF INDIA 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central G~vernment may. Bstablish-. 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be estab- =~ lO-
IS lished a Corporation called; the Life Insurance Corporation of India. don of Ufe 
IDSu~ 
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate having perpetual ~rndr:!OD 
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions 
of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, and may by its 
name sue and be sued. 
20 4. (1) The Corporation shall consist of such number of persons Coostitution 
not exceeding fifteen as the Central Government may think fit to ~:::ration. 
appoint thereto and one of them shall be appointed by the Central 
Government to be the Chairman thereof. 
(2) Before appointing a person to be a member, the Central Gov-
25 ernment shall satisfy itself that that person will have no such financial 
or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the exercise or 
performance by him of his functions as a mem'ber, and the Central 
Government shall also satisfy itself from time to time with respect 
to every member that he has no such interest; and any person who 
30 is, 01' whom the Central Government proposes to appoint and who 
has consented to be a member shall, whenever required by the Central 
Government so to do, furnish to it such information as the Central 
Government considers necessary for the performance of its duties 
under this sub-section. 
3S (3) A member who is in any way directly or indirectly interested 
in a contract made or proposed to be made by the Corporation shall, 
as soon as possible after the relevant circumstances have ccme to his 
knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest to the Corporation; 
and the member shall not take part in any deliberation or discussion 
40 of the Corporation with respect to that contract. 

Capital of 
the Corpora-
tion. 
4 
5. (1) The original capital of the Corporation shall be five crores 
of rupees provided by the Central Govenunent after due appropria-
tion made by Parliameot by law for the purpose, and the terms and 
conditions relatine to the provision of sueh capital shaD be such .1 
may be determined by the Central Government. ; 
(2) The Central Government may, on the recommendation of 
the Corporation, reduce the capital of the Corporation to such extent 
and in such manner as the Central Government may df:termine. 
CHAPTER III 
FUNCTIONS OF THE CORPORATION (0 
Functions 6. (1) Subject to the rules, if any, made by the Central Govern-
of the ment in this behalf, it shall be the general duty of the Corporation to 
carry on life insurance business, whether in or outside India, and 
the Corporation shall so exercise its powers under this Act as to 
secure that life insurance business is developed to the best adv£n- (5 
tage. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions con-
tained in sub-section (1) but subject to the other provisions con-
tained in this Act the Corporation shall have power-
(a) to carry on capital redemption business, annuity eer- 20 
tain business or reinsurance business in so far as such reinsur-
ance business appertains to life insurance business; 
(b) subject to the rules, if any, made by the Central Go-
vernIllent in this behalf, to invest the funds of the Corporation 
in such manner as the Corporation may think fit and to take all 2S 
such steps as may be necessary or expedient for the protection 
or realisation of any investment; including the taking over of 
and administering any property offered as security for the 
investment until a suitable opportunity arises for its disposal; 
(c) to acquire, hold and dispose of any property for the 30 
purpose of its business; 
(d) to transfer the whole or any part of the life insurance 
business carried on outside India to any other person, if in the 
interests of the Corporation it is expedient so to do; 
(e) to advance or lend money upon the security of any_ 3S 
movable or immovable property; 
(f) to borroVT or raise any money in such manner and upon 
such security as the Corporation may think fit; 
(g) to carry on any other pusiness in any case where such 
other business was being carried on by a subsidiary of an in- 040 
surer whose controlled business has been transferred to and 
vested in the Corporation under this Act; 

s 
10 
5 
(h) to carry on any other business which may seem to the 
Corporation to be capable of being conveniently carried on in 
connection with its business and calculated directly or indirectly 
to render profitable the life insurance business of the Corpora-
tion; 
(i) to do all such things as may be incidental or conducive 
to the proper exercise of any of the powers of the Corporation. 
(3) In the discharge of any of its functions the Corporation shall 
act so far as may be on business principles. 
CHAPTER IV 
TRANSFER OF EXISTING LIFE INSURANCE BUSINESS TO THE CORPORATION 
7. (1) On the appointed day there shall be transferred to and Tnnafer of 
vested in the Corporation all the assets and liabilities appertaining to :bl6ties u::: 
the controlled business of all insurers. c:liatiDa la-
I (2) The assets appertaining to the controlled business of an in- ~ c:anz.; 
5 surer shall be deemed to include all rights and powers, and all pro- =~..i 
perty, whether movable or immovaple, appertaining to his controlle4 
business, including, in particular, cash balances, reserve funds, in-
vestments, deposits and all other interests and rights in or arising out 
20 of such property as may be in the possession of the insurer and 
all books of account or documents relating to the controlled business 
of the insurer; and liabilities shall be deemed to include all debts, 
liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then existing and 
appertaining to the controlled business of the insurer. 
25 Explanation.-The expression "assets appertaining to the COD-
trolled business of an insurer"-
(a) in relation to a composite insurer includes that part of 
the paid-up capital of the insurer or assets representing such 
part which has or have been -allocated to the controlled business 
of the insurer in accordance with the rules made in this behalf; 
(b) in relation to a Government means the amount lying to 
the credit of that business on the appointed day. 
8. (1) Unless otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, General 
all contracts, agreements and other instruments of whatever nature df~ of of 
35 subsisting or having effect immediately before the appointed day ~ed 
and to which an insurer whose controlled business has been trans- bUllDell. 
ferred to and vested in the Corporation is a party or which are in 
favour of such insurer shall in so far as they relate to the controlled 
business of the insurer be of as full force and effect against or in 
40 favour of the Corporation, as the case may be, and maybe enforced 

6 
or' acted upon as fully and effectually as if, instead of the insurer, 
the Corporation had· been a party thereto or as if they had been 
entered' into or issued in favour of the Corporation. 
(2) If on the appointed day any suit, appeal or other legal pro-
ceeding of whatever nature is pending by or against an insurer, 5 
then, in so far as it relates to his controlled business, it shall not 
abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially aftected by 
reason of the transfer to the Corporation of the business of the in-
surer or of anything done under this Act, but the suit, appeal or 
other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or 10 
against the Corporation. 
(3) For the persons, if any, who immediately before the appoint-
ed day are the trustees of any superannuation or provident fund 
established by any insurer other than the Government for the bene-
fit of his employees employed in connection with his controlled IS 
business, there shall be substituted such persons as the Corporation 
may, by general or special order, specify. 
ProviaIoDI e. (1) For the removal of doubt it is hereby declared that in any 
;,.: com- case where an insurer whose controlled business has been transferr-
iDlurerl. ed to and vested in the Corporation under this Act is a composite 20 
insurer, the provisions of the preceding sections shall only apply to 
the extent to which any property appertains to his controlled 
business and to rights and powers acquired, and to debts, liabilities 
8D.d obli~ations incurred, and to contracts, agreements and other 
instruments made by the insurer for the purposes of his controlled 25 
business and to legal proceedings relating to those purposes, and the 
provisions of those sections shall be construed accordingly. 
(2) The Central Government may by rules made in this behalf 
provid&-
(a) for the determination of the question whether any pro- 30 
perty appertains to his controlled business or whether any 
rights, powers, debts, liabilities or obllgations were acquired or 
incurred or any contract, agreement or other instrument was 
made by the insurer for the purposes of his controlled business 
or whether any documents relate to those purposes; 35 
(b) for the allocation of the paid-up capital or &ssets repre-
senting suCh paid-up capital, as the case may be. between' the 
controlled business of the insurer and -any other business; 
(c) for substituting for any. agreements entered into by any 
insurer partly for the purposeS of his controlled business and 40 
partly for other purposes separate agreements in the requisite 
. terms and for any apportionments and indemnities consequent 
tMreon; 

s 
10 
(d) for the severance of leases comprising property of 
which part only is transferred to and vested in th~ Corporation 
by virtue of this Act and for apportionments consequent· on 
such severance; 
(e) for the apportionment and the making of financial 
adjustments with respect to any debts, liabilities or obligations 
incurred by any such insurer partly for the purposes of his 
controlled business and partly for other purposes and for any 
necessary variation of mortgages and encumbrances relating to 
such debts, liabilities or obligatio~; 
(1) for the apportioQJllent of superannuation or provident 
fund moneys between persons employed in connection with the 
controlled business of an insurer and other persons; 
(g) for any other· matters supplementary to or conse-
IS quential on the matters aforesaid for which provision appears 
to be necessary or expedient. 
(3) Where at any time before the expiration of six months from 
the appointed day a question has arisen under this section or under 
any rules made thereunder as to whether any· property is or was 
20 held or used by the insurer for the purposes of his controlledbusi-
ness, the question shall be referred to the Tribunal for decision. 
10. (1) Every whole-time employee of an insurer whose con- Transfer of 
trolled business has been transferred to and vested in the Corpora- ~. ,of 
tion and who was employed by the insurer wholly or mainly in con- ~ of 
25 nection with his controlled business immediately before the ap~ ~~_ 
pointed day shall, on and from the appointed day, become an tion. . 
employee of the Corporation, and shall hold his office therein by the 
same tenure, . at the same remuneration and upon the same terms 
and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension 
30 end gratuity and other matters· as he would have held the same 
on the appointed -day if this Act had not been passed, and shall con-
tinue ·to do so unless arid -until his employment in the Corporation 
is terminated or until his remuneration. terms and conditions are 
duly altered by the Corporation: 
35 Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply 
to any employee of the Government or to any employee who has, 
by notice in writing given to the. Central Government prior to the 
appointed day, intimated his intention of not becoming an employee 
-of the Corporation. 
40 '(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or in 
- any contract of service, the Central Government may, for the pur-
pose of rationalising the pay scales of employees of insurers whose 

8 
controlled business has been transferred to and vested in it or for 
the purpose of reducing the remuneration payable to employees in 
cases where in the interest of the Corporation and its policy-holders 
a reduction is called for, alter the terms of service of the 
employees as to their remuneration in such manner as it thinks fit; 5 
and if the alteration is not acceptable to any employee the Corpora-
tion may terminate his employment on giving him compensation 
equivalent to three months' remuneration unless the contract of 
service with such employee provides for a shorter notice of termina-
tion. 10 
• 
(3) If any question arises as to whether any person was a whole-
time employee of an insurer or as to whether any employee was 
employed wholly or mainly in connection with the controlled busi-
ness of an insurer immediately befOl·e the appointed day the ques-
tion shall be referred to the Central Government whose decisiQn 15 
shall be final. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Dis-
putes Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the 14 of 1947. 
transfer of the services of any employee of an insurer to the Cor-
poration shall not entitle any such employee to any compensation 20 
under that Act, and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, 
. tribunal or other authority. 
=erto 11. (1) Where any property appertaining to the controlled busi-
pa •• elRoD ness of an insurer has been transferred to and vested in the Cor-
~ poratit)n under this Act, then,- 25 
~u . 
relating (a) every person, in whose possession, custody or control 
tl:Ie.eto. any such property may be, shall deliver the property to the Cor-
poration forthwith; 
(b) any person who, on the appointed day has in his p0s-
session, custody or control any books, documents or other papers 30 
relating to such controlled business shall be liable to account 
for the said books, documents and papers to the Corporation and 
shall deliver them to the Corporation or to such person as the 
Corporation may direct. 
(2) In particular, all the assets of an insurer appertaining to life 35 
insurance business held ~ deposit by the Reserve Bank of India 
under the Inmrance Act or by trustees in trust shall be delivered to 
the Corporation. 
(3) Without prejudice to the' other provisions contained in this 
section, it shall be lawful for the Corporation to take all necessary 40 
steps for securing possession of all properties which have been 
transferred to and vested in it under this Act. 

9 
12. The Corporation may, having regard to the financial condition Power of 
on the appointed day 'of any insurer whose controlled business has Corpo~tion 
been transferred to and vested in the Corporation, reduce the:= of 
amounts of insurance under contracts of life insurance entered into ::e ins~ce 
5 by such insurer in such manner' and subject to such conditions as caseC::~ 
it thinks fit: 
Provided that no such reduction shall be made except in accor-
dance with a scheme prepared by the Corporation in this behalf and 
approved by the Central Government. 
10 II. (1) Where an insurer whose controlled business has been Right of 
d . Corporation 
IS 
20 
2S 
transferred to and vested in the Corporation 
at any tiine within two years before the 
January, 1956,-
un er thiS Act has, to seek re-
nin.eteenth day of lief in respect of certain 
transactions 
of the 
(a) made any payment to any person without consideration; insurer. 
(b) sold or disposed of any property of the insurer without 
consideration or for an inadequate consideration; 
(c) acquired any property or rights for an excessive consi-
deration; 
(d) entered into or varied any agreement so as to require an 
excessive consideration to be paid or given by the insurer; 
(e) entered into any other transaction of such an onerous 
nature as to cause a loss to, or impose a liability on, the insurer 
exceeding any benefit accruing to the insurer; 
<f> if a composite insurer, transferred any property from 
his life department to his general department without consi-
deration or for an inadequate consideration; 
and the payment, sale, disposal. acquisition, agreement or variation 
thereof or other transaction or transfer was not reasonably neces-
sary for the purpose of the controlled .business of the insurer or was 
30 made with an unreasonable lack of prudence on the part of the 
insurer, regard being had in either case to the circumstances at the 
time, the Corporation may apply for relief to the Tribunal in res-
pect of such transaction, and all parties to the transaction shall, 
u!lless the Tribunal otherwise directs, be made parties to the appli-
35 cation. 
(2) The Tribunal may make such order against any of the parties 
to the application as it thinks just having regard to the extent to 
which those parties were respectively l'Iesponsible for the transac-
tion or benefited from it and all the circumstances of the case. 
40 (3) Where an application is made to the Tri~un~l u~der this. sec-
tion in respect of any transaction and the apphcabon lS determmed . 

10 
in favour of the Corporation, the Trib~al shall have exclusive 
jurisdiction to determine any claims outstanding in respect of the 
tr8Il$8ction. 
Compenaa_ 14. (1) ~ere th~ controlled business of an. in8~.lrer has been 
~. for ac- transferred to and vested in the Corporation under this Act compen- 5 
:Oll!J of sation shall -be given by the Corporation to that insurer in accord-
business. ance with the principles contained in the First Schedule. 
Constitution 
of the 
Tribunal. 
(2) The amount of the compensation to be 'given in accordance ,. 
with the aforesaidpr~nciples shaJ} be determine,d,by the Corporatio,ll 
in the .first instance. and if the amount so determined is approved. ro 
by the Cen:tra1 Goveplment it shall be offered to the insurer in full. 
satisfaction of the compensation payable to him under this Act, 
and if, on the other hand, the amount so offered is not acceptable 
to the insurer he may within such time as may be prescribed for the 
purpose have the matter referred to the Tribunal for decision. 15 
15, (1) The Central Government may for the purpose of this Act 
constitute a Tribunal consisting of three members appointed by the 
Central Government one of whom shall be a pe~on who is, or has 
been, a Judge of a Higl,1 Cour.tor has been a Judge of th,e Supreme 
Court, and. he sh~l. be the Chairw\in thereof. 
(2) The Tribunal may choose one or more persons possessing 
special knowledge of any matter relating to any case under inquiry 
to assist the Tribunal in determining any question which bas to be 
decided by it under this Act. . 
20 
(3) The Tribunal shall have the powers of a civil court while 25 
trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of S of 1908. 
the following ~atters:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person, 
and examinIng him on oath; 
(b) requiring ~he di~overy and production of documents; 30 
(c) receiving evide.nce on afftdavits; 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents. 
(4) The Tribunal shall have power to regulate itS own procedure 
and decide all matters within its competence, and may review any 35 
of its decisions in the event of there being a mistake on the face 
of the, record or correct any arithmetical or clerical error therein. 

11 
CHAPTER V 
MANAGEMENT 
16. (1) The central office of the Corporation shall be at such place Offices, 
as the Central Government may, by notification in the OfficiM· branc!tea and 
S Gazette, specify. qeDaea. 
(2) The Corporation shall establish a zonal office at each of the 
following places, namely, Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi and Madras, and, 
subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, may 
establish such other zonal offices as it thinks fit. 
10 (3) The territorial limits of each zone shall be such as may be 
speCified by the Corporation. 
(4) There may be established as many divisional offices and 
branches in each zone as the Zonal Manager thinks fit. 
17. (1) The Corporation may entrust the general superintendence Committees 
J, and direction of its affairs and business to an Executive Committee of ~ 
consisting of not more than five of its members and the Executive ~d~:; 
Committee may exercise all powers and do all such acts and things as ing Director. 
may be delegated to it by the Corporation. 
(2) The Corporation may appoint a Managing Director who shall 
20 be a whole.time officer of the Corporation and the Managing D1rec· 
. tor shall exercise such powers and perform such duties· as may be 
entrusted or delegated to him by the Executive Committee or 'the 
Corporation. 
(3) The Corporation may also form such other Committees as it 
2S may think fit for the purpose of discharging such of its functions 
as may ,be delegated to them. 
18. In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Corpora- Corporation 
tion shall be guided by such directions in matters of policy involv- ~o ~eguided 
ing public interest as the Central Government may give to it; and dIrections 
30 if any question arises· whether a direction relates to a matter of ~em::I1t. 
policy involving public interest the decision of the Central Gov-
ernment thereon shall be final. 
19. (1) The Corporation may entrust the superintendence and Zonal 
direction of the affairs and business of a zonal office to a person, ManageR. 
35 whether a member or not, who shall be known as the Zonal Mana-
ger and the Zonal Manager shall perform all such functions of the 
Corporation as may be delegated to him with respect to the area 
within the jurisdiction of the zonal office. 
(2) The Corporation may constitute for each zone a Board con-
40 sisting of such number of persons as it thinks fit to appoint thereto 

12 
for the purpose of 'advising the Zonal 'Manager in respect of such 
matters as are referred to it under the regulations made by the 
Corporation. 
Staff of the . ZO. (1) For th~ purpose of enabling. it to discharge its functions 
CorpOl'adon. under this Act, the Corporation may appoint such number of per-
sons as it thinks fit. ' 5 
(2) Every person appointed by the. Corporation or whose services 
have been transferred to the Corporation under section 10 shall be 
liable to serve anywhere in India. . 
CHAPTER VI 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS I AND A~ 
=~~ %1. The Corporation shall have its own fund and all receipts of 
the Corporation shall be credited thereto and all payments of the 
Corporation shall be made therefrom.' ' 
I 
10 
Audit. 2Z. (1) The affairs of the Corporation shall ~ audited 8Y auditors I, 
duly qualified to act as auditors of companies ~nder the law for the 
time being in force relating to eompa~ie8, and the auditors shall be 
appointed by the Corporation with '~e previOus approval of the. 
Central Governmept and shall recei~ such re~~neration from -the 
Corporation as .,the Central Government may fix. 20 
(2) Every auditor in the perfor1lUlpce of his duties shall have at 
all reasonable times access to the books, acco\Jhts and other docu-
ments of the Corporation. ' 
(3) The auditors shall submit theirrepgrt to .the Corporation and 
shall also forward a copy of their report. to the Centra! Government. 2, , 
23. The Corporation shall, once at,. least in every two' years, cause 
an investigation to be made by actU$ies. into the financial condition 
of the business of the Corporation, including a valuation of the liabi-
lities of the Corporation, and submit the repo;rt of the actuaries to 
the Central Government. 30 
Surplua how 24. If as a result of any investigation undertaken by the Corpora-
:;;jJl!t. . tion under section 23 any surplus emerges, not less than 95 per cent. 
of such surplus shall be allocated to -or reserved for the policy-hold-
ers of the Corporation and the remainder may be utilised for such 
purposes and in such manner as the Central Government may deter- 3S. 
mtDe. 

13 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
'i·· 
25. Except to the extent otherwise...expressly provided in this Act, Corporation 
on and from the appointed day the Corporation shall have the ex- !':JIA,:e the 5 1 · "1 f ~ullve C USlve prlVl ege 0 carrying on life insurance business in India' and privilqe 
on and from the said day any certificate of registration under' the ofcarlifi~ . on em-
Insurance Act held by any insurer immediately before. the said day 8U~ 
shall cease to have effect in so far as it authorises him to carry on buuness. 
life insurance business in India. . 
26. Where any property or rights appertaining to the controlled R,ui~ment 
business of an insurer are transferred to and vested in the Corpora- lor oreagn be . aws to 
bon under this Act or would be so transferred and vested but ·for complied 
the fact that such transfer and. vesting are governed otherwise than WJtam:th in cer-
b h cases. y t . e law of India, the insurer shall comply with such directions as 
IS m.ay be given to him by the Corporation for the purpose of securing 
that the ownership of the property or as the case may be that the 
right is effectively transferred to the Corporation. 
27. (1) If, in the caSe of any insurer incorporated outside India, Repatriation 
the Central Government is satisfied on application made to it in this I~-= -rt 
.20 behalf that out of the. assets and liabilities transferred to and vested the cue olD 
in the Corporation under this Act there are assets brought into!orri8n iD 
. India by the insurer for the purpose of building up his.life insurance ~"c..el. 
business which should not be so transferred and vested. the Central 
Government· may, by order, direct that the Corporation shall be 
2S divested· of such assets as may be specified in the order. 
(2) For 'the purpose of determining any such assets as are referred 
to in sub-section (1), the Central Government shall compute the 
value as at the 31st day of December, 1955, of the assets of the 
insurer in accordance with the provisions contained in paragraph 
30 3 of Part B of the First Schedule and deduct therefrom the total 
amount of the liabilities of the insurer computed as at the same 
date and in accordance with the provisions contained in the Second 
Schedule. 
(3) In the case of any such insurer as is referred to in sub-sec-
3S tion (1). the Central Government may also, by order, direct that 
the Corporation shall be divested of any liabilities in respect of life 
'~';insurance poliCies issued in any foreign currency in favour of persons 
: •.. who are not citizens of India, and the order shall specify the amount 
which. may be necessary to enable the insurer concerned to meet 
40 such liabilities. . 

'14 
(4) The liabilities in respect of the policies referred to in sub-
section (3) shall be computed in accordance with the provisions 
contained in clause (b) of the Second Schedule. 
(5) Every order made by the Central Government under this 
section shall be carried out by the Corporation in such manner as 
the Central Government may direct. S 
Policies to be !S. The sums assured by all pollcies issued by the Corporation 'm-guaranteed 
by Central eluding any bonuses declared in respect thereof and, subject to the 
Government. provisions contained in section 12 the am.ounts assured by all poli-
Liquidation 
of Corpora-
tion. 
cies issued by any insurer the liabiUties under which have vested in 
the Corporation under this Act, and all bonuses declared in respect 10 
thereof whether before or after the appobatedday, shall be guaran-
teed as to payment by the Ceutral Govemment. , 
29. No provision of law relating to the winding up of companies 
or corporations shall apply to the Corporation established under this 
Act, and the Corporation shall not be placed 'in liquidation save by IS 
order of the Central Government and in such manner as that GOv-
ernment may direct. 
Special 
provillions 
for~ up of 
30. Where any insurer being a company (other than a composite 
insurer) whose controlled business has been transferred to and 
vested in the Corporation under this Act has in accordance with the 30 
provisions of this Act collected and distributed any moneys paid to inIurm. 
him l?y the Corporation by way of compensation or otherwise and 
has al!ilo complied with any direction given to him by the Corpora-
tion for the purpose of securing that the ownership of any property 
or any right is effectively transferred to the Corporation, the Central zS 
~ Government may on application being made to it in this behalf by 
such insurer grant a certificate to the insurer that there is no reason 
for the continued existence of the insurer and where such a cerU-
ficate has been granted shall cause the certificate to be published in 
the Official Gazette and upon the publication thereof the insurer 30 
shall be dissolved. 
Penalty for 31. If any person wilfully withhold or fails to deliver to the Cor-
withholdinl! poration as requined by section 11, any property or any books, docu-
property, etc.. h h' h b' h' . I . m.ents or ot er papers w lC may e In IS posseSSIon or un awfully 
retains possession of any property of an insurer which has been 3S 
transferred to and vested in the Corporation under this Act or wil-
fully applies any such property to purposes other than those express-
ed in or authorised by this Act, "he shall, on the complaint of th"! 
Corporation, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, 40 
or with both. 

16 
32) No: civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain or adjudi- Tribunal 
cate upon any matter which the Tribunal is empowered to decide or :c~~~e 
determine under this Act. !~8di~on mcertam 
matters. 
33. Any decision of the Tribunal may be enforced in any civil lnforcement 
5 court.as if it were a decree passed by that court. ~~ ~~~:t 
34. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Application 
Gazette, direct that all or any of the provisions contained in the I!sur:~e 
Insurance Act shall apply to. the Corporation subject to such condi- Act. 
tioDS or modifications as may 'be specified In the notification; but 
10 save as aforesaid nothing contained in that' Act shall apply to the 
Corporation. 
35. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply in relation to- Act not to 
apply in 
(a) any insurer whose business is being voluntarily wound certain cases. 
Up or is being wound up under the orders of the court; 
15 (b) any insurer to whom the Insurance Act does not apply 
by reason of the provisions contained in section 2E thereof; 
(c) the scheme run by the Central Government known as the 
Post Office Life Insurance Fund; 
(d) any approved superannuation fund as defined in clause 
20 (a) of section 58N of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922, which is It of 1922. 
in existence on the appointed day; 
(e) any scheme in existence on the appointed day whereby. 
in consideration of certain compulsory deductions made 'by Gov-
ernment from the salaries of its employees as part cf the con-
25. ditions of service, the payment of money is assured by Govern-
ment on the death of the employee concerned or on the hap-
peningof any contingency dependent on his life. 
36. No act or proceeding of the Corporation or of any Committee Defects in 
of the Corporation shall be called in question on the ground merely ~C!:;:,~~ 
30 of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the tion or 
Corporation or Committee, as the case may be. ~m:itt:~ 
validate acts 
or proceed-
inlS· 
37. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against Protection 
any member or employee of the Corporation for anything which is ~ctiond 
in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. AC~n un er 
35 38. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offl- Power to 
cia} Ga1.ette. make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. make rules. 

, Power to 
mllkeregu-
lations. 
16 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all' or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the term of office and the conditions of service of mem-
'bt>rsj S 
(b) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which 
investments may be made bY,the Corporation; • 
(c) the manner in which, and the persons to whom, any com-
pensation under this Act may be paid; 
(d) the time within which any matter which may be refer- 10 
red to the Tribunal for decision under this Act may be so refer-
red; 
(e) the conditions subject to which the Corporation may 
appoint employees; 
<f) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed. IS 
(3) All rules made under this section shali be laid before both 
HoUSl"s of Parliament as soon as may be after they are made. 
39. (1) The Corporation may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, by notification in the Gazette of India, make 20 
regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made there-
under to provide for all matters for which provision is expedient 
for th~ purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for-
. (a) the powers and functions of the Corporation which may 25 
be delegated to the .Zonal Managers; 
(Ib) the method of recruitment of employees and agents of 
the Corporation and the terms and conditions of service of such 
employees or agents; 
(c) the number, term of office and conditions of service of 30 
members of Boards constituted under section 19. 
(d) the territorial limits of each zone established under this 
Act and the business to be transacted in each zone; 
(e) the manner in which the fund of the Corporation shall 
be maintained; 35 
(f) the maintenance of separate funds and accounts at each 
of the zOnal otfices; • 
(g) the jurisdiction of each divisional office and the estab-
lishment of Councils representative of. policy-holders in each 
area served by a divisional office for the purpose of advising 40 
the divisional office in respect of any matter which may be refer-
red to it; 

t7 
(Jt.) the conduct of business at meetings of the Corporation; 
(i) the formation of Committees of the Corporation and the 
delegation of powers and functions of tlie Corporation to such 
Committees, and the conduct of business at meetings of such 
S Committees; 
(j) the form and manner in which policies may be issued and 
contracts binding on the Corporation may 'be executed; 
(k) the classification of policies, whether issued by the Cor-
poration or by any insurer whose controlled business has been 
10 transferred to and vested in the Corporation, for the purpose 
of declaring differential bonuses, wherever ne,*ssary; 
(1) the manner in which and the intervals within which the 
accounts of the various zonal offices, divisional offices and branch 
offices may be inspected and their accounts auditeq; 
IS (m) the conditions subject to which any payment may be 
madE' by the Corporation. 

- THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
PRINCIPLES FOR DETERMINING COMPENSATION 
(See section 14) 
PART A 
The compensation to be given by the Corporation to an insurer 5 
who has allocated to shareholders any share of the surplus as dis-
closed in the abstracts prepared in accordance with Part n of the 
Fourth Schec:ftJ.le to the Insurance Act in respect ~f the 18Slt actuarial 
investigation relating to his controlled business as at a date earlier 
than the 1st day of January, 1955, shall be computed in accordance 10 
with the frovisions contained in paragraph 1 or paragraph 2, 
whichever is more advantageous to the insurer. 
Paragraph I.-Twenty times the .&nnual average of the share of 
the suplus allocated to shareholders as disclosed in the abstracts 
aforesaid in respect of the last two actuarial investigations as at IS 
dates earlier than the 1st day of January, 1955. 
Paragraph 2.-Ten times the annual average of the share of the 
surplus allocated to shareholders as disclosed in the abstracts afore-
said in respect of the last two actuarial investigations as at dates 
earlier. than the 1st day of January, 1955, plu.8 the paid-up capital 20 
or assets equivalent thereto or, in the case of a composite insurer. 
that part of the paid-up capital or assets equivalent thereto which 
has or have b~n transferred to and vested in the Corporation 
under this Act less the amount, if any. of expenses or losses or 
both capitalised by the insurer for the purposes of Form A in the 25 
First Schedule Ito the Insurance Act. 
Explanation I.-If the aggregate of the inter-valuation periods 
preceding each of the last two actuarial investigations as at dates 
earlier /than the 1st day of January, 1955, is less than four years, 
such larger number of latest actuarial investigations as at dates 30 
earlier than the 1st day of January, 1955, as will make the aggre-
gate of the inter-valuation periods preceding each of such aCltuarial 
investigations to be not less than four years shall be taken into 
account for the purpose of determining the annual average of the 
share of the surplus under paragraph 1 or paragraph 2. 35 
Explanation 2.-For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2 where an' 
insurer has allocated to shareholders more than 5 per cent. of any 
18 

19 
such surplus as is referred to therein, the insurer shall be deemed 
to have alloca!ted only 5 per cent. of the surplus and where an 
insurer has allocated to shareholders less than 3 per cent. of any 
such surplus, the insurer shall be deemed to have allocated 3 per 
S cent. of the surplus. 
Explanation 3.-In the case of, any insurer incorporated outside 
India who makes allocations to shareholders only in relation to 
actuarial investigations undertaken in respect of his world busi-
ness reference in this Part to actuarial investigations shall be con-
10 sttued as references to the actuarial investigations undertaken 
under the Insurance Act as at the same dates as the actuarial in-
vestigations in respect of his world business. 
EXplanation 4.-Where an insurer is an insurer incorporated 
outside India whose paid-up capitd is outside India, the provisions 
15 contained in paragraph 1 shall have effect as if a sum equal to tha/t 
part of the paid-up capital of the insurer as may be determined by 
the Central Government to be allocable to the con)trolled business 
is to, be deducted therefrom and the provisions contained in para-
graph 2 shall have effect as if all the words beginning with "plus 
20 the paid~up capital" and ending with "in the First Schedule to the 
Insurance Act" had been omitted therefrom. 
Explanation 5.-In the case of any insurer incorporated outside 
India, in respect of whom an order under section 27 has been made 
by the Central Government, the share of Ithe surplus allocated to 
2S shareholders in respect of any relevant actuarial investigation 
shall be arrived at as follows:-
30 
(a) there shall be deducted from the surplus, disclosed as 
a result of the relevant actuarial investigation relating to his 
controlled business, jnterest at 31 per cent. per annum for the 
inter-valuation period preceding the date as at which the rele-
vant actuarial investigation was made, calculated on the assets 
of· ""hieh the Corporation is divested as a resuIlt of an order 
made under sub-section (1) of section 27; 
(b) with respect to the balance arrived at under clause 
(a) an amount shall be computed such that it bears the same 
proportion to the balance computed under clause (a), as the 
liability on policies continuing to veS!t in the Corporation bears 
to the aggregate of the liabilities on policies so continuing and 
on policies of which the Corporation has been divested as a • 
result of an order under sub-section (3) of section 27. !the liabi-
lities on poliCies being computed in accordance with the pre-
visions contained in clause (b) of the Second Schedule. 

20 
The share of the surplus for the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2 
shall be that amount which bears to !the amobnt computed under 
clause (b) the same proportion as the share of the surplus aUocated 
to shareholders as disclosed in the abstracts aforesaid, read with 
Explanation 2,beaors to the surplus disclosed as a result of the teo- 5 
levant actuarial investigation: . 
Provided that-
(i) in any case where the order made under section 27 is 
with reference to sub-section (1) only, this Explanation shall 
have effect as if clause (b) had been omitted therefrom and as 10 
if for the words, brackets and letter 'the amount computed 
under clause (b)', the words, brackets and letter 'the balance 
arrived at under clause (a)' had been substituted; and • 
(ii) in any case 'where the order made under section 27 is 
with reference to sub-section (3) only this Explanation shall IS 
have eftec!t as if clause (a) had been omitted and as if in clause 
(b), the words, brackets and letter 'with respect to the bal-
ance arrived at under clause (a)' had been omitted, and for 
the words, brackets and letter the balance computed. under 
clause (a)', the words 'the surplus' had been substituted. 20 
PART B 
The compensation to be given by the Corporation to an insurer 
having a share capital on which dividend or bonus is payable who 
has not made any such allocation as is referred !to in Part A in res-
pect of the last actuarial investigation as at a date earlier than the 2S 
1st day of January, 1955, shall be the sum of the amoun\ts computed 
as at the 19th day of January, 1956, in accordance with the provi-
sions of paragraph 3 less the sum of the amounts computed as at the 
19th day of January, 1956, in accordance with the provisiens of 
paragraph 4. 
Paragraph 3.-(a) The market value of any land or buildings. 
(b) The market value or the purchase price, whichever is less, 
of any shares, securities or other investments held by the insurer. 
(c) The total amount of the prem~ums paid by the insurer in 
respect of all leasehold properties reduced in the case of each such 3S 
premium by an amount which bears to such premium the same 
proportion as the expired term of the lease in respect of which such 
premium shall have been paid bears to the total term of the lease. 
AaIotI. 

21 
(d) The amount of debts due to the insurer, whether secur~d or 
unsecured, to the extent to which they are reasonably considered 
to be recoverable. 
(e) The amount of cash held by the insurer whether in deposit 
S with £. bank or otherwise. . 
'(f) The vdue of all tangible assets o'ther than those falling 
within any of the preceding clauses. 
Paragraph 4.-(a) The total amount of liabilities of the insurer 
to holders of policies in respect of his controlled business on ac· Liabilities. 
10 count of matured claims on which payment has to be made. 
IS 
20 
(b) The total ,mount of liabilities of the insurer to holders of 
policies in respect of his controlled business which have not ma-
tured for payment, the liabilities in respect thereof being calculat-
ed on the following actuarial bases:-
(i) in respect of whole-life assurances and endowment as-
surances, the mortality table to be used shall be the Oriental 
(~5) ultimate mortality table, and an interest rate of 31 per 
cent. per annum shall be assumed and for expenses 20 per cent. 
of office premiums in the case of' with-profit policies and 15 
per cent. of office premiums in the case of non-profit policies 
shall be reserved; 
(ii) in respect of other policies such actuarial bases deter-
mined by the ac'tuary making the valuation as may be con-
sistent with the basis specified in clause (i); and 
(iii) in determining the liabilities of insurers under clause 
(b) the actuary shall make all the usual prOVIsIons and re-
serves as are ordinarily done in such CE.ses. 
(e') The total amount of all other liabilities of insurt'!r . • 
(d) Where, as a result of the actuarial valuation of policy 
30 liabilities made under clause (b), the life insurance fund is shown to 
be in surplus, a sum equal to 96 per cent. of such surplus which shall 
be deemed to be a liability under this paragraph. 
PART C 
The compensation to be given by the Corporation to an insurer 
3S having no share capital or having no share capital on which -divi-
dend or bonus is payable shall be in the form of an addition at the 
r£te of rupee one per thousand in respect of the sum assured (ex-. 
cluding bonuses) under each with-profit policy. 

u 
THE SECOND' SCHEDULE 
PRINCIPLES FOR DETE~lMINING THE VALUE OF LIABlI.ITIES IN 
CERTAIN CASES 
(See section 27) 
The total amount of the liabilities of an insurer incorporate4, 5 
outside India for the purposes of sub-section (2) of section 21 shall 
be the sum of the amounts computed in accordance with the fol-
low ing provisions:-
(a) the total amount of liabilities of the insurer to holders 
of poliCies in respect of his controlled business on account of 10 
matured claims on which payment has to be made; 
(b) the total amount of liabilities of the insurer to holders 
of policies in respect of his controlled business which have not 
matured for payment, the liabilities in respect thereof being 
the mean of the liabilities calculated on method A and method 15 
B below: 
Method A.-Actuarial liability cdculated on the same bases as 
adopted by the insurer at the last actuarial investig£tion as at a 
date earlier than the first day of January, 1955. 
Method B.-Actuarial liability calculated on the method known 20 
as the modified net permium method of valuation, the mortality 
table to be used being the Oriental (25-35) ultimate mortality table, 
an interest rate of 2! per cent. per annum being assumed and the 
allowance for first year expenses being Rs. 40 per thousand rupees 
of the su~ assured by the policy. 2S 
Explanation.-Before ascerb:ining rthe liability under method A 
and method B, there shall be added to ear il" ," 'l~ policy in 
force on the 31st day of December, 1955. bonus at the same rate as 
declared at the said last ~(:tuarial investigation in respect of each 
year or part of a year the policy had, been in force since the date 30 
as at which the said last actuarial investigation was made: 
(c) the total amount of all other liabilities of the insurer. 

STAT~NT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
,,' To ensure 2'bsolute security to the policy-holder in the matter of 
his life insurance protection, to spread insurance much more widely 
and in particular to the rural areas, and as a further step m- the 
direction of more effective nlobilisatiolI of public savings, Gov$rn-
ment ~ decided to nationalise life insurance business in Indiat An 
Ordinance was promulgated in January. 1956, whereby pending the 
passing of a Bill to nationalise such bUSiness, the management of the 
life insuranc3 business in India was vested in the Central Govern-
ment. A Bill has been separately introduced to replace that 
Ordinance and the present Bill lays down the permarient arrange-
ments for nationalisation. Under this Bill a Life Insurance Corpora-
tion of India will be set up, with a share capital provided entirely 
by the Central Government, which will undertake life insurance 
business in India as a monopoly and into this Corporation will be 
integrated all the Insurance Companies now engaged in life business, 
as also the organisations functioning under the control of State Gov-
ernments and conducting such business for the benefit of the public. 
All the contracts for assurance executed by the Corporation will 
be guaranteed by -the Central Government. 
The Schedules to the Bill lay down the principles governing 
grant of compensation to the Insurers whose business will be 
taken over by the Corporation 
C. D. DESHMUKH. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 14th February, 1956. 
23 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under section 5(1) the original capital of Rs. 5 crores of the 
Corporation will be provided by the Central Government. This 
capital may be reduced by the Central Government on the recom-
mendation of the Corporation. 
, 
In terms of section 28, all the policies issued by the Corporation 
will be guaranteed as to payment by the Central Government. It 
is unlikely that this guarantee will lead to any liabilify in fact. 

MEMORANDUM ON DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Section 9(2) authorises the Central Government to make rules 
generally for dealing with the taking over by the Corporation of 
life insurance business of Insurers who have been t.ransacting other 
business as well. By means of such rules, the business of a compo-
site insurer may 'be divided into life insurance business and general 
insurance business for the purpose of facilitating the taking over. 
Under section 38(1) the Central Government may make rules to 
carry out the' purposes of the Bill; section 38(3) provides that all 
rules so made shan be laid before both Houses of Parliament as 
soon as may be after they are made. Section 39(1) empowers the 
Corporation to make regulations for the purpose of ·giving effect to 
the provisions of the Bill with the previous approval of the Central 
Government. The powers deleted under section 38 are of a ·normal 
character. 
25 

lOK SABHA 
A 
BlLL 
to . provide for the . nat ·onalisation of life insuran~ business 
.in India by transf~tall,~ .business to aCorporatiOl. 
. . -escablisked f9r the' ~ and to pro~de for the regulation 
and <.vD&orof the buSiness of the Corporation and for matters 
connected thereWith or incidental thereto. 
The President - has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to 
Lok Sabha the introduction ani comideration of the Bill. 
GIPD-LAD -1933 LS-I6-z-16 -2,400. 
M. N. KAUl., 
Secretary. 
(Shn' C. D. Deshmukh, 
Minister of Finance.) 