THE TOURISM PROMOTION CORPORATION OF
INDIA BILL, 2007
By
SHRI K.S. RAO, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Tourism Promotion Corporation of India to promote
and develop tourism in the country and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tourism Promotion Corporation of India Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 9 of 2007
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i)  “appropriate Government” means a State Government or the Central
Government, as the case may be;
(ii) “Director-General” means the Director-General of Tourism Promotion
Corporation of India established under section 3;
(iii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(iv) “tourist centre” means a centre declared as a tourist centre by the appropriate
Government.
3. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Corporation to be known as
Tourism Promotion Corporation of India with its headquarters at New Delhi.
(2) The Corporation shall have its office in the capital city of each State and
Union Territory:
Provided that the Corporation may set up its offices at any tourist centre or
other places with the prior approval of the Central Government.
4. (1) The Corporation shall be headed by a Director-General.
(2) Each office of the Corporation shall be headed by a Director and shall consist
of such number of officers and other staff as may be required for its efficient
functioning.
5. The Corporation shall perform the following functions:—
(i) formulation of a tourism policy in consultation with the State Governments;
(ii) giving wide publicity to its policies and programmes through all means
of communication including print and electronic media;
(iii) advising Central Government with regard to financial assistance to be
provided to State Governments for creating infrastructure at all tourist centres;
(iv) providing better connectivity to all places of tourist importance by
way of creation of adequate infrastructure;
(v) setting up tourist facilitation centres at all airports and railway stations
with a view to facilitate travelling, boarding and lodging for the tourists including
reservation in air services, trains, buses, hotels and motels;
(vi) conducting organized tours to different tourist centres;
(vii) setting up hotels, restaurants and motels at all tourist centres with a
view to catering to the needs of different categories of tourists;
(viii) preparing a list of paying-guest accommodation available at places having
inadequate hotel or motel accommodation;
(ix) make arrangements for provision of adequate paying-guest accommodation
for tourists at tourist centres having no hotels run by the Corporation;
(x) organizing cultural functions in cooperation with the appropriate
Government and other organisations concerned at various tourist places at
regular intervals with a view to creating awareness among the general public
and foreign tourists about the Indian culture and tradition;
(xi) organizing cultural functions in various countries in co-ordination with
Indian Embassies/High Commissions in those countries with a view to depicting
Indian culture and tradition;
Functions of the
Corporation.
Definitions.
Corporation to
be headed by
Director-
General.
Tourism
Promotion
Corporation of
India.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(xii) sending experts in the fields of art, music and such other activities as
it may deem fit, to various countries for participating in programmes aimed at
depicting Indian culture;
(xiii) training tourist guides and tour operators regarding historical
background of tourist centres and courtesy to be extended to tourists, especially
foreign tourists;
(xiv) setting up health resorts based on Indian system of medicine at various
tourist places in consultation with the appropriate Government;
(xv) making arrangements for security of foreign tourists at various tourist
centres in consultation with the appropriate Government; and
(xvi) coordinating with the Archaeological Survey of India with a view to
preserving and promoting monuments declared as of national importance.
6.  The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a large country having vast tourist potential. However, it has not been exploited
fully to the advantage of the country. Every year, lakhs of tourists visit our country from all
over the world.
It is a known fact that the foreign tourists face hardship and suffer unpleasant experiences
while they travel in our country. They get cheated by middlemen, touts and others for arranging
reservations for journey, hotels, etc. Many of them carry a bad impression about our country
on their return. As a result, prospective tourists are discouraged from visiting our country.
Consequently there is a heavy loss of foreign exchange to the country.
India is a vast country having different cultures and traditions and various languages.
People of one region are not aware of the culture and tradition of people belonging to the
other regions. As such they face a lot of difficulties while visiting important tourist places.
Moreover, the tourist centres in many places require adequate facilities and the States are
not in a position to spend the money. Security to foreign tourists also has to be taken into
consideration. Therefore, it is proposed to set up a Tourism Promotion Corporation of India
with a view to promote tourism in the country and attract foreign tourists in large numbers.
It is also proposed to provide that the Corporation shall function with a professional approach
in order to promote tourism.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; K. S. RAO.
December 18, 2006
SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ LS \ 46LS.P65

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall set up a Corporation to
be known as Tourist Promotion Corporation of India with its headquarters at New Delhi and
an office in each State and Union Territory. Clause 4 provides that the Corporation shall
consist of a Director-General, number of Directors and Officers. Clause 5 provides that the
Corporation shall perform various functions to augment infrastructural and other facilities
for tourists in all tourist places.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand
crore from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
5
SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ LS \ 46LS.P65

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6
SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ LS \ 46LS.P65

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Tourism Promotion Corporation of India to promote and
develop tourism in the country and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri K.S. Rao, M.P .)
MGIP(MRND)46LS(S5)—08-02-2007.