1
Short title,
extent, and
commencement.
THE PREVENTION OF DEATHS DUE TO HEAT AND COLD
WA VES BILL, 2018
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of human deaths caused by heat stroke during summer and
chilling cold during winter seasons by declaring heatwave and coldwave as national
calamity and for making provisions for advance preparedness to face these natural
calamities immediately on predictions of meteorological department making
provision for providing woollens, setting up night shelters, community
bonfires etc. during winters and for drinking water, ORS packets,
Mango panna, cooling space and shades at conspicuous places,
free ration and other needs for the poor homeless workers
and daily wage earners during summer and for payment
of compensation to the kins of those losing lives in
heat or cold wave, as the case may be, by the
Central and the State Governments and for
matters  connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Deaths due to Heat and Cold Waves
Act, 2015.
Bill  No. 9 of  2018
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) “cold wave” means the period of abnormally low temperature less than the normal
temperature that occurs in a place;
(c) “heat wave” means the period of abnormally high temperatures, more than the
normal maximum temperature that occurs in a place; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The natural calamities of severe heat wave or cold wave in which people lose their
lives are hereby declared respectively to be national calamities and shall be dealt with by the
appropriate Government accordingly.
4. (1) The Central and regional Meteorological Centres shall inform the appropriate
Government about forecast detailing the likely occurance of severe heat or cold wave, as the
case may be, in their areas, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) On receipt of the forecast from the Meteorological Centre under sub-section (1),
the appropriate Government shall alert its Ministries or departments dealing with agriculture,
drinking water, social justice, food and others as it may deem necessary for their necessary
arrangements and action plans to meet the challenges likely to be caused by natural calamity
and disaster.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up at conspicuous places within its
territorial jurisdiction:—
(a) night shelters for the homeless people with such amenities and facilities for the
summer, rainy and winter seasons as may be prescribed.
(b) cooling spaces, shades in the fields for the agricultural workers, near the site of
construction for construction workers, near roads and highways for the workers engaged
in construction of roads or highways and at such other places as the appropriate
Government may deem necessary for the daily wage earners, rickshaw or cart pullers,
porters, roadside mechanics and other such workers with facility of drinking water, ORS
packets and mango panna in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Department of Health of the appropriate Government to
announce and implement guidelines on dealing with cold wave or heat wave patients, as the
case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
agricultural workers, construction workers and workers who work in the open including
porters, cart pullers, rickshaw pullers and other such workers shall be allowed rest between
12 PM and 3 PM during summer season in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall prepare within six months of the commencement
of this Act, a long term action plan in order to increase preparedness, information sharing
and response coordination between various Ministries and departments of the Government
to reduce the health impacts particularly deaths due to extreme heat or cold, as the case may
be, on vulnerable population with in its territorial jurisdiction.
(2) While implementing the long term action plan prepared under sub-section (1) the
appropriate Government shall make use of short message service (SMS) e-mail, radio,
television, mobile apps and services of village Panchayats to alert the people about extreme
heat and cold conditions, as the case may be.
Definitions.
Declaration
of heat wave
and cold wave
as national
calamity.
Meteorological
Centres to
inform the
appropriate
Government
about
prediction of
heat or cold
wave.
Setting up of
night shelters,
cooling spaces
and shades
etc. by
appropriate
Government.
Long term
plan to
prevent
deaths due to
cold and heat
waves.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
7. Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 5 of this Act shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term of one month and also with fine which may extend
upto two lakh rupees.
8. The appropriate Government shall pay to the nearest kin of  the victim who die
because of heat wave or cold wave, as the case may  be a compensation of minimum three
lakhs rupees in such manner as may be prescribed.
9. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or in any other instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this
Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in  derogation of any other
law for the time being applicable to the subject  matter of this Act.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Compensation
to the kin of
the victims.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
Penalty.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Every year our nation faces extreme weather conditions in the form of heatwave, rains
and coldwave in which many people, particularly the poorer ones lose their lives. For instance
in the heatwave of this year 2015 death toll crossed the 2000 mark in the month of May itself.
This has become the fifth deadliest ever heatwave in the world and the second deadliest in
India according to an International database of disasters. The deadliest heatwave on record
in India was in the year 1998 which killed 2541 people. The most lethal heatwave in the globe
was the one that crippled Europe in the year 2003 killing 71,310 people. In the list of top ten
deadliest disasters  heatwaves figure four times—1998, 2002, 2003 and 2015 in India.
Unsurprisingly, six of the top ten heatwaves in terms of deaths have occurred in the 21st
Century which has also recorded eight of the ten warmest years ever since records of global
temperatures have started being kept. The year 2014 was tied as the warmest year on record
with the year 1998 whereas the first quarter of 2015 was declared warmest on record.
Unfortunately the poor who are undernourished and have no option but to work in the
scorching heat and chilling cold to get two square meals are vulnerable to these extreme
weather conditions and lose their lives. The death tolls from heatwaves are very difficult to
estimate since excess heat is typically not listed as the primary cause of death in cases where
the victim has a pre-existing condition such as heart or lung disease. This means that in most
of the cases especially in India the actual death toll will be much higher in all the listed events
including the spell of heatwave of 2015.
It is only after Prime Minister’s appeal to take precautions against the heatwave that
killed nearly 2300 people in the month of May, 2015 across the country particularly in the
States of Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and other parts of the country that the National
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) has started working on it. There is need to declare
heatwave and coldwave as national calamity. Immediate as well as long term action plans to
increase preparedness, information sharing through various means, increasing communication
on prevention methods, access to potable drinking water and cooling space etc. are required
to prevent deaths due to heatwave and availability to rain baseraas, woollens, medicines and
food for the poorest of the poor may prevent deaths during chilling winters. This is the
minimum which has to be done for the poorest of the poor in a welfare State like ours.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK'
January 2, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for various welfare measures such as setting up of night
shelters, cooling spaces and shades etc. by the Government. Clause 8 provides for
compensation to the kin of the victims. Clause 9 makes it mandatory for the Central Government
to provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
ten thousand crore will involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees twenty five thousand crore will also
be involved for creating assets throughout the country.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of human deaths caused by heat stroke during summer and
chilling cold during winter seasons by declaring heatwave and coldwave as national
calamity and for making provisions for advance preparedness to face these natural
calamities immediately on predictions of meteorological department making
provision for providing woollens, setting up night shelters, community
bonfires etc. during winters and for drinking water, ORS packets,
Mango panna, cooling space and shades at conspicuous places,
free ration and other needs for the poor homeless workers
and daily wage earners during summer and for payment
of compensation to the kins of those losing lives in
heat or cold wave, as the case may be, by the
Central and the State Governments and for
matters  connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal ‘Nishank’, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3655LS(S3)—19-01-2018.