1
THE VICTIMS OF ACCIDENT (EQUAL COMPENSATION) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide  for equal compensation to victims of accidents by the Government and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "accident" means an unexpected and undesirable incident resulting in injury
or death of a person during travel by road, railway or air or due to natural disasters, or
terrorist or extremists activities or stampede;
Definitions.
Bill No. 9 of  2016
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

2
(b) "victim," means a person killed or injured in any accident;
(c) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(d) "compensation" means financial assistance provided by the Central
Government to the victim or his dependent;
(e) "dependent" means the parents, spouse, children or siblings of the victim;
(f) "Fund" means the Victims of Accident Compensation Fund constituted under
section 4;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(h) "qualified medical practitioner" means any person declared by the Central or
State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a qualified medical
practitioner for the purposes of this Act.
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall after taking into consideration the loss
or injury sustained, pay equal amount of compensation to every victim.
(2) The amount of compensation shall be as follows:—
(i) where death results from the accident, the dependents of the victim shall be
paid rupees twenty lakh;
(ii) where permanent disability results from the accident,  the victim shall be
paid rupees ten lakh;
(iii) where temporary disability results from the accident, the victim shall be
paid rupees four lakh; and
(iv) where ordinary injury results from the accident, the victim shall be paid
rupees one lakh.
(3) The nature of injury suffered by a victim shall be examined and reported by a
qualified medical practitioner, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The compensation amount shall be disbursed to the victim or to his dependent within
one week from the date of receipt of report of the qualified medical practitioner.
4. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Victims of
Accident Compensation Fund for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The State Governments shall  contribute to the Fund in such proportion as may be
prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation or contribution both from
domestic and international institutions shall also be credited to the Fund.
(4) The Fund shall be administered by a Board to be known as the Victims of Accident
Compensation Board, consisting of:—
(i) the Prime Minister—ex-officio Chairperson;
(ii) the Chief Ministers of every State and Lieutenant Governor or Chief
Administrators of Union territories; and
(iii) ten retired judges of  High Court to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. The Central Government may require a State Government to furnish such statistical
and other information as may be necessary for implementation of the provisions of this Act,
in such form and within such period as may be prescribed.
Equal
compensation
to victims of
accidents.
Constitution
of Victims of
Accident
Compensation
Fund.
State
Government
to furnish
statistical
information.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. (1) The appropriate  Government shall constitute a Special Team to effectively
implement the provisions of this Act within their jurisdiction.
(2) The Special Team shall consist of ten members of which five shall be appointed
by the Central Government and five by the appropriate Government in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(3) The Special Team shall—
(i) visit the accident site and collect information relating to the victims;
(ii) submit the accident related information to the Victims of Accident
Compensation Board;
(iii) ensure that the victims receive the compensation within the time limit
prescribed under this Act; and
(iv) undertake any other work  that may be assigned by the Victims of Accident
Compensation Board.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt within this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making and modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything  previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of a special
team by the
appropriate
Government.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Savings.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution provides right to equality to every citizen as a Fundamental Right.
There is a provision for equality and non-discrimination before law under articles 14 to 16
and for social equality under articles 17 and 18 of the Constitution. The right to equality
provided by the Constitution provides that all persons within the territories of India should
get equal protection under the law and should be treated equally in similar situations. In case
of accident financial assistance is provided as compensation to affected persons. However
in case of death of the accident affected person, the relatives of the deceased have to go to
court for justice which is unfortunate. Thousands of suits are filed in courts for similar
compensation in similar situations. In may cases, courts have also given decisions to provide
for equal amounts. Despite this, there is no clear policy of the Government. Everything
depends on the administrative decision. Now, the time has come to formulate a law providing
for payment of fixed amounts as compensation to the next kin of deceased and to the injured
in accidents.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
December 22, 2015.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for equal compensation to accident affected persons.
Clause 4 provides for constitution of a Victims of Accident Compensation Fund. Clause 7
provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to carry out provisions
of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if anacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees twenty five thousand
crore per annum will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for equal compensation to victims of accidents by the Government and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4120LS(S3)—12.02.2016.