“® As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

24 MAR ong

Vs ‘Bill No. 9 of 2005

THE YOUTH WELFARE BILL, 2005

SHRIMATI KRISHNA TIRATH, M.P.

A
aw BILL

(7) This Act may be called the Youth Welfare Act, 2005. tet | Short title,
ee _ extent and
(2) It extends to the whole of India . ; commence-
| ment.

Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
ial Gazette, appoint


Definitions.

Compulsory
and free
educational
facilities.

Sports
facilities to
the youth.

Provision of
nutritious
meals in
schools, etc.

Medical care
to the youth.

Training of
the youth in
trade

vocation, etc..

Appointment
of expert
Committees.

Military
training to
the youth.

Provision of
employment.

Power to
make rules.

2

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case ofa State, the State Government
and in the case of a Union Territory, the Union Government;

(8) ‘Youth’ means all persons between twelve and thirty years of age; and -

(c) ‘Youth Organisation’ means an organisation of youth which provides for
universal membership, without any discrimination on the basis of race, religion,
language, caste, creed or sex and the Constitution of which provides for its democratic
functioning in respective States or Union territories, as the case may be.

3. The appropriate Government shall provide to every eligible youth—
(a) compulsory and free education including technical education; |
(8) materials like books, stationery, uniform, etc. free of cost;
(c) free hostel facilities; |
(d) scholarships to deserving students;
(९) free transport facilities;

(f) pocket allowance at the rate of rupees one hundred to rupees one hundred
fifty per month according to the age cf the youth, as may be prescribed; and

(2) free access to all libraries and technical institutions.
4, The appropriate Government shall provide,—

(a) training in sports to every eligible youth and facilities for participation in
sports activities both inside and outside the country;

(b) representation to youth organisations in sports associations; and

(c) other facilities for the welfare of youth, who represent the country in sports,
throughout his life time.

5, The appropriate Government shall provide nutritious meals free of cost to all the
students in schools, colleges, universities, hostels and technical institutions.

6. The appropriate Government shall provide medical and health care to the youth
free of cost.

7. The appropriate Government shall evolve a scheme under which every eligible
youth shall be imparted training in modern apprenticeship trades, vocations, etc. in factories
and vocational institutions.

8. The appropriate Government shall appoint an expert Committee in every district
consisting of eminent educationists, psychologists to recommend the type of education or
training in any vocation that is to be imparted to a youth of the district after he or she has
passed the tenth class examination. |

9, The Central Government shall provide military training to all the able bodied youth
and those who successfully complete the training shall be given preference in employment
in defence services.

10. The appropriate Government shall provide employment to the youth after their
education/training or unemployment allowance, as may be prescribed, by the Central
Government, in lieu thereof, till they are provided employment.

11, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. |



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

'. Even after five decades of independence, no clear-cut youth policy has been laid
down in our country so far. The education should be the right of every youth and not a
privilege of a few and employment should be guaranteed to them. The youth should be
ked directly with the production process. The disparities between the rural and urban
h should be eliminated gradually. The youth today is also facing serious health problems, _
lute inadequacy in sports and cultural facilities The youth belonging to Scheduled
es, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes are still reeling under poverty. There
sno proper planning for comprehensive development of the youth and proper utilisation of
sir energies and education. A comprehensive youth policy for their all round development
, therefore, absolutely necessary

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; KRISHNA TIRATH


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall provide compulsory
and free education and also supply of materials like books, stationery, uniform, etc., free of
cost and pocket allowance to all the youth. It also provides for free hostel and transport
facilities and scholarships to youth. Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government shall
provide facilities to youth for their participation in sports activities. Clause 5 provides that
the appropriate Government shall provide nutritious diet free of cost to all the students in
schools, colleges, universities and hostels. Clause 6 provides for medical and health care to
all the youth by the appropriate Government. Clause 7 provides that the appropriate
Government shall evolve a scheme under which the youth will be given training in factories
and vocational institutions. Clause 8 provides for appointment of expert Committees to
recommend the type of education that is to be imparted to the youth. Clause 9 provides for
military training to able bodied youth. Clause 10 provides that the appropriate Government
shall be responsible for providing employment to all the youth or unemployment allowance,
as may be prescribed, till they are provided with employment.

The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India in
_ respect of the Union Territories. The State Governments will incur the expenditure from their
respective Consolidated Funds in respect of their States supplemented by assistance from
the Central Government. An annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred and
fifty crore is likely to be incurred, from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees four crore is also likely to be incurred.



a

x +

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

2 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 0७
of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the

a

५१


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for a comprehensive policy for the development of the youth in the —
country. |

(Shrimati Krishna Tirath, 14.7)

MGIPMRND—3981LS(S-1)—14.01.2005. .