1
THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI C.R. PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. After section 56 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, the following  new
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“56A. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, any person who whether by
himself or by any other person on his behalf manufactures for sale or stores or sells or
distributes milk or milk products which is adulterated and unsafe or injurious to health
shall be punished with imprisonment for life.”
Short title.
Bill No.  9 of 2015
5
Insertion of
new section
56A.
Penalty for
selling
adulterated
milk or milk
products.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
34 of 2006.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the recent years, cases of adulteration of milk are rampant in the country. The
demand for milk and its products increases manifold particularly during festival season. In
order to earn quick money some people resort to all sorts of adulteration of milk and its
products. However, the penalty of a maximum of rupees five lakh provided under the Food
Safety and Standards Act, 2006 for manufacturing, selling or distributing adulterated milk or
its products does not commensurate with the seriousness of the offence. Therefore, this
penalty of rupees five lakh does not act as deterrent. The adulterators put the life of so many
people at risk. Even the Supreme Court has observed that adulterators of milk should be
given a stringent and exemplary punishment.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 with a
view to provide stringent punishment for manufacturing, distributing or selling of adulterated
milk and its products in order to put a check on the increasing cases of adulteration of milk
and its products in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; C.R. PA TIL
December 12, 2014.
2

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
————
(Shri C.R. Patil, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4164LS(S3)—09-02-2015.