As InrropuceD In Lok SsBHa

# 2 may 2006

Bill No. 9 of 2006

THE PROHIBITION OF PUBLICATION OF PRE-ELECTION SURVEY
BILL, 2006
By
Suri Mouan Sincu, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit pre-election survey.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Publication of Pre-election Survey Act, 2006.
(2) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "election" means an election to fill a seat or seats in either House of Parliament
or either House of the Legislature of a State; and

(0) “express” means and includes expression through printing or publication in
8 newspaper or a magazine or a book or telecast/broadcast through television/radio
network or by through other means to which the public has access.

3. No person shall express or cause to be expressed any opinion on the result of any
election, including any caste based survey in a particular constituency, before the completion
of process of election.

4, If any person violates the provisions of section 3, he shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupées.

Short title,
and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.

Prohibition
of publication
of pre-
election
survey,
Punishment.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It has been observed that during elections to Lok Sabha and Legislative Assemblies,
caste based data of a particular region are often published in the newspapers without any
scientific basis and on the basis of that data the forecast of victory or defeat of a candidate
is published. This creates caste-based tension in the society. Similarly, the forecast of the
victory or defeat of some particular party is published in the name of pre-poll opinion which
affects the final results of elections. This also affects the fairness of polling and the possibilities
of social atmosphere becoming poisonous are enhanced. Therefore, a legislation is needed
to ensure free and fair elections.

Hence this Bill.

New Dewi; MOHAN SINGH
January 31,2006.


to prohibit pre-election survey.

(Siri Mohan Singh, MP.)