1
THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE PRICE
COMMISSION BILL, 2011
By
SHRI RAJU SHETTI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Statutory  autonomous Commission for the purpose
of ensuring minimum support remunerative prices to farmers for their agricultural
produce and for  matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act  may be called the National Agricultural Produce Price Commission
Act,  2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  9 of  2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 (i) "agricultural produce" includes paddy, wheat, sugarcane, millet, barley, ragi, madwa,
cotton, maize, soyabean, rapeseed, mustard, peanut, coconut, sunflower, groundnut,
safflower, sesamum, niger seed, gram, tur, urad, moong, masoor (lentil), peas, jute, cashew
nut, pepper, turmeric, tobacco, potato, tomato, onion, mango, apple, orange, kinnoo,
mousambi and other such commodities;
(ii) "Commission" means the National Agricultural Produce Price Commission
constituted under section 3;
(iii) "cost of cultivation" includes operating cost plus imputed value of family labour,
market based rental value of land, interest on both working and fixed capital, transportation
cost, marketing cost and insurance premium; and
(iv) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than six
months of the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Commission to be known as the National Agricultural Produce Price Commission.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of:—
(i) (a) a Chairperson;
(b) a Vice-Chairperson;
to be appointed, from amongst persons of eminence having special knowledge in the
field of agricultural economics, by the Central Government;
(ii) five members of Parliament, of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two from
Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective Houses;
(iii) one member having practical experience in the field of agriculture with
compulsory agricultural and rural background representing each State to be nominated
by the Central Government in consultation with the respective State Governments;
(iv) one member representing the Union Ministry of Agriculture;
(v) one member representing the Indian Council of Agricultural Research; and
(vi) five members representing farmers to be appointed by the Central Government
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and members of the Commission, shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.
(4) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Commission as are required  for its efficient functioning.
(5) The Salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of the officers and staff of the Commission, shall be  such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Commission shall perform the following functions:—
(a) fix and declare the minimum support price of agricultural produce on the basis of
cost of cultivation plus fifty per cent. margin on the cost of cultivation and the announcement
of the same well in advance of the sowing season;
(b) ensure that the farmers get the minimum support prices fixed by it for their produce;
(c
) recommend to the Central Government the measures to raise the standard of
farming in the country, especially raising farm productivity and farm profitability;
2
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
National
Agricultural
Produce Price
Commission.
Composition
of the
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(d) recommend to the Central Government the measures for improving the living
conditions of farmers;
(e) ensure that the prices of the agricultural produce do not fall below the statutorily
fixed minimum support price fixed by it due to undesirable activities of traders and middlemen
after the post-harvest period;
(f) give wide publicity to the minimum support prices of the agricultural produce
determined by it; and
(g) keep the farmers aware of the prices of agricultural produce in the international
market.
(2) The Commission shall, while discharging its functions, consult State Governments
and such other agencies as it thinks fit, which are responsible for procurement, supply,
distribution, trade and other activities in relation to agricultural produce so as to ensure
payment of minimum support  prices to the farmers.
6. The Central Government shall be bound to accept and implement the minimum
support prices announced by the Commission.
7. Where the farmers fail to sell their produce in the open market at minimum
support price determined by the Commission, the Central Government and the State
Governments shall purchase the agricultural produce from the farmers at the price fixed
by the Commission.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament  by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Commission for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of the commencement of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to implement
the
recommendations
of the
Commission.
Compulsory
purchasing of
agricultural
produce by the
Central and
the State
Governments.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power of the
Central
Government
to remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is an open secret that agriculture sector is reeling under severe crisis in India. The
share of agriculture in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the country is constantly and
unabatedly falling year by year since independence. In 1950, the share of the agriculture in
GDP was 51 per cent. and in the year 2009, it has come down to a mere 14.1 per cent. and that
too without any substantial decrease in the number of the people dependent on it. Still sixty
per cent. of our population  is directly dependent on agriculture. It is shocking that the
policy makers, the leaders, the bureaucracy,  etc. are apathetic to the fact that in the last
thirteen years, more than 3 lakh farmers have committed suicide across the country. Even
today, in some States the trend of committing suicide by farmers is continuing. According
to the annual data released by the National Crime Records Bureau in the year 2009, around
17,368 farmers committed suicide i.e. every hour, two of our farmers committed suicide, and
that too when we pat our back for achieving a GDP growth rate of 9 per cent. per annum.
There are several reasons behind their shocking misery but one of the major reasons is non-
availability of remunerative prices of their agricultural produce. The middlemen, hoarders,
money lenders, etc. are exploiting them for the last 63 years. The Commission of Agricultural
Cost and Prices  (CACP) under the Ministry of Agriculture fixes the Minimum Support Price
(MSP) of a few agricultural commodities. This Commission has no legal standing and it
often happens that the MSP determined by the CACP is not remunerative for farmers.
Perhaps it would not be incorrect to say that the CACP has failed in its duty to ensure
remunerative prices to farmers. It has no proper mechanism to calculate the cost of production
of agricultural produce and, therefore, the MSP announced by it is far below the cost
incurred by the farmers to raise their crops. Hence, it is felt that if a fully autonomous
statutory commission is established to fix the minimum support prices of the agricultural
produce with certain guidelines, the misery of the farmers of the country would be solved to
some extent.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAJU SHETTI
February  3, 2011.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National Agricultural Produce
Price Commission. Clause 4 provides for salary and allowances of the Chairperson,
 Vice Chairperson and members of the Commission. Clause 5 provides, inter alia, for giving
wide publicity to minimum support price of the agricultural produce by the Commission.
Clause 7 provides for compulsory purchasing of agricultural produce by the Central and the
State Governments. Clause 8 provides for payment of adequate funds to the Commission for
carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,  would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of
rupees five hundred crore would be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees  one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—6298LS(S3)—25-02-2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a  Statutory autonomous Commission for the purpose
of ensuring minimum support  prices to farmers for their agricultural produce and for
 matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Raju Shetti, M.P .)