AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA,

)
92 MAR 2m)

Bill No.9 of 2002

THE SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION OF MEMBERS OF
PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002
By
‘Suri RAMESH CHENNITHALA, M.P.
A
BILL

further to amend the Salary, Allowances and Pension of
Members of Parliament Act, 1954.

Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows: —

1, This Act may be called the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of — Short title.
Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2002.

2. In section 8A of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, Amendment of
5 1954, in sub-section (7),— section BA.

(a) for the second proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely, —

“Provided further that where any person has served as a Member of the
House of the People for a duration of even one term of the House of the People



2 +

(irrespective of the period of that House) as provided in clause (2) of article 83
of the Constitution and who is not entitled to any pension under the foregoing
provisions of this sub-section, shall be entitled to a pension of three thousand
rupees per mensem;

(b) in the third proviso, for the words "two thousand and five hundred", the
words "three thousand" shall be substituted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The provisions of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act,
1954 provides that a member of the House of the People becomes entitled to monthly pension
only if he serves the House for a period of four years. In the past, Lok Sabhas had to be
dissolved before completion of full term i.e. five years. This has resulted in a situation, where
a large number of Members, who served the Lok Sabha for less than four years were left out
of the ambit of the provision relating to pension. When a member of the provisional Parliament
is entitled to pension, irrespective of the period of his membership, there is no reason for
depriving a member of Parliament, who could not serve the House for four years, due to early
dissolution of the Lok Sabha. This is an anomaly which needs to be corrected.

This Bill seeks to amend the Act with a view to enabling a member for entitlement of
pension on completion of one term of the House of the People irrespective of the number of
years.

New Deni; RAMESH CHENNITHALA
February 4,2002


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for entitling members of Lok Sabha to a monthly pension
irrespective of the number of years he has served as such if the Lok Sabha is dissolved
before its duration and also enhance the monthly pension to rupees three thousand in
respect of Members of Provisional Parliament. The Bill, if enacted, will involve an expendi-
ture from the Consolidated Fund of India. Itis likely to involve an annual recurring expendi-
ture of about rupees two crore from the Consolidated Fund of India

.  Anon-recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore is also likely to be involved.



ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT ACT, 1954.
(Act no. 30 oF 1954)

* * . * .

. *

8A. (1) With effect from the commencement of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of
Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1993, there shall be paid a pension of three thousand
rupees per mensem to every person who has served for a period of four years, whether

continuous or not
@ asamember of the Council of States; or

(i) as amember of the House of the People; or

Gii) Partly asa member of the Council of States and partly as a member of the
House of the Peopie; or

{iv) asamember of the Provisional Parliament: or
(५) Partly as a member of the Provisional Parliament and—

(a) partly as a mem!
the House of the People, or

‘he Council of States and partly as a mem!

(b) parily as a member of the Council of States or partly as amember of the
House of the People.

Provided that where any person has served as aforesaid for a period exceeding five

years, there shall be paid to him an additional pension of six hundred rupees per mensem for
every year in excess of five years.

Provided further that where any person has served as a Member of the House of the
People twice for its duration as provided in clause (2) of article 83 of the Constitution,
whether consecutively or not, and who is not entitled to any pension under the foregoing
provisions of this sub-section, he shall with effect fom the commencement of the Salary,
Ailowances and Pension of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1993, be entitled toa
pension of two thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem.

Provided alse that every person, who served for any period as amember of the Provi-
sional Parliament and who is not entitled to any pension under the foregoing provisions of
this sub-section, shall, with effect from the commencement of the Salary, Allowances and
Pension of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1993 be entitled to a pension of two
thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem.

* + + * * * *


LOK SABHA

nN
further to amend'the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, | x

(Shri Ramesh Chennithala, M.P.)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—4895LS1—25-2-2002.