1
THE PROHIBITION OF CHILD MARRIAGE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2019
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Child Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 9 of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Amendment
of Section 11.
2. In section 11 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006, in sub-section (1), for
the words "two years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend up to one lakh
rupees", the words "ten years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend up to
twenty-five lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
6 of 2007.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In India, women and girl child are revered since ancient times. They are also worshiped
as Goddess. Marriage in India is one of the sixteen Sanskaras. However, child marriage is a
social evil, therefore, urgently needed to be checked. Even during freedom struggle, the
eminent personalities of our country raised their voice against child marriage and it is because
of their noble deeds that various Governments took measures to check it by formulating laws
after independence. But there is further need to take stringent measures to check the child
marriage taking place at present so that any sort of exploitation against girl child is stopped
forthwith. With the help of this Bill, a tough message will be given to those who promote
child marriage. This will eventually help prohibit child marriages more effectively.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA  SINGH CHANDEL
January 18, 2019.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE P ROHIBITION  OF CHILD MARRIAGE  ACT, 2006
(NO. 6 OF 2007)
* * * * *
11. (1) Where a child contracts a child marriage, any person having charge of the child,
whether as parent or guardian or any other person or in any other capacity, lawful or unlawful,
including any member of an organisation or association of persons who does any act to
promote the marriage or permits it to be solemnised, or negligently fails to prevent it from
being solemnised, including attending or participating in a child marriage, shall be punishable
with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine
which may extend up to one lakh rupees:
Provided that no woman shall be punishable with imprisonment.
* * * * *
Punishment
for promoting
or permitting
solemnisation
of child
marriages.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—3297LS(S3)—28-01-2019.