As Intropuceb IN Lok SABHA

27 su 2001

Bill No. 9 of 2001

THE PROHIBITION ON RELIGIOUS CONVERSION BILL, 2001
By
‘Suri ANANT GANGaraM GeeTE, M.P,
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition on religious conversions.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows :—

1, (7) This Act may be called Prohibition on Religious Conversion Act, 2001.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

2 No person or institution shall encourage or cause to encourage any person or
group of persons to convert religion by way of inducement in any form or force.

Explanation:—For the purposes of this section, "inducement means and includes
giving or offering or promising to give cash, imparting free education, giving employ-
ment, shelter, food and clothes free of cost.

3. This Act shall not apply to a person who voluntarily converts to another religion
or reconverts to his original religion.

4. If any person violates the provisions of this Act, he shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment of a term not less than ten years and a fine not less than Tupees one lakh.

5. If any institution or organisation violates the provisions of this Act, the Person in
charge of the affairs of the organisation or institution, as the case may be, shall be subject
to punishment as provided under section 4 and the registration of the organisation or
institution under any law for the time being in force shall be cancelled forthwith.

Short title and
extent,

Prohibition on
religious
conversion.

Act not to
apply in case
of voluntary
conversion
Punishment
for violation of
provisions of
Act.
Punishment 5
for violation of
provisions of
Act by an
institution or
organisation.


2

6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
no person or organisation violating the provisions of this Act shall be allowed to accept
any donation or contribution of any kind from within the country or abroad.

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Offical Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Religious conversion is the order of the day. Inducement of all types is offered and
sometimes promise to offer certain things is given. Certain organisations indulge them-
selves in encouraging conversion through all ways and means and money received from
abroad and within the country is put to use for these purposes.

In many parts of the country, it has been witnessed that conversion has been taking
place through force. Forced or induced conversion should be stopped. It is, therefore, pro-
posed to prohibit conversion through force or inducement. However, a provision is made
for enabling voluntary conversion.

The Bill secks to achieve the above objective.

New Deut, ANANT GANGARAM GEETE
February 9, 2001.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

& =
BILL
to provide for prohibition on religious conversions.

(Shri Anant Gangaram Geete, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6426LS—16.2.2001. -