1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
ADV. JOICE GEORGE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India .
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2017.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  9 of  2017
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In article 253 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:—
"Provided that a treaty, agreement, convention or decision affecting the interests
of one or more States of India, shall be implemented only if it is ratified by the legislatures
of affected States by passing of resolutions to that effect.".
Amendment of
article 253.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The power to enter into treaties, agreements and covenants or conventions is vested
with the executive. There can be no dispute with the proposition that a treaty, agreement,
covenant or convention may contain clauses having deleterious effect on our economy and
the life and livelihood of our citizens. In a federal system, the clauses of agreements, treaties,
covenants and conventions may have very serious impact on the lives of the people living
in a particular region or a State. But there is no mechanism in our Constitution to consider the
opinion of the people who are affected by the laws enacted to give effect to international
commitments. Hence, it is necessary to have a constitutional provision requiring ratification
of treaties or agreements or conventions entered into by India, with other countries or
multilateral organisations affecting the interests of States by Legislatures of those States by
passing of resolutions to that effect before implementation of such treaties, agreements or
conventions.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; JOICE GEORGE
December 14, 2016.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
253.— Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament
has power to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing
any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries or any decision
made at any international conference, association or other body.
* * * * * * *
4
Legislation for
giving effect to
international
agreements.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Adv. Joice George, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4061LS(S3)—24.01.2017.