THE MINIMUM WAGES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
By
SHRI PRABODH  PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Minimum Wages Act, 1948.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Minimum Wages (Amendment) Act, 2008.
2. In section 3 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, in sub-section (1), in
clause (b),—
(i) for the words "five years" the words "two years" shall be substituted;
(ii) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
"Provided that where for any reason the appropriate Government has
not reviewed the minimum rates of wages fixed by it in respect of any
scheduled employment within any interval of two years, nothing contained
in this clause shall be deemed to prevent it from reviewing the minimum
rates after the expiry of the said period of two years and revising them, if
necessary, and until they are so revised the minimum rates in force
immediately before the expiry of the said period of two years shall continue
in force.".
Short title.
Amendment
of section 3.
Bill No. 9 of 2008.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
11 of 1948
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 regulates the rates of minimum wages payable to
workers engaged in unorganized sector. The minimum wages payable to these workers
are presently reviewed and revised every five years. With the change in the economic
scenario of our country, there has been a rapid rise in the price index of essential
commodities. In view of the increasing cost of living, the Central Government increases
the dearness allowance of its employees twice a year. But, people working in unorganized
sector are not entitled to such benefits. Thus, the review and revision of the minimum
wages at an interval of five years is not in the interest of crores of workers engaged in
the unorganized sector. To make the Act more effective and practicable, it is proposed
in the Bill to review and revise the minimum wages at such interval not exceeding two
years. The Bill, if enacted, will go a long way in fulfilling the aspirations of the workers
across the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRABODH PANDA
November 28, 2007.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948
(ACT NO. 11 OF 1948)
3. Fixing of minimum rates of wages—
* * * * *
* * * * *
* * * * *
(b) review at such intervals as it may think fit, such intervals not exceeding five years,
the minimum rates of wages so fixed and revise the minimum rates, if necessary:
Provided that where for any reason the appropriate Government has not reviewed the
minimum rates of wages fixed by it in respect of any scheduled employment within any
interval of five years, nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to prevent it from
reviewing the minimum rates after the expiry of the said period of five years and revising
them, if necessary, and until they are so revised the minimum rates in force immediately
before the expiry of the said period of five years shall continue in force.
3

LOK   SALOK  SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Minimum Wages Act, 1948.
————
(Shri Prabodh Panda, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—151LS(S5)—06-02-2008.