 
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 9 of 2023
THE PRIV ATE COACHING CENTRES REGULATORY BOARD 
BILL, 2023
By
Sඁඋං Dංඅංඉ Sൺං඄ංൺ,  M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for regulation of private coaching centres and for 
matters connected therewith.
      Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Private Coaching Centres Regulatory Board Act, 2023. 
       (2) It extends to the whole of India.
   (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Board" means the Private Coaching Centers Regulatory Board constituted 
under section 3;
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5
Definitions.

(b) "private coaching centre" means an institution imparting—
(i) pre-admission coaching to students for admission into any medical, engineering 
or any other professional course; or
(ii) pre-examination coaching for securing Government or private job through 
written or oral examination conducted by any agency of the Government or a private 
establishment; or
(iii) coaching of any subject taught at secondary or senior secondary school 
examination level; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1)  The Central Government shall constitute a Board to be known as the  Private 
Coaching Centres Regulatory Board for the purpose of regulating the functioning of 
private coaching centres in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Board shall have its office in every State and Union territory.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and employees 
as it considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board. 
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service 
of the officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Board shall —
(a) give recognition to private coaching centres on such conditions, as may be prescribed;
(b) specify, from time to time, the fee to be charged by coaching centres from students;
(c) formulate a refund policy for the students who leave coaching midway or before 
completion; 
(d) specify modes of payment of fee in lump sum and in installments by the students;
(e) specify the  number of holidays including  weekly holiday on Sundays to be observed 
by coaching centres per week;
(f) lay down the minimum qualifications for teachers to be appointed in coaching centres;
(g) determine, in respect of coaching centres, the minimum number of teachers and the 
student-teacher ratio in the classes;
(h) ensure the appointment of counselor, psychiatrist and physiologist in every coaching 
centre for counseling of students;
(i) suggest steps to be taken by every coaching centre for reducing  psychological 
pressure on students;
(j) ensure that the yoga classes and sports activities are being provided by the coaching 
centres;
(k) fix the timings of the coaching centres; and
(l) specify the level of basic facilities to be provided in every coaching centre.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Constitution of   Private Coaching Centres Regulatory Board.
10
5
25
20
30
15
35
40
Power to make 
rules.
2
45
Functions of the Board.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The dependence on coaching for preparation of entrance exams for IIT and Medical 
is growing very fast all over the country. These coaching institutes claim to improve the 
future of the students of the country and give guarantee of their selection in IIT and medical 
entrance exams. While lakhs of students appear in the exams in the country, the seats are 
only in thousands. Classes in such institutes run seven days a week. Sometimes there are 
more than 100 students per class in these coaching institutes.Too much pressure is put on the 
students to score good marks and rank in the examination as a result of which the children 
become victim of depression. Excessive pressure on children for study in these institutes is 
proving to be fatal. According to a data, 16 students commit suicide every day in the country 
coming under pressure of examinations. According to crime record bureau, 10335 students 
committed suicide in 2019, 12526 in 2020 and 13089 in 2021 which is almost 63.3 percent 
more in comparison to the figures in 2013. According to the bureau, 40.17 percent of those  
committing  suicide are youths below 30 years out of which 17.2 percent are girls below the 
age of 30 years. So, there is an urgent need to enact a legislation to regulate the functioning 
of such private coaching centres in the country.
Hence this Bill.
      Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                 DILIP SAIKIA
16, 2022

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of Private Coaching Centre 
Regulatory Board for regulating the functioning of private coaching centres. The Bill, 
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is 
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore will be involved 
per annum. 
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
Legislative Power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
ൺ
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for regulation of private coaching centres and for 
matters connected therewith.
_______
(Shri Dilip Saikia, M.P .)