1
THE COMPULSORY MEDICAL PREPAREDNESS IN
SCHOOLS BILL, 2012
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory medical preparedness in schools to deal with medical
emergencies and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Medical Preparedness in Schools Act,
2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "doctor" means a medical practitioner registered with the Medical Council of
India;
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 9 of  2012
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.5

2
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "school" means a school run by the Central Government or a State Government
or a local authority or by an authority designated or sponsored by the appropriate
Government and includes Government aided school and recognised private school
imparting education upto twelfth standard.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Medical Council of India,
within a period of six months from the commencement of this Act, formulate a health policy
for students in schools prescribing norms to be followed in case of medical emergency.
(2) The Central Government shall issue guidelines and directions to the  State
Governments with regard to medical preparedness in schools from time to time.
4. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure that every school,
within its jurisdiction, is fully prepared to deal with any medical emergency.
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to,—
(i) appoint a registered medical practitioner and a qualified nurse in every
school;
(ii) make provision of a full-fledged first-aid centre having life saving equipments
and medicines in every school; and
(iii) make provision of an ambulance in every school.
6. (1) Every school shall maintain health data of every student who is suffering from
any life threatening disease, in consultation with his parents or guardians or family doctors,
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the duty of every parent to apprise the school administration of the
special medical needs of his school going child and keep a slip in the school bag of the child
mentioning the kind of medical treatment being taken by the child.
7. Every school shall make arrangements with nearby Government or private hospitals
for the purpose of providing immediate medical treatment to students in emergency.
8. The appropriate Government shall take steps to organise, from time to time, first-
aid training programmes in every school to train every teacher and non-teaching staff
member to help the students during medical emergency.
9. The appropriate Government shall designate an authority in every district to monitor
and conduct an inspection of medical preparedness in every school at least once in each
financial year, in such manner as may be prescribed.
10. The appropriate Government shall take steps to ensure that no school charges any
extra amount from the parents of students for arranging medical preparedness or refuses
admission to any child, who is suffering from any disease which is not life threatening.
Central
Government
to formulate
health policy
for students in
schools.
Schools to be
prepared for
medical
emergency.
Appropriate
Government
to appoint
doctors and
nurses to
provide
certain
facilities in
every school.
Schools to
maintain
health data of
students
suffering
from life
threatening
disease.
Arrangement
with hospitals
by schools to
provide
medical
treatment to
students in
emergency.
Appropriate
Government
to organise
first-aid
training
programmes
for teachers
and staff of
every school.
Monitoring
and
inspection of
medical
preparedness
in schools.
Schools not
to charge
extra amount
for arranging
medical
preparedness.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, in
this behalf provide requisite funds for the purposes of this Act.
12. Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to two
lakh rupees or with both.
13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
14.  The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to
medical preparedness in schools or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law
other than this Act.
15. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Incidents of medical emergency in schools due to injury caused to the students or
sickness are very common now a days. Of late, many incidents have come to light wherein
students lost their lives for want of proper and immediate medical help in schools. In an
incident, a young girl of sixteen years age lost her life as she was not given any first-aid in
school and reportedly there was delay in transporting her to the hospital. As of now, even
the Department of Education does not have any health policy for students in schools. Every
school follows its own set of norms to deal with children's medical emergency. Therefore,
there is no proper, uniform and adequate arrangement for medical help to students in
emergency. As of now the Government has not issued any direction to schools in this regard.
There is an urgent need that proper attention be paid to make available medical facilities and
infrastructure in schools to deal with such emergencies. Every school should have a registered
doctor, qualified nurse and first-aid centre equipped with life saving medicines. It is also
required that every school shall make some arrangement with nearby hospitals to provide
medical treatment to students in the eventuality of any accident or medical emergency. The
Central Government should also come out with a health policy for students in schools to
handle the medical emergency and to provide health services to the students in schools.
The Bill seeks to achieve above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
November 22, 2011.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint a doctor
and a nurse in every school. It also provides for arrangement of first-aid centre and ambulance
in every school. Clause 7 provides that every school shall make arrangements with nearby
hospitals including private hospitals to provide medical treatment to students in emergency.
Clause 8 provides that the appropriate Government shall organise first-aid training programmes
for teachers and staff members in every school. Clause 11 provides that the Central
Government, shall after due appropriation, provide adequate funds to the State Governments
for the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. The State Governments have to incur some expenditure from
their respective Consolidated Funds in respect of their States supplemented by assistance
from the Central Government. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees
fifty hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory medical preparedness in schools to deal with medical
emergencies and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4049LS—05.03.2012.