SERVER5/BILL 2004/RS/4143RS
1
Bill No. C of 2006
THE ADOPTION OF CHILDREN (REGULATION) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to regulate the adoption of children and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Adoption of the Children (Regulation) Act, 2006.
(2) (a) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) (b) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "child" means a person who has not attained the age eighteen years;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006.
10

SERVER5/BILL 2004/RS/4143RS
2
3.   No person shall indulge in sale or purchase of a child in the country.
4.  No organisation or institution shall indulge in any activity connected with either the
taking or giving in adoption of children in the country except as provided in this Act.
5. (1) The appropriate government shall set up a centre to be known as a centre for
welfare, rehabilitation and adoption of children in each district of the country with such
families and infrastructure as may be prescribed.
(2) The centre set up under sub-section (1) shall take over the custody of all the
children from various organisations or institutions which are working in connection with
the welfare rehabilitation and adoption of children in that district.
6.  (1)  Whoever, desires to adopt a child shall apply to any centre for Welfare,
Rehabilitation and Adoption for adoption of a child and such centre shall, on being satisfied
by the genuineness of the adopting person, allowed adoption of child in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(2)  Any person who adopts a child shall inform the respective centre about the
development and welfare of the adopted child from time-to-time until such child attains the
age of eighteen years.
7.  Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term, which may extend to five years with and with a fine which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees.
8.  The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being or in any instrument having the force
of law but save as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to the adoption of children.
9.  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provision of this Act.
No person to
indulge in sale
or purchase of
children.
Organisations
not indulge in
activity re-
lated to adop-
tion of chil-
dren.
Establishment
of centre for
Welfare, Reha-
bilitation and
adoption of
children.
Procedure for
adoption of a
child.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Recently several cases of sale of children have been reported in the country. Even an
educator working with a noted NGO, run by a top police official was arrested on charge of
facilitating the sale of children. Many non-government organizations and institutions set up
for the purpose of welfare and rehabilitation of orphans and helpless children have also been
reportedly involved in nefarious dealings in children for monetary gains. There is no system
of verifying the antecedents of persons who seek adoption of children. The loopholes
enable child trafficking in the name of adoption of children. At present, there is no law to
affectively tackle sale of children. It is, therefore, to enact a law to regulate adoption of
children and present sale of children.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
SHOBHANA  BHARTIA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a centre for welfare, rehabilitation and
adoption of child in each district of the state. The Central Government will bear expenditure
incurred in respect of the Union territories and the state governments will bear expenditure
incurred in respect of states from their respective consolidated funds. The Bill, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of about five crore rupees is likely  to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about ten lakh rupees is also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central government to make rules for carrying out the
purpose of the Bill. These rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of legisla-
tive power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the adoption of children and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4143RS(S5)—8-12-2006.