Bill No. C of 2024 
THE PRIVATE UNIVERSITIES (PREVENTION OF 
SALE OF DEGREES) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to prevent the sale of degrees by private Universities and ensure the  
 maintenance of educational standards, integrity, and accountability 
in higher education, and to provide for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to prevent private Universities from engaging  in the 
sale of degrees and related malpractices that undermine the credibility of Indian 
higher education to protect students,  safeguard educational standards,  and 
ensure accountability in the private education sector. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Private Universities (Prevention of Sale of
Degrees) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 7TH  FEBRUARY, 2025

2 
Definitions. 2. (1)  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) “affiliate(s)” means educational institutions which can run
degree or other equivalent programmes, but are not empowered to
provide degree on their own and have to be necessarily attached with
some private University for the purpose of awarding degree;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State; in the case of a Union Territory, the Union
Territory Administration and in all other cases, the Central
Government;
(c) "degree" means any  academic title awarded by a private
University or its affiliate(s), to a student or any other person in the
name of certification, diploma, or degree after the su ccessful
completion of a prescribed course of study and examination, and duly
recognized by the University Grants Commission or any other relevant 
authority or the appropriate Government, as the case may be;
(d) "degree fraud" refers to any fraudulent activit y or illegal act
involving the unauthorized sale, issuance, or procurement of degrees,
diplomas, certificates, or academic titles;
(e) "private University" means a university duly established or
incorporated by a private body, institution or trust through a
Central/State Act or by any other corresponding law for the time being
in force or enacted by the appropriate legislature and maintained by a
private entity;
(f) "Regulatory Authority" means the University Grants
Commission or any other body designated as such and notified by the
appropriate Government in the Official Gazette under section 5 of the
Act; and
(g) "sale of degree" means the practice of granting academic
certifications in exchange for money, goods, or services, without
requiring the recipient to complete  the necessary academic course
requirements.
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956 or any other relevant law for the
time being in force, shall have the same meanings respectively a ssigned to
them in those Acts.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
3 of
 1956. 
Prohibition of 
sale of degrees. 
3. (1) No private University or its affiliate(s) shall engage in the sale,
exchange, or any other form of financial transaction for granting academic
degrees or certificates without requiring compliance with the prescribed
academic standards.
(2) Any degree, diploma, or certification awarded in contravention of this
section shall be null and void.
40 
Mandatory 
Transparency 
and Disclosure. 
4. Every private University and its affiliate shall,—
(i) maintain transparency in admissions, academic assessments, and
awarding of degrees or certificates;
(ii) prepare and submit a detailed report of degrees or certificates
conferred and the students’ academic performance   annually to the
Regulatory Authority, so designated under Section 5 of this Act, in
such form and manner as may be prescribed.
45 

3 
5 
10 
15 
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, designate the University Grants Commission (UGC) or any other
body as the Regulatory Authority for the purposes of monitoring a nd
enforcing the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Regulatory Authority so designated, shall have such powers and
perform such functions as may be prescribed to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this Act, including but not limited to:
(a) issue guidelines and advisories for the effective implementation of
the Act;
(b) receive complaints or on its own initiative, investigate any
suspected violations of this Act;
(c) conduct periodic audit of private Universities to verify compliance
with academic and procedural standards and norms;
(d) exercise regulatory oversight over  matters related to the sale of
degrees by private Universities, if any, either suo motu or which may be 
brought to its notice and recommending appropriate actions, including 
prosecution or derecognition, as may be prescribed; and 
(e) any other matter relating to this Act, which may be referred to it by
t
he appropriate Government, from time-to-time.
Regulatory 
Authority. 
20 
25 
30 
6. The Regulatory Authority shall, while investigating any matter referred to
in clause (b) or clause (d) of section 5, have all the powers of a Civil Court
trying a suit and, in particular, in respect of the following matters,
namely,—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any
part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court
or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
Regulatory 
authority to 
have powers 
of a Civil 
Court. 
35 
7. The Regulatory Authority shall, in collaboration with the appropriate
Government, raise public awareness about the dangers of degree fraud and
e
stablish reporting mechanisms for complaints.
Awareness 
and 
Reporting. 40 
8. (1) A dedicated Grievance Redressal Cell shall be established within the
Regulatory Authority to address complaints and grievances specifically
related to degree fraud and violation or contravention of any of the
provisions of the Act, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Any student, employee, or member of the public may submit complaints
regarding suspected instances of illegal sale of degrees and violation or
contravention of any of the provisions of the Act, in such form and manner
as may be prescribed.
Establishment 
o f a  
Gr
ievance 
Redressal 
Mechanism. 
45 
9. (1)  Any private University or its affiliate(s) or any individual shall be held
guilty of an offence under this Act if they: 
(a) issue, sell, or grant degrees or certificates without adherence to the
p
rescribed academic and procedural standards and norms, as may be
pr
escribed;
Offences. 

4 
(b) facilitate or abet any activity leading to the unauthorized issue or
sale or grant of academic degrees and certificates;
(c) submit false or misleading information to the Regulatory Authority
regarding compliance with this Act;
(d) fail to maintain accurate academic records or provide such records
when required or called for by the Regulatory Authority; 
(e) obstruct or refuse to cooperate with inspections or inquiries by the 
Regulatory Autho rity or comply with the directions issued under this  
Act; and
(f) violate or act in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act. 
(
2) The offences under this section shall be deemed to be cognizable and
non-bailable.
5 
10 
Liability of an 
officer of the 
University. 
10. (1) If it is proven that any offence under section 9 was committed with the
consent or connivance of, or due to negligence by, any officer of the
university, such officer shall also be deemed guilty of the said offence and
be liable to punishment in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) Where an offence under this Act is committed by a private University or
its affiliate(s), the Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor, Registrar, Principal,
Faculty and/or other persons responsible for the management thereof shall
be deemed guilty unless they prove that the offence occurred without their
knowledge or that they exercised due diligence to prevent it.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub- sections (1) and (2), no
action shall be taken against any person for anything which is in good faith
done or intended to be done under this Act.
15 
20 
Penalties. 11. (1) Any private University or its affiliate(s) found violating the provisions
of this Act shall be liable to be punished with—
(a) a monetary fine, which may extend up to rupees one crore; and/or
(b) suspension of accreditation or affiliation, depending on the severity
of the violation; and/or
(c) disqualification of specific academic programs or all programs
until remedial action is undertaken. 
(2) Any individual, including officials or faculty of a private University or
its affiliate(s), proven to be involved in the sale of degrees or certificates or
found guilty of any of the offences under Section  9 shall be  punished
with—
(a) a monetary fine, which may extend up to rupees ten lakh; and/or
(b) suspension or permanent disqualification from holding any
position in any educational institution.
25 
30 
35 
Protection for 
Whistleblowers. 
12. (1) Any person who, in good faith, reports instances or files a complaint
regarding the illegal sale of degrees or violation or contravention of any of
the provisions of this Act shall be entitled to protection against retaliation,
including but not limited to:
(a) dismissal, suspension, or demotion from employment;
(b) discrimination in terms of employment conditions or opportunities;
(c) any form of harassment, whether physical, psychological, or
professional.
40 
45 

5 
5 
10 
Provided that any such retaliatory action taken by any organ ization, 
body or individual(s) against a whistleblower shall be deemed as a 
punishable offence and shall be liable to be punished as per the provisions 
of this Act or any other relevant law for the time being in force. 
(2) The identity of whistleblower(s)  and the contents of their complaints
shall remain confidential and shall not be disclosed except:
(a) when required by law or judicial process; or
(b) to the extent necessary for conducting an effective investigation or
proceeding under this Act, in which case adequate measures shall be
taken to protect the whistleblower’s identity; or
(c) any other circumstances, as may be prescribed.
15 
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of
any inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on
t
he provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
20 
25 
30 
14. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Officia l
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) E very rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each Hous e of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expir
y
o
f the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
H
ouses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
ef
fect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modi fication or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one
House, before that House.
Power to  
make rules. 

6 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The purpose of this Bill is to address the serious issue of degree selling by 
private Universities, which undermines the credibility of Indian higher education 
and devalues legitimate academic achievements. By enacting stringent penalties 
and establishing an enforcement mechanism, this Bill aims to maintain the integrity 
of academic qualifications, protect students from degree fraud, instill confidence in 
the education system and preserve the reputation of Indian education on a global 
level.  The Bill also seeks to provide necessary safeguards for whistleblowers, so 
that students and general public can fearlessly report cases of degree fraud and other 
violations of the provisions of the Bill and bring the guilty to justice. 
Hence this Bill. 
IMRAN PRATAPGARHI 

7 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
As the matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure 
and administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of 
a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_____________ 
A 
BILL 
to prevent the sale of degrees by private Universities and ensure the maintenance of 
educational standards, integrity, and accountability in higher education, and to 
provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
_____________ 
(Shri Imran Pratapgarhi, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS–PMB(E)–093–10.02.2025  