1
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/ 4141RS
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. CI of 2006
THE CHILD MARRIAGE (ABOLITION) AND MISCELLANEOUS
PROVISIONS BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of child marriages and for compulsory registration of all
marriages   and  for matters connected  therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Abolition of Child Marriage and Miscellaneous
Provisions  Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “child” means a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(c) “child marriage” means a marriage to which either of the contracting parties
is a child;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006.
5
10

2
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/ 4141RS
3. (1) Child marriage is hereby abolished.
(2) No person shall marry his or her children below the age of eighteen years.
4. (1) All the marriages solemnized in the country after the commencement of this Act
shall be registered within a fortnight of the solemnization of marriage in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the parents to get the marriage of their children
registered with the designated authority.
5. The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, designate
an authority or an officer for registration of marriages, where no such authority or office
exists in each district within its jurisdiction.
6. After the registration of marriage under the provisions of this Act, a marriage certificate
shall be issued to the parents giving such details as may be prescribed.
7. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and a fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees.
(2) Marriages solemnized in contravention of the provisions of this Act shall,—
(a) be void; and
(b) not be registered; and
(c) debar the person from the benefits of various schemes of the appropriate
Government.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as aforesaid, the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being applicable to marriages.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Abolition of
Child
Marriage.
Authority for
Registration of
Marriages.
Registration
of Marriages.
Certificate of
Marriage
Registration.
Penalty.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Child marriages have been prevalent in various parts of the country for a long
time because people have no knowledge of the implications of such marriages. The
parents of the children usually think that a girl is not safe in their houses after a certain
age and because of which, their honour and lives are always at danger. Due to the
economic progress and awareness many people have started changing their minds but
due to poverty and ignorance many perform such marriages which are harmful and
affect the physiological, psychological and emotional development of their children.
The early marriage also has several health complications and contributes to the rising
population. The Government has, recently, abolished the child labour in the country,
therefore, it will be in the fitness of things that the child marriages are also completely
abolished so that children are properly looked after and provided education for their
development. Alongwith the abolition of the child marriages, registration of all the
marriages performed in the country should also be made compulsory. As children of
today are future for tomorrow, child marriages should be discouraged and at the same
time it is also necessary that parents who indulge in such a practice are punished with
fine and imprisonment.
Hence this Bill.
SHOBHANA  BHARTIA

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purpose of the Bill. These rules will relate to matters of details only. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
4

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of child marriages and for compulsory registration of all marriages
and  for matters connected  therewith or incidental thereto.
 ————
(Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4141RS(S3)—8-12-2006.