1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govenment may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 16 of the Constitution, for clause 4A, the following new clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
''(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision
for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class or
classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes which, in the opinion of the State, are not
adequately represented in the services under the State.''
Bill No. CI of 2022
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA S ABHA
ON 8TH DECEMBER,2023
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
Article 16.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Constitution being a legal as well as a social document should be dynamic in  
nature. With the changing needs of society and  the foray of new ideas, the Constitution 
must
 change from time to time for the welfare of the people of India. If existing impediments 
to the
 welfare of the people are not removed, the  Constitution would suffer virtual atrophy.
2. The Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995 inserted clause (4A) to
article 16 to extend the benefit of reservations in promotions as clause (4) is confined only to 
reservation in initial appointments. Parliament felt that it was necessary to continue providing 
reservations in promotion posts as well in the case of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
T
ribes. However, the said amendment did not consider the case of Other Backward Classes 
(OBCs).
3. The discrimination faced by the OBCs is comparable and a similar level to the
discrimination faced by the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. The abhorrent and 
inhuman system of classification of human beings merely based on their birth, over which 
they obviously had no control, led to systemic oppression and discrimination. The effect of
 
this systemic discrimination was not just econmic, it was social and psychological which 
was the primary reason to insert article 16(4) in the Constitution.
4. The founding fathers of our Constituiton have designedly couched articles 14, 15
and 16 in comprehensive phraseology so that the frail and emaciated sections of the people 
living in poverty, rearing in obsurity, possessing no wealth or influence, having no education, 
much less high education and suffering 
from social repression and oppression should not be 
denied equality before law and equal protection of the laws or subjected to any prohibition 
of discrimination on grounds of religion, rate, caste, sex or place of birth. These people who 
have been historically ostracized from mainstream education and employment should be 
afforded equal opportunity in the matters of public employment. OBCs are constitutionally 
r
ecognised to be socially backward but still there are no enabling provisions to provide 
reservations for them in promotional posts. Due to such non-inclusion, the OBCs are vastly 
unrepresented at the higher posts of the administration as they were never considered for 
promotions due to social status. Even the States which are interested in granting reservations 
in promotional posts for OBCs cannot do so for lack of enabling provision in the Constitution.
5. Recently, Parliament has extended the benefit of reservations to forward castes also
in the category of economically weaker sections.
6. Due to absence of the aforesaid Constitutional mandate in promotions, the real
oppressed and downtrodden are not brought into the mainstream till today. Mere entry into 
service is not sufficient. Only when the OBCs are duly represented in promotional posts, a 
truly representative administration could be achieved and real substantive equality is enabled. 
Historical injustice is still meted out to backward classes of citizens and their due share in 
jobs in the h
igher posts is denied and they are not adequately represented even till today.
7. Therefore, article 16 of the Constitution of India must be further amended to grant
reservations in promotional posts with consequential seniority for the backward classes of 
citizens and this would result in true social justice as it would ensure adequate representation 
of the backward class of citizens in higher offices of the administration.
8. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Constitution to achieve the above objectives.
P. WILSON.
2

ANNEXURE
 EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
16.* *   *   *  *
(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority
, to any class or classes of
posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in the services
under the State.
* * * * *
3
Equality of
opportunity
in matters of
public
employment.

RS-P&PS-PMB( E)-014-11-12-2023.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P . Wilson, M.P.)