1
Bill No. CII of 2022
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
TAMIL NADU BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to provide for spe cial financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu for the purpose of 
sustainable and balanced development of growth-oriented infrastructure such as 
affordable housing, drinking wate r, roads, sanitation, creation of grain and
fodder banks, skill development, textile parks, food processing zones,
cloud seeding and welfare schemes for women, children, senior
citizens and people living below the poverty line in the State
and encouraging traditional water conservation through
lakes, ponds, wells rainwater harvesting and
afforestation and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of
Tamil Nadu  Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER 2023
5

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Tamil Nadu to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be
undertaken by the State Government of T amil Nadu with the approval of the Union Government
for the purposes of—
(a) improvement of drinking water facilities;
(b) implementation of schemes aimed at improving the health and educational
standards of the girl child;
(c) providing for welfare measures aimed at improving the condition of
agricultural and migrant labourers;
(d) providing for measures aimed at lowering of infant mortality rate, improving
the maternal health and promoting institutional delivery;
(e) provindg employment to members of families living below poverty line and
unemployed youth through skill development;
(f) providing water and sanitation facilities in rural and urban areas;
(g) creating good quality infrastructure of roads, rail, highways, street lights,
schools, colleges and transport;
(h) creating awareness amongst people about disaster preparedness plan and
training them to deal with disasters;
(i) creation and maintenance of water conservation bodies such as check dams;
(j) digging of open wells, ponds and desiltation of such bodies from time to time
under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005;
(k) encouraging and providing irrigation facilities to the farming sector and
promotion of sustainable practices like organic farming coupled with modern
facilities like drip irrgation and sprinklers to farmers;
(l) capping of water guzzling sugarcane area and promotion of drought resilient
crops;
(m) promotion of rain water harvesting and watershed development to ensure
replenishment of groundwater;
(n) afforestation particularly on vacant or barren and waste land with the help of
villagers and village Panchayats including community afforestation;
(o) promotion for growing fodder and setting up fodder and food grain banks at
conspicuous places;
(p) initiating welfare measures for improving the conditions of agricultural
workers, senior citizens, women, children and poor people;
(q) establishing cold storages and warehouses for farmers;
(r) settling the debt of farmers;
(s) providing compensation and relief to farmers and agricultural labourers for
any damage to crops caused due to rainfall deficit, pest attack, flood, hailstorm or any
other natural calamity;
(t) promotion of research and development through Krishi Vigyan Kendra in
agriculture and drought management to ensure better and inexpensive inputs like
seeds, fertilizers and pesticides;
(u) promotion of sectors like livestock and poultry;
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
42 of 2005.

3
(v) promoting food processing industries based on local agricultural products;
textile parks;
(w) implementation of social awareness campaigns through Non-Governmental
organisations and Self-Help Groups relating to farmer credit, water literacy and
drought management through change in cropping pattern;
(x) promotion and implementation of cloud seeding through silver iodide; and
(y) such other provisions as the State Government of Tamil Nadu may deem
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
3. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the President of
India may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act
which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
10
5
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONSThe State of Tamil Nadu needs assistance from the Central Government for thesuccessful completion of various schemes being undertaken at present with an aim to improvethe standard of life of the people, improve the level of education and health condition of thegirls, to encourage the girl students of families living below poverty line to pursue highereducation and also to provide incentives for people living below poverty line to pursuehigher education. The condition of farmers and agricultural labourers in the State, theirwelfare and protection are of paramount importance. Central assistance to the State is alsoneeded for the holistic development and further reduction in the maternal and infant mortalityrates.Recurring droughts have made the farmers of the State to seek support from theGovernment. The situation wherein droughts have been a frequent occurrence during thepast fifty years has to be stopped through massive water conservation with check dams andother structures to arrest rain water run off.The traditional methods of water conservation through digging of open wells, ponds,lakes and such other bodies and time to time desiltation of such water bodies need to beundertaken. Rain water harvesting has to be promoted as a mass movement in the State.Afforestation on a large scale particularly on barren lands and wastelands has to be promotedinvolving villagers and village Panchayats by providing incentives which can certainly arrestthe desertification. Unfortunately certain backward regions of the State are not muchdeveloped in comparison to other urban regions of the State in terms of infrastructure facilities,such as, potable water, roads, electricity, sanitation and other development indicators suchas employment, per capita income and education particularly of the girl child. Welfare measuresfor the senior citizens, widows, physically handicapped or infirm do not exist in these regionsof the State. Tamil Nadu has to be allocated its fair share of resources by the CentralGovernment. As a welfare State, the Government has to provide all these facilities and worktowards giving a requisite push for overall and all round development of the State.Hence, this Bill.KANIMOZHI NVN  SOMU.4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUMClause 2 of the Bill provides for special financial assistance to the State of Tamil Naduto be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by dueappropriation provide, to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may beundertaken by the State of Tamil Nadu with the approval of the Central Government. The Bill,therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India. Asthe sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Tamil Nadu as special financialassistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfareschemes to be implemented by the State Government with the approval of the CentralGovernment are identified, it is not  possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure,which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this state.2. No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund ofIndia.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for speical financial assistance to the State of Tamil Nadu for the purpose of
sustainable and balanced development of growth-oriented infrastructure such as
affordable housing, drinking water, roads, sanitation, creation of grain and
fodder banks, skill development, textile parks, food processing zones,
cloud seeding and welfare schemes for women, children, senior
citizens and people living below the poverty line in the State
and encouraging traditional water conservation through
lakes, ponds, wells rainwater harvesting and
afforestation and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu, M.P .)
RS-P&PS-PMB (E) 087- 14.12.2023