AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. CII of 2024 
THE VOYEURISM (PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL) 
BILL, 2024 
____________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
____________ 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II 
RIGHTS OF PERSONS AND VICTIMS 
3. Right to privacy.
4. Right to information.
5. Prevention of voyeurism.
6. Rights of victims.
7. Right to file application and receive acknowledgement.
CHAPTER III 
ANTI-VOYEURISM BUREAU OF INDIA 
8. Establishment of the National Bureau.
9. Appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of members of the National Bureau.
10. Salaries and allowances of members of the National Bureau.
11. Powers, duties and functions of the National Bureau.
CHAPTER IV 
ANTI-VOYEURISM BUREAU OF THE STATES 
12. Constitution of the State Bureau.
13. Appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of members of the State Bureau.
14. Salaries and allowances of members of the State Bureau.
15. Powers, duties and functions of the State Bureau.
CHAPTER V 
ANTI-VOYEURISM BUREAUS OF THE DISTRICTS 
16. Constitution of District Bureau.
17. Qualification for appointment as officers and other employees of the District Bureau.
18. Powers, duties and functions of the District Bureau.

(ii) 
CHAPTER VI 
COPYRIGHT AND TAKEDOWN MECHANISM 
CLAUSES 
19. Copyright over voyeuristic material.
20. Takedown notice and restoration procedure.
21. Prohibition on third-party intermediaries for claiming or working as a take-down agency.
CHAPTER VII 
VOYEURISM-FREE STANDARDS AND STANDARD MARK 
22. Standards to be specified.
23. Duty to conform to standards.
24. ‘Voyeurism -Free’ standard mark.
25. Use of standard mark.
26. Standards and voluntary certification by NGOs.
CHAPTER VIII 
PROVISIONS FOR ESTABLISHMENTS 
27. Licences for establishments.
28. Exemptions for obtaining licence.
29. Licencing authority and forms of licences.
30. Restrictions in granting licences.
31. Licencing authorities to furnish information to State Bureau.
32. Enabling ease of access to licence services.
33. Application for licences.
34. Jurisdiction of licencing authority.
35. Inspection of establishments.
36. Grant of licences and time limit for grant of licences.
37. Maintenance of records in electronic format and consolidation of licences.
38. Change, correction, addition, alteration and deletion of any information after grant of
licence by licencing authority.
39. Provision relating to change in address of establishment.
40. Renewal of licence.
41. Deemed grant or renewal of licences.
42. Fees for licences.
43. Fee payable for copies and duplicates.
44. Collection of fees.
45. Production of licence.
46. Suspension, revocation and cancellation of licence.
47. Licence not to indicate legality of business.
48. Search report on request.
49. Duties of establishments.

(iii) 
CHAPTER IX 
PROVISIONS FOR SENSITIVE SERVICE PROVIDERS 
CLAUSES 
50. Online registration of sensitive service providers.
51. Rules for verification of sensitive service providers.
52. National database of sensitive service providers.
53. Power of State Bureau to blacklist sensitive service providers.
54. Procedure for blacklisting.
55. Effects of blacklisting.
56. Duties of sensitive service providers.
CHAPTER X 
OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUREAUS 
57. Powers of the National, State and District Bureaus during inquiry.
58. Power of State Bureau to order payment of compensation to victims of voyeurism.
59. Power to set aside ex parte orders.
60. Finality of orders.
61. Appeal to State Bureau.
62. Appeal to National Bureau.
63. Other provisions regarding appeal.
64. Priority in processing applications and appeals.
65. Review by Bureaus.
66. Experts to assist Bureaus.
67. Enforcement of orders of the State and National Bureaus.
68. Right of appellant to appoint a representative.
69. Public servants responsible for damages.
70. Duty to inform other authorities.
71. Power of Bureaus to make regulations.
CHAPTER XI 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
72. Voyeurism by physical spying.
73. Voyeurism by hidden or drone or any other type of camera.
74. Voyeurism by special glasses.
75. Voyeurism by hacking a digital device, juice jacking, stealing data, retrieving deleted data
or
 other cyber techniques.
76. Voyeurism of private conversation by using eavesdropping device or audiovisual
recording device.
77. Voyeurism by use of mechanical or other electromagnetic waves.
78. Voyeurism by influencing a person using narcotic drugs or other methods.
79. Voyeurism by criminal force, during wrongful confinement or against trafficked huma n
or bonded labour.

(iv) 
CLAUSES 
80. Voyeurism against a child, orphan, person with mental disability, blind person, foreig n
t
ourist, abandoned widow, pardanashin woman or person belonging to the third gender.
81. Voyeurism committed with the help of a child, orphan, person with mental disability,
blind person or pardanashin woman.
82. Voyeurism of sensitive personal data.
83. Voyeurism by repeatedly or constantly monitoring the location and movements of a
person.
84. Dissemination of voyeuristic material.
85. Showing or transmitting voyeuristic material of sexually explicit content to a child,
orphan, person with mental disability, pardanashin woman.
86. Prohibition of publication or making known any contents affecting the right to privacy of
victim.
87. Seeking, searching, browsing, downloading, watching, listening, reading, sensing, stori
ng
a
nd possessing of voyeuristic material.
88. Using voyeuristic material for pornographic or commercial purposes.
89. Using voyeuristic material, including a child, orphan, person with mental disability, blind
person, foreign tourist, abandoned widow, pardanashin woman or person belonging to the
third gender for pornographic or commercial purposes.
90. Creating or disseminating deepfake images, videos or audio of voyeuristic nature.
91. Using or disseminating voyeuristic material against rights and interests of victims in cases
of sexual offences.
92. Punishment for sextortion.
93. Offences by juveniles.
94. Discriminating against victim of voyeurism.
95. Punishment to establishments carrying on business without licence of Bureau.
96. Punishment to establishments using fake or forged copy of licence.
97. Punishment to establishments for failing to exhibit licence on a visible area of their
premises.
98. Punishment to establishments that refuse to show their licence to certain officials.
99. Punishment for using standard mark without bearing valid licence or registration or usi
ng
d
eceptively similar mark.
100. Contempt of the lawful authority of public servants under this Act.
101. Obstructing officials of Bureau or Police while discharging their duties.
102. Punishment for false or malicious complaint or false information.
103. Furnishing false information by establishments or sensitive service providers.
104. Punishment to intermediaries.
105. Punishment to recidivists.
106. Abetment to commit voyeurism.
107. Attempt to commit an offence punishable under this Act.
108. Offences by companies.
109. Punishment for vexatious search.
110. Offences by public servants of Bureaus and police.

(v) 
CLAUSES 
111. Exemptions and defences to offences mentioned in this Act.
112. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.
113. Compounding of offences.
CHAPTER XII 
INVESTIGATION INTO CASES UNDER THE ACT 
114. Reporting of offences.
115. Preliminary inquiry and investigation.
116. Arrest and custody.
117. Procedure for investigation.
118. Search and seizure.
119. Procedure for accessing computer data during investigation.
120. Procedure for dealing with voyeuristic material.
121. Obligation on public servant to maintain confidentiality.
122. Obligation on employees or personnel of establishment or sensitive service provider t o
r
eport cases.
123. Punishment for failure to report or record a case.
124. Procedure for media.
125. Other officers required to assist Bureau officers.
CHAPTER XIII 
PROCEDURE FOR RECORDING OF STATEMENT OF THE VICTIM 
126. Recording of statement of victim by District Bureau or police.
127. Recording of statement of victim by magistrate.
128. Additional provisions regarding statement to be recorded.
CHAPTER XIV 
SPECIAL COURTS 
129. Designation of Special Courts.
130. Presumption as to certain offences.
131. Presumption of culpable mental state.
132. Application of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 to proceedings before
Special Court.
133. Special Public Prosecutors.
CHAPTER XV 
PROCEDURE AND POWER OF SPECIAL COURTS AND RECORDING OF EVIDENCE 
134. Procedure and powers of Special Court.
135. Period for recording of evidence of victim and disposal of case.
136. Trials to be conducted in camera.
137. Assistance of interpreter or expert while recording evidence of victim.

(vi) 
CLAUSES 
138. Guidelines to rehabilitate and assist the victims by experts.
139. Power of Special Court to order destruction of voyeuristic material.
CHAPTER XVI 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO CENTRAL AND STATE GOVERNMENTS 
140. Special efforts by  appropriate Government.
141. Provision for comprehensive sex education in schools and colleges.
142. Public awareness about the Act.
143. Monitoring of implementation of this Act.
144. Grants by  appropriate Government.
145. Power to make rules.
146. Power to amend the First Schedule.
CHAPTER XVII 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
147. General provisions relating to security cameras and CCTVs.
148. Provisions relating to privacy during the use of vehicles.
149. Protection and rewards to whistleblowers.
150. Bureau and Court to give copies of order free of cost.
151. Quick response system.
152. Obligation on intermediaries, including anti-virus service providers, etc.
153. Provisions for films, literature, drama, art, streaming media and other digital content.
154. Protection of action taken in good faith.
155. Act not in derogation of any other law.
156. Monitoring and reporting.
157. Budget.
158. Accounts and audit.
159. Power to remove difficulties.
160. Bar on jurisdiction of other courts.
161. Repeal
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
Establishments to which the licence provisions under this Act apply.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
List of Sensitive Service Providers that may voluntarily apply for registration.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
Format of Licence
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
Format of Registration Certificate for Sensitive Service Providers

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. CII of 2024 
THE VOYEURISM (PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL) 
BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
 to provide an all-inclusive legal framework to protect the Fundamental 
Right to Privacy of humans, prevent Voyeurism, provide consumer 
centric law and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS, the State uphold the dignity and privacy of every human being and 
guarantees full respect for human rights, and the State shall take necessary 
measures to prevent and penalise acts that would destroy the honour and dignity 
of a person; 
AND WHEREAS, the rapid technological development has led to easy 
availability and use of spy and web cameras, CCTVs, smartphones, computers, 
spying software, eavesdropping devices, deepfake software, high- speed internet, 
Artificial Intelligence and other new instruments in the market and various new 
methods and modus operandi leading to an increase in cases breach of privacy;  
AND WHEREAS, the offence of video voyeurism, compounded by its persistent 
dissemination, results in irreparable harm to the victims and necessitates the 
enactment of a preventive legal framework; 

2 
AND WHEREAS, there is an absence of a separate, exhaustive, preventive and 
remedial legislation against Voyeurism and on Right to Privacy; 
AND WHEREAS, Voyeurism results in the violation of a person’s human right 
and fundamental Right to Privacy and life under article 21 of the Constitution of 
India; 
AND WHEREAS, there is a need to frame a new, improved and comprehensive 
definition of Voyeurism which will cover various other aspects of breach of 
privacy; 
AND WHEREAS, the Right to P rivacy is a gender -neutral right, and there is a 
need for a gender-neutral law on privacy; 
AND WHEREAS, there is a need to designate Special Courts for the trial of 
Voyeurism offences and to set up a hassle -free administrative mechanism for 
providing compensation to victims; 
AND WHEREAS, there is a need to establish specialized bureaus, Voyeurism -
Free standard mark, the licencing authority for Establishments and Registrar for 
sensitive service providers to certify as Voyeurism -Free, Privacy- Protected and 
Safe, to eliminate the fear in the minds of the users thereof, set up a takedown 
mechanism and strike down the copyright of accused and convicted persons over 
the Voyeuristic material; 
A
ND WHEREAS, there is a need to enact a separate, all -inclusive and broad  
legal framework on the Right to Privacy to protect various aspects of privacy 
including privacy of human body, communication privacy, location privacy and 
data confidentiality; 
AND WHEREAS , there is a need to establish a procedure by law as per 
conditions stipulated in article 21 of the Constitution of India for depriving the 
privacy of a person in exceptional cases, in good faith and also in view of the 
doctrine of necessity and fair trial. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title and 
commencement. 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Voyeurism (Prevention, Prohibition an d
Redressal) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, b y
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be
appointed for different States and for different provisions of this Act, and any
reference in any such pro vision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
5 
10 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) “abandoned widow” means a widow who has been deserted or thrown out
of the household by her relatives to fend for herself and who has no means to
support herself and her dependent children, if any;
(2) “accredited NGO” means a Non -Governmental Organisatio n workin g
exclusively for the prevention of voyeurism for a minimum period of three
years and recognized as such by the Registrar of the National Bureau in the
manner as may be prescribed;
(3) “advocate” shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it in the Advocates
Act, 1961; 
15 
20 
25 of 1961. 

3 
20 of 1972. 
49 of 2016. 
3
2 of 2012. 
21 of 2000. 
2
5 of 1990. 
8
 of 2013. 
5 
1
0 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
(4) “architect” means a person registered as an architect under the provisions
of the Architects Act, 1972;
(5) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(6) “ Bureau” means the National, State or District Anti- Voyeurism Bureau
established or constituted under this Act, as applicable;
(7) “blind person” means a person who has any visual impairment as defined
under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016; 
(8) “capture” includes the capture of images and recording of videos and
sounds; 
(9) “CCTV” and in its full form “Closed- circuit Television” means a
computer system that uses video cameras, mikes or recorders to transmit a
signal to a spe cific place, such as a limited set of monitors or computer
devices, and includes spy cameras, pinhole cameras and other hidde n
cameras;
(10) “child” shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it in the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012; 
(11) “community service” means unpaid work which a person is required to
perform as a punishment for an offence committed under this Act with the
intention to rehabilitate the offender and provide services beneficial to the
community but does not include any religious activity or service;
(12) “computer” shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it in th e
Information Technology Act, 2000; 
(13) “deepfake” means a technological outcome powered by artificial
intelligence that uses a machine learning model to manipulate, morph, edit or 
superimpose existing images, videos or audio to create a new piece of content 
that appears to be authentic but is actually fabricated; 
(14) “dissemination” means the act of transmitting, selling, broadcasting,
sharing, showing, promoting, publishing, or exhibiting the information of
voyeuristic material to one or more person or third person as the case may be,
through VCD, DVD, memory card, pen drive, internet, computers,
smartphones, software and similar means or devices or by c opying,
reproducing or advertising;
Explanation:— For the purposes of this clause,  “broadcasting” shall 
have the same meaning as ascribed to it in the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting 
Corporation of India) Act, 1990; 
(15) “ Engineer” means a person who possesses a Bachelor’s degree or
equivalent qualification from an institution recognised by the All- India
Council of Technical Education or any University or any institution
recognised under a law or is registered as an engineer under any law for the
time being in force;
(16) “ establishment” means —
(i) a nybody or authority established by or under a Central Act or a State
Act or an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided by the
Government or a local authority, or a Government company as defined
in section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013, and includes a Department of
the Government; or
(ii) any entity, company or body, corporate or association or body of
individuals, firm, cooperative or other society, association, trust,
agency, institution, shop and its branches;

4 
whether the property or premises of such establishment is fixed or 
temporary, movable or immovable; and which provides to the public 
its physical premises for a private act, where the users entrust their right 
to privacy to that establishment and where voyeurism is likely to take 
place; and such establishments as the Central Government may, on 
recommendations of the National Bureau, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, declare under the First Schedule to be an 
establishment for the purposes of this Act; 
(17) “film” shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in the Cinematograph
Act, 1952;
(18) “hidden camera” means a camera whose position is hidden from public
view and used to capture information secretly and may also be termed as spy
camera;
(19) “information” shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in th e
Information Technology Act, 2000 or the Right to Information Act, 2005,
depending on the context in which it is used;
(20) “i ntermediary” shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it i n the
Information Technology Act, 2000 and shall also include websites a nd
software applications that provide static data, that do not provide user -
generated content and that which may be prescribed;
(21) “ licencing authority” means the Superintendent of t he District Bureau
under this Act;
(22) “person with mental disability” includes persons of unsound mind,
lunatic persons, or persons with any similar disorder, which renders the
person incapable of understanding the nature and consequences of the act
committed by such person and includes—
(i) a person with mental illness as defined under clause (s) of section 2
o
f the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017; and
(ii) any other category of person as may be specified by the Central
Government, by notification in the Off icial Gazette, on the
recommendations of a competent authority designated under this Act;
(23) “NGO” means Non-Governmental Organization registered under section 
8 of the Companies Act, 2013 or the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or the
Maharashtra Public Trusts Act, 1950 or other State Legislations concerning
Charitable Trusts or any other voluntary association registered under any
other law for the time being in force;
(24) “orphan” means a person who has not completed twenty -five years of
age and,
(i) who is without biological or adoptive parents or legal guardian; or
(ii) whose legal guardian is not willing to take or capable of taking care
of the person;
(25) “par danashin woman” means a woman who, according to custom, lives
a secluded life, lives only within the family, does not appear in public and has
no communication with any other person except for a few near relatives;
(26) “person belonging to an economically backward class” means a person
recognized as such by the laws of the Union and respective States or as may 
be prescribed; 
(27) “pornography” or “porn” means consensually captured verbal or visual
depiction of sexually explicit conduct of persons intending to elicit significant
sexual arousal and entertainment on the part of the consumer of such material
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
3
7 of 1952. 
21 of 2000. 
22 of 2005. 
21 of 2000. 
1
0 of 2017. 
18 of 2013. 
21 of 1860. 
29 of 1950. 

5 
45 of 2023. 
4
0 of 1971. 
 
40 of 2019. 
4
6 of 2023. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
and includes books, photographs, statues, videos, cartoons, digital or 
computer-generated images and material created, adapted or modified to 
depict the same; 
(28) “ public place” means a place which is open and  accessible to all of the
public and is not a place exclusively used for private or personal purposes or 
has been notified as such by the appropriate Government; 
(29) “public servant” shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it under sub-
section (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and includes 
members, officers and other employees of the Bureaus under this Act; 
(30) “premises” shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it in the Public
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971; 
(31) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the appropriat e
Government under this Act;
(32) “Register of sensitive service providers” means the register of sensitiv e
service providers maintained by the Registrar of the National Bureau in such 
form and in such manner as may be prescribed under this Act; 
(33) “sensitive service provider” means service providers other than an
establishment defined under this Act, which gains access to the privacy of an
individual, whether physically or virtually,  in the course of providing
services, and includes—
(i) s ervice providers or service centres, which provide local repair
services for smartphones, digital devices, or similar equipment;
(ii) doorstep service providers including but not limited to, technicians
for geysers, air conditioners or computers, electricians, carpenters,
civil contractors, plumbers, or similar equipment;
(iii) intermediaries;
(iv) s
oftware service providers; and
(v) and any other category of services as may be notified by the
appropriate Government in the Second Schedule;
(34) “s extortion” means the unwarranted demand for, —
(i)sexual favours by a person in authority or in exchange for something
in their power to grant or withhold; or
(ii)sexual or other illegal favours by any p erson threatening to
disseminate voyeuristic material of the victim or of any person in
whom the victim is interested or to harm such persons, employing
physical or non-physical, online or offline forms of coercion.
(35) “ third gender” means persons who do not identify as exclusively male
or female, including individuals whose gender identity, expression, or live d
experience does not conform to societal expectations of binary gender roles,
and includes—
(i) transgender persons as defined under section sub-s ection (k) of
section 2 of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019;
or
(ii) individuals with intersex variations as defined under sub-section (i)
of section 2  of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 
2019; 
(36) “victim” shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it under clause (y)
of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Bharatiya  Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita,
2023;

6 
(37) “voyeur” means a person who is convicted for the offence of voyeurism
under this Act;
(38) “voyeurism” means an act done secretly, without knowledge, without
consent or   in violation of the procedure established by law and includes—
(i) w atching, listening or capturing a person engaging in a private act
or a private conversation; or
(ii) accessing, monitoring, listening, reading, sensing, processing,
altering or disseminating one’s sensitive personal data; or
(iii) accessing, watching, listening, reading, sensing or disseminati ng
one
’s stored or live information of a private act or private conversation
as the case may be; or
(iv) r
epeatedly or constantly monitoring the location and movements
of a person or accessing location data;
in circumstances where a reason able person would usually have the 
reasonable expectation of privacy; where such breach of privacy is 
committed intentionally or knowing that it is likely to cause breach of 
privacy of a person with the motive of sexual arousal, sexual 
gratification, enter tainment, profit, intimidation, revenge, defame, 
degrade or abuse a person. 
(v) s ecretly or without knowledge or consent or unlawfully installing a
device or software, permitting the installation of a device or software
;
obt
aining command over camera, microphone, location and storage of
a computer, accessing information from any device or software; t o
w
atch, listen, recapture, read, sense or disseminate sensitive personal
data, data of location and movements or captured information of a
person engaging in a private act or a private conversation; or
(vi
) a
ny dissemination with malafide intention of—
(a) information of a private act or a private conversation in
circumstances where a person consensually captures such
information or consents to such capture or knowing that it is being 
captured or having reason to believe it is likely to be captured or
saved, but does not expressly consent to its dissemination to a
third person, or
(b) a  recording of a sexual offence and such captured information
is used against the rights and interests of the victim, or
(c
) a
ny sexually explicit, obscene or similar private information
accidently captured, recorded or stored by CCTV cameras and
other devices installed for security purposes in public places, or
(d) cap
tured information of any incident occurring in emergency
or unavoidable circumstances such as childbirth in public places
and which discloses the facial identity and private part of the body
of the woman, or
(e) c aptured information disclosing the private part of the b ody of
a person and disclosing facial identity in case of a woman,
urinating or doing any similar private act in a public place which
is illegal under any other law for the time being in force; for the
purposes other than prosecuting the illegal act, or
(f) c all recordings, audio files, video files, text chat or screenshots
of a private conversation; or
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

7 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
(g) sensitive personal data including data related to location and
movements in circumstances where a person consensuall y
provides such data to any person or intermediary or consents to its
access or knowing that it is being accessed or having reason to
believe it is likely to be accessed or saved, but does not expressl
y
c
onsent to its dissemination to a third person or to use or process
it for other purpose than consented; or
(vii) acts committed by Revenge Porn, Revenge Call Recording,
Revenge Text Chat, Upskirt, Down- blouse, Downstream distribution,
Sexting, Eavesdropping, Cyber Stalking, Stalking Paparazzi, Doxin g
a
nd Voyeuristic deepfake.
Explanation - For the purposes of this clause,— 
(a) “private act” includes an act carried out in the circumstances
where the person is alone or with any other person or remotel y
c
onnected with any other person through technology and where
the person is naked, or person’s genitals, posterior or female
breasts are exposed or covered only in underwear; or the person
is using a lavatory, or disrobing, or doing a sexual or an intimate
act that is not of a kind ordinarily done in public; which the person 
has reason to believe as private act and it is not likely t o be
disclosed to the third person or public; regardless of whether the
person is in a public or private place; where visibility or disclosure 
of such act or any part of it to the third person may cause legal
injury to that person regardless of the damage.
(b) “ private conversation” includes a conversation carried out in
the circumstances where the interlocutor is alone or with any other 
person or remotely connected with any other person through
technology or by correspondence; making mutually consenting
any sexual or intimate conversation arising out of the fiduciary
relationship or mutual trust; or conveying personal, medical or
financial secret, login credential or password, official secrets out
of the scope of the Right to Information Act, 2005; or havin
g
au
dible, noticeable or recordable self- talk or voice of similar
nature; or communications under section 128, 130, 132 or 134 of
the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023; or communication under 
in camera judicial proceedings, whether such conversation or self-
talk is oral, written or in electronic format; that such conversation
or self-talk is not of a kind ordinarily done in public; which the
interlocutor has reason to believe as a private conversation or self-
talk and it is not likely to be disclosed to the third person or public;
regardless of whether the interlocutor is in a public or private
place, where disclosure of such conversation or self -talk or an
y
part of it to the third person may cause legal injury to the
interlocutor regardless of the damage.
(c) “ sensitive personal data” means any data about a person who
is identifiable by or in relation to such data; either in physical form 
or in electronic format and includes login credential, password,
contact list, finger -impressions, palm -print impressi ons, foot -
print impressions, iris and retina scan, physical, biological
samples and their analysis, behavioural attributes including
signatures, digital signature, racial or ethnic origin, politica l
opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, genetic da ta, data
about health and sex life, sexual orientation; data including
commercial confidence, trade secrets, intellectual property, or
official secrets; and any other category as may be prescribed; but
22 of 2005. 
47 of 2023. 

8 
does not include data of a private act or private conv ersation 
mentioned in this definition; data which the person has reason to 
believe as confidential data and it is not likely to be disclosed to 
the third person or public; regardless of whether the such data is 
stored in personal custody, custody of a comp
any, at public 
domain or with intermediaries; where disclosure without express 
consent of such data or any part of it to the third person may cause 
legal injury to that person regardless of the damage. 
(d) “in circumstances where a reasonable person would  usually
have the reasonable expectation of privacy” means—
(i) the victim could be naked, disrobe in privacy or engage in
a private act without the same being observed or captured; or
(ii) any part of the victim’s private area or the private act
would not be visible to the public; regardless of whether the
victim is in a public or private place; or
(iii) in case where the victim is a child or an adolescent who
knows using a lavatory and changing room and reasonably
expects not to be seen by others; or
(iv) mutually consenting any sexual or intimate conversation;
or conveying personal, official, medical or financial secret,
login credential or password; or audible, noticeable or
recordable self-talk of similar nature; whether oral, written or
in electronic format, would not be shared or disclosed to any
third person, or
(v) not being observed or heard live in-person; or his sensitive
personal data or information of a private act or a private 
conversation is not being accessed, captured, watched, heard, 
read, sensed or disseminated; or sensitive personal data is not 
being used or processed for the other purpose than consented; 
as the case may be; either by the perpetrator or by any other 
person at the behest of the perpetrator, or 
(vi) not being targeted and the location, travel history and
movements of a person would not be surveilled by any person
or software company;
(e) “Down-blouse” means secretly watching or capturing a
person’s cleavage, bra and breasts under a person’s clothing,
regardless of whether the person is in a private or public place;
(f) “Downstream distribution” means the reposting of earlier
posted voyeuristic material on the internet by third parties;
(g) “Doxxi ng” or “Doxing” means publicly revealing previously
private data about a person through electronic means without the 
consent of that person; 
(h) “private place” means a place where one may reasonably
expect to be safe from uninvited intrusion or surveillance but does
not include a place to which the public has lawful access;
(i) “Revenge porn” means voyeuristic material of a private act
captured consensually but disseminated without the consent of the 
person or persons visible in the material, with the intention of
revenge;
(j) “Sexting” means sexual conversation in the form of  text
including attachments of an image, audio or video; 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
4
5 
50 

9 
45
 of 2023. 
21 of 2000. 
22 of 2023. 
13 of 1885. 
5 
10 
(k) “Stalking Paparazzi” means overzealous and aggressive
persons who capture or publish audios, videos or images of
celebrities despite a clear indication of refusal;
(l) “Up-s kirt” means secretly  watching or capturing a person’s
private parts, whether covered or uncovered, under a person’s 
skirt or other similar clothing, regardless of whether the person is 
in a private or public place; 
(39) “Voyeuristic material” means any information arising out  of the
offence of voyeurism as defined under sub-section (38);
(40) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the Information Technology Act, 2000, 
the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 or the Indian Telegraph Act, 
1885 shall have the same meaning as is respectively assigned to them in 
those Acts. 
15 CHAPTER II 
RIGHTS OF PERSONS AND VICTIMS 
20 
25 
3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person shall have the right to
privacy:
Provided that right to privacy shall be subject to reasonable restrictions
imposed by  State in the interest of public order, security, or other specified
grounds as per the procedure established by law.
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, "State" shall include the 
Central Government or the Government of any State or Union territory and
any local authority or other body created by or under the authority of any such
Government, and any agency of the appropriate Government, including law
enforcement agencies and regulatory authorities.
Right to 
privacy. 
30 
35 
4. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person shall have the right to
access information with respect to,—
(i) the privacy measures and privacy policy adopted by any
establishment or sensitive service provider;
(ii) the name, designation, rights and duties of such designated public
servant or an employee of the establishment or the sensitive service
provider under this Act, whose duties and responsibilities are related to
the implementation of this Act.
(2) The procedure for obtaining the information referred to in sub-section (1)
shall be such, as may be prescribed.
Right to 
information 
5. No person shall be subjected to voyeurism, and violation of this provision
shall be an offence punishable under this Act. 
Prevention of 
voyeurism. 
40 
45 
6. (1) Every victim under this Act shall have the right to,—
(a) be informed about the rights of the victim;
(b) seek redressal against offences committed under this Act;
(c) seek legal and medical aid;
(d) apply for damages and compensation;
(e) attend criminal justice proceedings arising out of the offence
committed against him ;
(f) be heard and participate in such criminal justice proceedings;
Rights of 
victims. 

10 
(g) be informed, with reasonable, accurate, and timely notice, of an y
investigation, Court proceeding including any bail proceeding, legal
rights and remedies, and available services and the Special Publi c
Prosecutor:
Provided that the appropriate Government shall inform the victim 
about any proceedings under this Act; 
(h) pr
otection from intimidation, harassment, coercion, induc ement,
violence or threats of violence;
(i) r
estitution by the offender;
(j) p
rompt return of personal property seized as evidence;
(k) a s
peedy trial;
(l) b
e treated in a fair, just, dignified, respectable and equitable manner
and with due regard to any s pecial need that arises because of the
victim’s age or gender or educational disadvantage or poverty;
(m)take down voyeuristic material related to them from an
intermediary; 
(n) not be discriminated against on the grounds of being a victim of
voyeurism;
(o) t
ake assistance from NGOs, social workers or advocates;
(p) a
ny other relief under the provisions of this Act; and
(q) e
nforcement of the rights mentioned under this Act.
5 
10 
15 
20 
Right to file 
application and 
receive 
acknowledgement.
 
7. (1) Every person shall have the right to file a letter, complaint, application or
appeal to the Bureaus, establishments or offices of the sensitive servi ce
providers established under this Act, as the case may be, and shall be entitled
to receive an acknowledgement thereof in the form and manner, as may be
prescribed.
(2) In the event of refusal to accept or acknowledge such letter, complaint,
application, or appeal under sub- section (1), the aggrieved person shall be
entitled to such remedies as may be prescribed, and the person in default of
the duty stipulated under sub- section (1) shall be liable to such disciplinary
proceedings and penalties as may be applicable to an Officer of the Central
Civil Service of equivalent grade.
25 
30 
CHAPTER III 
ANTI-VOYEURISM BUREAU OF INDIA 
Constitution of 
National 
Bureau. 
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official gazette,
establish a body to be called as the Anti- Voyeurism Bureau of India
(hereinafter referred to as the National Bureau), to exercise the powers
conferred upon and duties and function assigned to it under this Act.
(2) T he National Bureau shall consist of —
(a) the Chief Anti-Voyeurism Commissioner; and
(b) f our members, out of which two shall be experts in the technical
field; one shall be an eminent advocate; and one shall be a
representative of an accredited NGO.
Provided that out of the five members of the National Bureau, at least 
two shall be women, and efforts shall be made to include to the extent 
possible persons belonging to the third gender. 
35 
40 
45 

11 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
(3) The Chief Anti -Voyeurism Commissioner and members of the National
Bureau shall be appointed from amongst persons—
(a) w ho have been or are in an All- India Service or in any civil service
of
 the Union or in a civil post under the Union or persons of eminence
in public life with vast knowledge and experience in law, science and
technology, cyber security, investigation, social service, management,
journalism, mass media or administration and governance; or
(b) who have held office or are holding office in a corporation
established by or under any Central Act or a Government compa ny
ow
ned or controlled by the Central Government and persons who have
expertise and experience in law, science and technology, cyber
security, investigation, social service, management, journalism, mass
media or administration and governance.
(4) T he Chief Anti -Voyeurism Commissioner or a Member of the National
Bureau shall not be a Member of Parliament or a Member of the Legislatur e
of any State or Union territory, as the case may be, or hold any other office
of profit or be connected with any political party or carrying on any business
or pursuing any profession.
(5) The National Bureau shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable 
and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
(6) The headquarters of the National Bureau shall be at Delhi, and the
National Bureau may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, establish divisional or branch offices at other places in
India, as may be deemed necessary.
(7) The Central Government shall appoint a Registrar to the National Bureau
on such terms and conditions as it deems fit to exercise such powers and
discharge such duties as the National Bureau may by regulations specify in
this behalf.
(8) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of
the National Bureau shall vest in the Chief Anti- Voyeurism Commissioner
who shall be assisted by the members; shall exercise all such powers and do
all such acts and thing s which may be exercised or done by the National
Bureau autonomously without being subjected to directions by any other
authority under this Act.
40 
45 
9. (1) The Chief Anti-Voyeurism Commissioner and the other members of the
National Bureau shall be appointed by the President of India, by warrant
under his hand and seal, on the recommendations of a Committee consisting
of—
(i) The Prime Minister of India who shall be the Chairperson of the
Committee;
(ii) The Chief Justice of India, ex office Member; and
(iii) The Leader of Opposition House of the People, ex office Member.
Explanation.— For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 
that where the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People has not been 
recognized as such, the Leader of the single largest group in opposition of the 
Government in the House of the People shall be deemed to be the Leader of 
Opposition. 
Appointment, 
term of office, 
resignation and 
removal of 
members of the 
National 
Bureau. 

12 
(2) While making any recommendation under sub-section (1), the Committee
shall take into consideration the view s of the outgoing members of the
National Bureau.
(3) The Central Government shall provide requisite induction training to the
persons appointed to the National Bureau before their joining office, in such
form and manner as may be prescribed.
(4) T he term of office of the Chief Anti -Voyeurism Commissioner and the
members of the National Bureau shall be five years from the date of their
appointment or until they attain the age of sixty -five years, whichever is
earlier.
(5) T he outgoing Chief Anti- Voyeurism Commissioner shall be eligible for
further selection as the Chief Anti- Voyeurism Commissioner, provided that
no person shall hold the office for more than two terms.
(6) N o person employed in the service of the Government shall be eligible t o
hold the office of the Chief Anti -Voyeurism Commissioner under this Act,
unless, upon selection, such person voluntary retires from government service 
prior to assuming office.
(7) Any member of the National Bureau may, at any time, relinquish his office
by giving notice of not less than three months by writing under his hand t o
the President and on such resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed to
have vacated his office.
(8) T he President may remove from office any member of the National
Bureau, if the member—
(i) i
s adjudged an insolvent; or
(ii) has indulged in any misbehaviour; or
(iii) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside
the duties of his office; or
(iv) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which
in the opinion of the President involves moral turpitude; or
(v
) be
comes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
court; or 
(vi) r
efuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or
(vii) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a member; or
(viii) in the opinion of the President has so abused the position of Chief
Anti-Voyeurism Commissioner or Member as to render that person’s 
continuance in office detrimental to the public interest; or 
(ix
) i
n the opinion of the President is unfit to continue in office by
reason of infirmity of mind or body:
  Provided that no member shall be removed from his office unless 
he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the 
matter. 
(9) A vacancy caused of the office of the Chief Anti -Voyeurism
Commissioner or any other member shall be filled up within a period of three
months from the date on which such vacancy occurs:
Provided that till such time the vacancy of the Chief Anti- Voyeurism 
Commissioner is filled up, the senior- most member shall be the officer -in-
charge of the National Bureau. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

13 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
10. (1) The salaries and allowances payable to—
(a) T he Chief Anti -Voyeurism Commissioner shall be the same as
that of the Chief Election Commissioner;
(b) A
 member of the National Bureau shall be the same as that of
an Election Commissioner; 
       Provided that if the Chief Anti -Voyeurism Commissioner or a 
member, at the time of his appointment is, in receipt of a pension, 
other than a disability or wound pension, in respect of any previous 
service under the Government of India or under the Government 
of a State, his salary in respect of the service as the Chief Anti -
Voyeurism Commissioner or a member shall be reduced by the 
amount of that pension including any portion of pension which was 
commuted and pension equivalent  
of other forms of retirement 
benefits excluding pension equivalent of retirement gratuity: 
      Provided further that if the Chief Anti -Voyeurism 
Commissioner or a member if, at the time of his appointment is, in 
receipt of retirement benefits in respect  of any previous service 
rendered in a Corporation established by or under any Central Act 
or State Act or a Government company owned or controlled by the 
Central Government or the State Government, his salary in respect 
of the service as the Chief Anti -Vo
yeurism Commissioner or a 
member shall be reduced by the amount of pension equivalent to 
the retirement benefits: 
 P rovided also that the salaries, allowances and other conditions 
of service of the Chief Anti -Voyeurism Commissioner and the 
members sha ll not be varied to their disadvantage after their 
appointment. 
(2) T he Central Government shall provide the Chief Anti -Voyeurism
Commissioner and the members with such number of officers a nd
employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of t heir
functions under this Act.
(3) The methods of recruitment, the qualifications and experience, the
salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and conditions of
service of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of
this Act shall be such as may be prescribed.
Salaries and 
allowances of 
members of the 
National 
Bureau. 
40 
45 
11. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the following shall be the duties and
functions to be performed and the powers to be exercised by the National
Bureau:
(a) advising and giving directions to the Central Government on
prevention, prohibition and redressal of voyeurism and rehabilitati on
o
f the victims;
(b) supervising the functioning of the State and District Bureaus;
(c) laying down the standards to be maintained by the State and District
Bureaus;
(d) laying down standards for the films, literature, drama, art,
streaming media and other digital content which contain dramatic
scenes related to or depicting voyeurism;
( e) prescribing fees for licences and their renewal;
Powers, duties 
and functions of 
the National 
Bureau. 

14 
(f) prescribing the format of application of licences and their renewal,
the fees and prescribing the format of application of registration of
sensitive service providers and the fees;
(g) preparing and publishing, on t he recommendation of the State
Bureaus, a national blacklist of sensitive service providers and a list of
establishments whose licences have been suspended;
(h) recognizing an NGO as an accredited NGO authorized to set
standards and conduct voluntary certi fication for establishments and
sensitive service providers, on application by such NGO;
(i) trying appeals from the orders passed by the State Bureaus i n
matters related to blacklisting or licences; 
(j) banning any websites or films or digital content which contains any
voyeuristic material and taking appropriate steps to eliminate the
material from the internet permanently;
(k) prescribing the qualifications of the District Superintendent, Deputy 
Superintendents, Inspectors and other staff at the District Bureau on 
the recommendation of the State Bureau; 
(l) providing a budget for the administration and functioning of the
National, State and District Bureaus;
(m) conducting scientific, technical, legal and investigation training for
officials of the State and District Bureaus; 
(n) providing statistics about the number of reported and convicted
cases of voyeurism to the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB);
(o) encouraging technical, legal and medical research to prevent and
redress voyeurism and creating a Subordinate Committee for the
purposes of such research;
(p) reviewing and coordinating the activities of all the departments and 
organizations of the Government and other NGOs that are dealing with
m
atters relating to voyeurism; and
(q) recommending to the State Bureau to conduct inquiry, determine
losses and grant compensations to the victims of voyeurism under 
section 58 of this Act. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the National Bureau shall have the
power of reference and revision.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
CHAPTER IV 
ANTI-VOYEURISM BUREAUS OF THE STATES 
35 
Constitution of 
State Bureau. 
12. (1) Every State Government shall, by notification in the official gazette,
establish a body to be called the Anti -Voyeurism Bureau of the State,
(hereinafter referred to as the State Bureau) in each State to exercise the
powers conferred upon and duties and functions assigned to it under this
Act.
(2) T he Bureau shall consist of the following, namely —
(a) T
he Chief Anti-Voyeurism Commissioner of the State; and
(b) Four members, out of which two shall be experts in the
technical field; one shall be an eminent advocate; and one shall be
a representative of an accredited NGO.
40 
45 

15 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Provided that out of the five members of the State Bureau, at least 
two shall be women, and efforts shall be made to include to the extent 
possible persons belonging to the third gender. 
(3) The Chief Anti -Voyeurism Commissioner of the State and members of 
the State Bureau shall be appointed from amongst persons— 
(a) who have been or are in an All-India Service or in any civil service 
of the Union or State in a civil post under the Union or State or persons 
of eminence in public life with vast knowledge and experience in law, 
science and technology, cyber security, investigation, social  service, 
management, journalism, mass media or administration and 
governance; or 
(b) who have held office or are holding office in a corporation 
established by or under any Central or State Act or a Government 
company owned or controlled by the Central or State Government and 
persons who have expertise and experience in law, science and 
technology, cyber security, investigation, social service, management, 
journalism, mass media or administration and governance. 
(4) The Chief Anti-Voyeurism Commissioner of the State or a Member of the 
State Bureau shall not be a Member of Parliament or a Member of the 
Legislature of any State or Union territory, as the case may be, or hold any 
other office of profit or connected with any political party or carrying on any 
business or pursuing any profession. 
(5) The State Bureau shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable 
and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 
(6) The headquarters of the State Bureau shall be at such concerned 
place in the State as the State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify and the Sta te Bureau may, with the previous 
approval of the State Government, establish divisional or branch offices 
at other places in the State, as may be deemed necessary. 
(7) The State Government shall appoint a Registrar to the State Bureau on 
such terms and con ditions, as it deems fit, to exercise such powers and 
discharge such duties as the State Bureau may be regulations specify in this 
behalf. 
(8) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of 
the State Bureau shall vest in the Chief Anti-Voyeurism Commissioner of the 
State who shall be assisted by the members and shall exercise all such powers 
and do all such acts and things which may be exercised or done by the State 
Bureau as prescribed under this Act. 
 
 
45 
50 
13.  (1) The Chief Anti -Voyeurism Commissioner of the State and the other 
members of the State Bureau shall be appointed by the Governor of the 
concerned State by warrant under his hand and seal on recommendations of 
a Committee consisting of—  
(i) The Chief Minister of the State, who shall be the Chairperson of the 
Committee; 
(ii) The Chief Justice of the High Court of the State, ex officio Member; 
and 
(iii) The Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly of the State, 
ex officio Member. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appointment, 
term of office, 
resignation and 
the removal of 
members of the 
State Bureau. 

16 
 
Explanation.— For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that where the Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly of 
the State has not been recog nized as such, the Leader of the single largest 
group in opposition of the Government in the Legislative Assembly of the 
State shall be deemed to be the Leader of Opposition. 
(2) While making any recommendation under sub-section (1), the Committee 
shall take into consideration the views of the outgoing members of the State 
Bureau. 
(3) The State Government provide requisite induction training to the persons 
appointed to the State Bureau before joining office, in such form and manner, 
as may be prescribed. 
(4) The term of office of the Chief Anti -Voyeurism Commissioner of the 
State and the members of the State Bureau shall be five years from the date 
of their appointment: 
Provided that the outgoing Chief Anti -Voyeurism Commissioner shall 
be eligible for further selection as the Chief Anti-Voyeurism Commissioner, 
provided that no person shall hold the office for more than two terms. 
(5) Any member of the State Bureau, at any time, may relinquish his office 
by giving, a notice of three months by writing under his  hand and seal in 
writing to the Governor, and on such resignation being accepted, he shall be 
deemed to have vacated his office. 
(6) The Governor may remove from office any member of the State Bureau 
if the member— 
(i) is adjudged an insolvent; or 
(ii) has indulged in any misbehaviour; or 
(iii) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside 
the duties of his office; or 
(iv) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, 
in the opinion of the State Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
(v) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent 
court; or 
(vi) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or 
(vii) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as a member; or 
(viii) in the opinion of the Governor has so abused the position of Chief 
Anti-Voyeurism Commissioner of the State or Member as to render that 
person’s continuance in office detrimental to public interest; or 
(ix) in the opinion of the Governor is unfit to continue in office by 
reason of infirmity of mind or body: 
      Provided that no member shall be removed from his office unless he 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
(7) A vaca ncy caused to the office of the Chief Anti -Voyeurism 
Commissioner of the State or any other member shall be filled up within a 
period of three months from the date on which such vacancy occurs:   
       Provided that till such time the vacancy of the Chief  Anti-Voyeurism 
Commissioner of the State is filled up, the senior -most member will be the 
officer-in-charge  of the State Bureau. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

17 
 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
14.  (1) The salaries and allowances payable to—  
(a) The Chief Anti-Voyeurism Commissioner of the State shall be 
the same as that of the Election Commissioner; 
(b) A Member of the State Bureau shall be the same as that of the 
Chief Secretary to the State Government: 
      Provided that if the Chief Anti-Voyeurism Commissioner of the 
State or a member, at the time of his appointment is, in receipt of a 
pension, other than a disability or wound pension, in respect of any 
previous service under the Government of India or under the 
Government of a State, his salary in respect of the service as the 
Chief Anti -Voyeurism Commissioner of the State or a member 
shall be reduced by the amount of that pension including any 
portion of pension which was commuted and pension equivalent of 
other forms of retirement benefits excluding pension equivalent of 
retirement gratuity: 
      Provided further that if the Chief Anti -Voyeurism 
Commissioner of the State or a member if, at the time of his 
appointment is, in receipt of retirement benefits in respect of any 
previous service rendered in a Corporation established by or under 
any Central Act or State Act or a Government company owned or 
controlled by the Central Government or the State Governmen t, 
his salary in respect of the service as the Chief Anti -Voyeurism 
Commissioner of the State or a member shall be reduced by the 
amount of pension equivalent to the retirement benefits: 
      Provided also that the salaries, allowances and other conditions 
of service of the Chief Anti -Voyeurism Commissioner of the State 
and the members of the State Bureau shall not be varied to their 
disadvantage after their appointment. 
(2) The State Government shall provide the Chief Anti -Voyeurism 
Commissioner of the St ate and the members with such number of 
officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance 
of their functions under this Act,  
 (3) The methods of recruitment, qualifications and experience, the 
salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of 
this Act shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 Salaries and 
allowances of 
members of 
State Bureau. 
 
40 
45 
50 
15.  (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the following shall be the duties and 
functions to be performed and the powers to be exercised by the State 
Bureaus: 
(a) advising and giving directions to the State Government on 
prevention, prohibition and redressal of voyeurism and rehabilitation 
of the victims; 
(b) supervising the functioning of the District Bureaus; 
(c) translating the application and renewal forms for licences and the 
licence formats prescribed by the National Bureau into the regional and 
local languages of the State; 
(d) passing orders to black- list sensitive service providers 
recommended by the District Bureaus after conducting quasi -judicial 
proceedings and giving the sensitive service provider a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Powers, 
duties and 
functions of 
State Bureau. 

18 
 
(e) recommending to the Natio nal Bureau for sensitive service 
providers to be added to the national blacklist along with a detailed 
report containing reasons for the same; 
(f) taking appropriate steps against any websites or films or digital 
content which contain any voyeuristic material to eliminate the material 
from the internet permanently; 
(g) taking suo moto cognizance of the offences of voyeurism; 
(h) taking cognizance of the cases of violation of the Act and other 
laws relating to voyeurism on receipt of complaint in this regard from 
any person, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed; 
(i) directing the District Bureaus to conduct the inquiry or 
investigation, file charge sheet to the Special Court or the inquiry report 
to State Bureau, as the case may be, provide counselling to the victim s, 
in cases of voyeurism; 
(j) conducting random verification of all establishments where 
voyeurism is likely to take place; 
(k) providing scientific, technical, legal and investigation training for 
officials of the District Bureaus; 
(l) directing the District Bureau to issue or revoke licences of the 
establishments which have appealed to the State Bureau in cases where 
the State Bureau deems fit; 
(m) publishing the list of applications and appeals pending before it on 
a notice board displayed at a conspicuous place  on its office premises 
and on its official website, in such form and manner, as may be 
prescribed; 
(n) making recommendations to the National Bureau regarding the 
qualifications of the District Superintendent, Deputy Superintendents, 
Inspectors and other staff of the District Bureau; 
(o) publishing all information regarding establishments that have been 
granted or rejected licences, do not have a licence, have pending licence 
applications and blacklisted sensitive service providers on the official 
website of the State Bureau periodically; 
(p) making recommendations to the National Bureau to direct the 
appropriate Government for the censoring of films, literature, drama, 
art, streaming media and other digital content which encourages or 
glorifies voyeurism; 
(q) taking any o ther legal action as necessary for the prevention, 
prohibition and redressal of any offence of voyeurism or related 
incidents. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the State Bureau shall have the power 
of reference and revision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
   CHAPTER V 
ANTI-VOYEURISM BUREAUS OF THE DISTRICTS 
  
Constitution of 
District Bureau. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.  (1) Each State Government shall, by notification, in the official Gazette, 
constitute a body to be called as the Anti -Voyeurism Bureau of District,  
(hereinafter referred to as the District Bureau), in each District of the 
State, to exercise the powers confer red upon and duties and functions 
assigned to it under this Act. 
(2) The Bureau shall consist of the following, namely— 
45 
 

19 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
(a) the District Superintendent of the District Bureau; 
(b) two or more Deputy Superintendents of the District Bureau; 
(c) two or more Inspectors of the District Bureau; 
(d) experts in the technical, legal, medical and other fields, and any 
such staff as may be required, to carry out the functions of the 
District Bureau: 
Provided that half of the total staff of the District Bureau sh all 
be women and efforts shall be made to include to the extent possible 
persons belonging to the third gender. 
(3) There shall be a seal of every District Bureau shall be a body corporate by 
the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common sea l, with 
power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said 
name, sue or be sued. 
(4) The headquarters of the District Bureau shall be at such a place i n 
the State as the State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify and the District Bureau may, with the previous approval 
of the State Government, establish offices at other places in the district.  
(5) The State Government may estab lish one or more divisional or 
branch offices of the District Bureau, as may be deemed necessary, at 
any such places where it deems fit. 
(6) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of 
the District Bureau shall vest in the Distr ict Superintendent of the District 
Bureau who shall be assisted by the Deputy Superintendents, the inspectors 
and the staff, and may exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things 
which may be exercised or done by the District Bureau as prescribe d under 
this Act. 
 
30 
35 
40 
45 
17.  (1) The District Superintendent, Deputy Superintendents, Inspectors and the 
staff of the District Bureau shall be persons who are experts in the fields of 
science, cyber security, information technology, computer or electronic 
engineering, law, investigation and administration. 
(2) In addition to the above staff, the District Bureau shall have at all 
times in its staff at least one person qualified to be an architect, one 
person qualified to be a software or computer engineer, one person 
qualified to be an ele ctrical or electronic engineer, and one person 
qualified to be an advocate. 
(3) The officials and employees of the District Bureau shall be appointed 
by the State Government on the recommendation of the State Bureau.  
(4) The State Government shall, by noti fication in the official Gazette, 
make rules to provide for the qualifications and experience, method of 
recruitment, procedure for appointment, expenditure, term of office, 
salaries and allowances, resignation and removal from office, 
promotions, and othe r terms and conditions of the employees of the 
District Bureau. 
(5) The State Government shall provide requisite induction training to the 
persons appointed to the District Bureau before their joining office, in such 
form and manner, as may be prescribed. 
(6) A vacancy caused to the office of the District Superintendent, Deputy 
Superintendents, Inspectors and the staff of the District Bureau shall be filed 
 Qualification 
for appointment 
of officers and 
other 
employees of 
District Bureau. 

20 
 
up within a period of three months from the date on which such vacancy 
occurs. 
Powers, duties 
and functions of 
District Bureau. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18.  (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of the District 
Bureau, as the case may be, to receive or inquire into a complaint from any 
person, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the following shall be the duties and 
functions to be performed and powers to be exercised by the District Bureaus: 
(a) taking all necessary measures to prevent the offence of voyeurism 
in places under its jurisdiction; 
(b) taking suo-moto cognizance of the offences of voyeurism; 
(c) taking cognizance of the cases of violation of the Act and other laws 
relating to voyeurism on a complaint by any person; 
(d) conducting investigation in cases of voyeurism where the Police 
have forwarded the case to the District Bureau; 
(e) submitting a detailed report of the investigation to the Police in  such 
cases where charge sheet is to be forwarded by the police and providing 
all such assistance as requested by the Police; 
(f) forwarding charge sheet to the Special Court or inquiry report to the 
State Bureau, as the case may be; 
(g) conducting regular and random verification of all establishments 
where voyeurism is likely to take place; 
(h) entering and inspecting the premises of any establishment during 
reasonable working hours: 
      Provided that such inspection shall be recorded in a register of the 
office of the District Bureau and in a register maintained by the 
establishment; 
(i) entering and inspecting any dwelling house subject to the provisions 
under the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; 
(j) conducting surprise and regular inspections of places other than 
establishments where security cameras or CCTVs have been installed 
in public places; 
(k) using the powers of search, seizure and arrest as prescribed under 
the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; 
(l) collecting fees relating to licences, their renewal and penalties for 
non-compliance of other provisions under this Act; 
(m) issuing licences to establishments: 
       Provided that the District Superintendent of the District Bureau 
shall be the licensing authority for this purpose under the Act; 
(n) recommending to the State Bureau, sensitive service providers to be 
added to the blacklist along with a detailed re port containing reasons 
for the same; 
(o) providing medical, legal and technical aid to the victims of 
voyeurism; 
(p) forwarding proposal to the State Bureau to conduct inquiry, 
determine losses and grant compensations to the victims of voyeurism 
under section 58 of this Act; 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 

21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  5 
(q) determining whether the voyeuristic material is genuine or 
deepfake; 
(r) providing rehabilitation and counselling to the  offenders of 
voyeurism; and 
(s) taking any other legal action as necessary for the prevention, 
prohibition and redress al of any offence of voyeurism or related 
incidents. 
 
   CHAPTER VI 
COPYRIGHT AND TAKEDOWN MECHANISM 
  
14 of 1957. 
 
10 19.  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Copyright Act, 1957, the accused 
or convicted person shall not have any copyright over the voyeuristic 
material, wholly or in part, arising out of the offence committed by them. 
 Copyright 
over 
voyeuristic 
material. 
 
21 of 2000. 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
  15 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
20.  Notwithstanding anything contained in section 79 of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 and the rules made under that Act,— 
(1) Every intermediary shall establish within one hundred and twenty 
days from the date of enactment of this Act, a mechanism for the 
takedown of voyeuristic material uploaded by any of its users or by 
itself. 
(2) Any victim who wishes to remove their voyeuristic material from 
any online platform may send a takedown notice to that intermediary in 
such format as may be prescribed. 
(3) The intermediary shall take down the voyeuristic material within a 
maximum period of thirty -six hours from the receipt of the notice and 
shall notify the same to the user who uploaded it, if applicable: 
        Provided that the intermediary may not reject the takedown notice 
by reason of non- compliance of the prescribed format of notice or lack 
of other compliance. 
(4) Any user aggrieved by the takedown of  content, may file a counter-
notice in the prescribed format to the intermediary within a period of 
sixty days from the date of receipt of the notification. 
(5) The intermediary on receipt of the counter-notice may, if it deems fit 
that such material  was not uploaded in violation of any law, restore the 
material on the website within a period of fifteen days from such receipt: 
      Provided that the material shall not be restored in cases where the 
victim initiates legal action, or the Special Court or Bureau passes an 
order against it. 
(6) The intermediary, after receipt of takedown notice, shall securely 
preserve such voyeuristic material and associated records for at least 
ninety days for  investigation purposes, ensuring that there is no 
dissemination, after which it shall be permanently destroyed by the 
intermediary. 
(7) The takedown notice shall include the following information:— 
(a) Identification of the voyeuristic material that is claimed to be 
illegally uploaded or to be the subject of such activity and that is to 
be removed or access to which is to be disabled, and information 
reasonably sufficient to enable the intermediary to locate the 
material such as the website link, 
(b) Information reasonably sufficient to enable the intermediary to 
contact the victim, su ch as an address, telephone number, and, if 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Takedown 
notice and 
restoration 
procedure. 
 
 

22 
 
available, an electronic mail address at which the victim may be 
contacted: 
Provided that the victim shall have the right to refrain from 
disclosing  his name, address, telephone number or related personal 
information and may alternatively provide the details of a 
representative or an advocate, 
(c) A statement that the victim has a good faith belief that use of 
the material in the manner complained of is illegally uploaded, and 
a statement that the information in the notice is accurate and under 
the offence of perjury, the deponent could be held liable. 
(8) The counter-notice shall include the following information:— 
(a) A physical or electronic signature of the user, 
(b) Identification of the material that has been removed or to which 
access has been disabled and the location at which the material 
appeared before it was removed or access to it was disabled, 
(c) A statement under the offence of perjury that the user has a good 
faith belief that the material was remo ved or disabled illegally, or 
as a result of mistake or misidentification of the material to be 
removed or disabled, 
(d) The name, telephone number, postal and email address of the 
user and if the user’s address is outside of India, the name, address 
and telephone number of a representative residing in India. 
(9) The Bureaus established under this Act shall, after a preliminary 
investigation, have the power to order the intermediary to takedown any 
voyeuristic material, and the same shall be complied with b y the 
intermediary within a period of twenty -four hours from the receipt of 
such order: 
Provided that in such cases, no voyeuristic material shall be restored 
under sub-section (5) of this section. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
Prohibition on 
third-party 
intermediaries 
for claiming or 
working as a 
takedown 
agency. 
 21.  (1) No third-party intermediary shall claim or advertise to have a technical 
tool for taking down voyeuristic material from any other intermediary or 
digital platform and shall not thereby seek, call for, collect, store or process 
any voyeuristic materials themselves. 
(2) No person shall, by himself or on behalf of a third- party intermediary; 
promulgate, endorse or advertise the claim pr ohibited in sub-section (1) and 
shall not thereby induce people to transfer the voyeuristic material to himself 
or the third-party intermediary. 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
   CHAPTER VII 
VOYEURISM-FREE STANDARDS AND STANDARD MARK 
  
Standards to be 
specified. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22.  (1) Without prejudice to the powers of the Bureaus under this Act, the Bureau 
of Indian Standards established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
2016 shall, in consultation with the National Bureau and accredited NGOs 
under this Act, set mandatory standards for the protection of privacy, 
protection against voyeurism and other purposes under this Act. 
(2) The Bureau of Indian Standards shall, at regular intervals, update the 
mandatory standards under sub- section (1) to meet contemporary social 
needs. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 2016 and the rules, regulations and standards thereunder, the mandatory 
standards set under sub -section (1) shall be a public document within the 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
11 of 2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
 
 
47 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
meaning of sub -section (1) of section 74 of the Bharatiya Sakshya 
Adhiniyam, 2023 and same shall be made available to the public without 
charging any commercial fees. 
 
  
 
 
5 
23.  Every establishment and sensitive service provider under this Act shall 
conform to the mandatory standards set under section 22 of this Act. 
 Duty to 
conform to 
standards. 
 
 
 
47 of 1999. 
 
 
10 
24.  The Bureau of Indian Standards shall, in consultation with the National 
Bureau, the Trade Marks Registry established under the Trade Marks Act, 
1999, accredited NGOs, and stakeholders, establish a Standard Mark which 
shall be of such design and contain such particulars as may be prescribed to 
represent conformity of the services of an establishment or sensitive service 
provider to the mandatory standards set under section 22, indicating that the 
particular services are Voyeurism-free. 
 ‘Voyeurism-
Free’ standard 
mark. 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
20 
25 
25.  (1) No establishment or sensitive servicer provider other than an 
establishment bearing a valid licence under Chapter VIII or a sensitive service 
provider registered under Chapter IX of this Act, may make use of the 
Standard Mark in the premises of their business , on advertisements, 
brochures, billing receipts, websites, software, social media or by any other 
methods to represent the conformity of their services to the standards. 
(2) The use of the Standard Mark shall be deemed to be evidence of the 
premises of an  establishment or services of the sensitive service provider 
being in conformity with the mandatory standards applicable to them under 
this Act:  
         Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent any officer of the 
Bureaus from examining any  premises of an establishment, service of the 
sensitive service provider, entity or person if they have reason to believe that 
the standard mark is not genuine or has been used, affixed or applied 
fraudulently or if such an examination is necessary for the  purpose of any 
other law for the time being in force. 
 Use of 
standard 
mark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 of 2016. 
 
 
 
30 
35 
40 
26.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter and for the larger 
public interest, an accredited NGOs is authorized to set their own standards 
for voluntary certification and certify establishments and sensitive service 
providers that voluntarily adopt those standards. 
(2) Nothing shall prevent any accredited NGOs from certification work for 
the larger public interest on the grounds that their standards resemble those 
set under section 22 of this Act. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything inconsistent contained in sub -section (3) of 
section 17 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016, nothing shall 
prevent any accredited NGO from registeri ng certification trademarks and 
other intellectual property for the larger public interest subject to obtaining 
a no-objection certificate from the National Bureau. 
 Standards and 
voluntary 
certification 
by NGOs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   CHAPTER VIII 
PROVISIONS FOR ESTABLISHMENTS 
  
 
45 
 
50 
27.  No establishment specified in the First Schedule  or its branch or department 
shall commence or carry on any business unless it holds in this behalf a 
licence issued in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Rules 
made thereunder: 
Provided that the establishments in operation prior to the enactment of 
this Act shall, within a period of one year from the date of enactment of this 
Act, apply for the licence and may continue their business unless the lice nce 
is rejected by the licencing authority. 
 Licences for 
establishments. 

24 
 
Exemptions for 
obtaining 
licence. 
 28.  Any establishment mentioned in the First Schedule  may apply to the 
licencing authority for an exemption on the grounds that there is no scope for 
voyeurism to take place within their premises: 
Provided that the licencing authority may grant such an exemption after 
an inspection of the establishment and on certain conditions as may be 
prescribed. 
5 
 
Licencing 
authority and 
forms of licences. 
 29.  The licences under this Act  shall be granted or renewed, by the licencing 
authority, in such forms and to be valid for such period as prescribed by the 
State Bureau, subject to such conditions as are specified in these rules and in 
the licence:  
Provided that the licencing authority may empower in his behalf any 
officer or officers of the District Bureau to grant or renew any such licences. 
10 
 
Restrictions in 
granting 
licences. 
 30.  No licence shall be granted to the establishments specified in the First 
Schedule  unless they have been legally established, registered or possessed, 
and not prohibited under any other law for the time being in force. 
 
 
15 
 
Licencing 
authorities to 
furnish 
information to 
State Bureau. 
 31. The licencing authority shall provide information with respect to the licences 
granted, rejected and renewed, and pending applications of licences under 
this Act to the State Bureau at regular intervals in such form and manner, as 
may be prescribed by the State Bureau. 
  
Enabling ease of 
access to licence 
services. 
 32. The employees of the District Bureau shall render reasonable assistance, free 
of cost, to persons applying for a licence or its renewal by assisting them in 
the application processes such as filling the form, attaching required 
documents, etc. and periodically organizing camps for easy access to their 
services at various locations in the district. 
20  
Application for 
licences. 
 33. (1) Every application for the grant of a licence under this Act, shall be— 
(a) submitted in the form, contain such particulars and be accompanied 
by such fee, as may be prescribed by the State Bureau; 
(b) presented by the applicant in person or sent through the medium of  
post  or filed electronically or otherwise to the licencing authority, as 
far as possible, having jurisdiction in respect of the place where the 
establishment is situated. 
(2) Every application submitted by a person for the grant of a licence shall be 
accompanied by the documents as prescribed by the State Bureau. 
(3) The applicant shall not suppress any factual information or furnish false 
or wrong information in the application form. 
25 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
Jurisdiction of 
licencing 
authority. 
 34. (1) The licencing authority shall issue licences to establishments situated 
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the district. 
(2) In cases where the property or premises of the establishment is movable, 
the licencing authority under whose jurisdiction the establishment has its 
registered office, or its head office or its branch office is situated, or from 
where it carries out its business under any other law for the time being in 
force, shall be the licencing authority having jurisdiction to issue a licence to 
such movable property or premises. 
40 
 
Inspection of 
establishments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35. (1) On receipt of an application, a team of experts from the District Bureau 
appointed by the licencing authority shall conduct a thorough inspection of 
the applicant establishment, their premises, documents, the conformity of the 
establishment with the standards set under section 22 of this Act and collect 
any other information as deemed necessary ; and after such inspection, the 
team of experts shall prepare a report on the same and submit  it to the 
45 
 

25 
 
5 
licencing authority within fifteen working days from the date of receipt of 
application. 
(2)The District Bureau shall carry out surprise inspection in the establishment 
at regular intervals. 
(3) The inspection of an establishment shall be carried out during reasonable 
working hours and in the presence of a woman officer in cases where the 
establishment is run or managed by a woman. 
 
10 
15 
20 
25 
36. (1) The licencing authority shall, after considering the application by the 
applicant establishment and the inspection report under sub- section (1) or 
section 48 and on being satisfied that the applicant has fulfilled the eligibility 
conditions, subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, grant a licence; or 
refuse to grant a licence by recording its reasons in writing for such refusal, 
and by passing a speaking order; within a period of thirty days from the 
receipt of such application. 
(2) In case of grant of licence, the licencing authority shall provide the 
certificate of licence in the format specified in the Third schedule  to the 
applicant. 
(3) The establishment shall exhibit, on a visible area of the premises of the 
establishment, either the licence granted by the licencing authority under this 
section or any document informing the licencing authority about the deemed 
grant of licence under the first proviso to section 41. 
(4) Any licence granted by the licencing authority to the particular pr emises 
of an establishment shall be valid only to the extent of those premises of the 
establishment. 
(5) The licence format and the contents to be filled up in the licence shall be 
written in both the local language and English language. 
 Grant of 
licences and 
time limit for 
grant of 
licences. 
 
30 
35 
40 
37. (1) Every licencing authority, while granting or renewing a licence, shall 
enter the data of the record locally in an electronic format as specified from 
time to time by the State Bureau. 
(2) Every licencing authority shall  enter  the relevant data of each such 
licensee in the Central system developed and upgraded at regular intervals by 
the National Bureau in consultation with the Central Government, which shall 
generate a Unique Identification Numb er (hereinafter referred to as “UIN”) 
for each licensee  which shall take effect from such date as may be prescribed 
by the National Bureau, and  no licence shall be deemed valid without such 
UIN. 
(3) The UIN so generated under sub - section (2) shall be un ique for every 
licensee. 
(4) The licencing authority shall provide through its public web portal, 
Application Programming Interface (API) for Unique Identification Number 
(UIN) and standard mark, to be voluntarily exhibited on the websites and 
software applications if any, of a licensee, on the request of a licensee. 
 Maintenance of 
records in 
electronic 
format and 
consolidation of 
licences. 
 
45 
50 
38. (1) Where there is a change, correction, addition, alteration or deletion in any 
kind of information, other than information about a change in address given 
to the licencing authority by the establishment, the establishment shall 
forthwith inform the same to t he licencing authority by such application and 
in such form, as prescribed by the State Bureau from time to time, within 
thirty days from the date of such change, correction, addition, alteration or 
deletion.  
Provided that any establishment that does not inform the licencing 
authority about any such change, correction, addition, alteration or deletion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Change, 
correction, 
addition, 
alteration and 
deletion of any 
information 
after grant of 
licence by 
licencing 
authority. 

26 
 
shall be liable to such fine as may be prescribed by the State Bureau in 
accordance with  such penalty as prescribed under section 103 of this Act. 
(2) The licencing authority shall, on receiving such information and on being 
satisfied about its correctness, make the change in the register of 
establishments and shall amend the certificate of licence or issue a fresh 
certificate of licence, if necessary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Provision 
relating to 
change in 
address of 
establishment. 
 39. (1) The licensee shall notify the licencing authority in the form prescribed by 
the State Bureau within thirty days from the date of change of address of the 
establishment that such establishment has changed their address, in such form 
and manner, as may be prescribed.  
Provided that where the change of address has taken place in the area 
which is under the jurisdiction of the licencing authority which has issued the 
previous licence, the changes shall be incorporated into the same licence after 
inspection of the changed premises of the establishment and no cancellation 
of the previous licence  shall be required. 
(2) The licencing authority shall, on receiving the information and being 
satisfied about its correctness, remove such establishment from the register 
of establishments and cancel the licence. 
10 
15 
 
Renewal of 
licence. 
 40. (1) Every licence  shall, at its expiration and subject to the same conditions 
as to the grant thereof, be renewed by the licencing authority within a period 
of thirty days from the date of receipt of the application for renewal. 
(2) An application for renewal of a licence shall be filed in the form specified 
by the State Bureau, at least sixty days prior but not more than ninety days 
prior to the expiry of the said licence with t he licencing authority along with 
the documents specified by the State Bureau. 
(3) The licencing authority  shall consider an application for renewal of a 
licence, if the period between the date of its expiry and the date of application 
is not, in his opinion, unduly long with due regard to the circumstances of the 
case, and subject to payment of all renewal fees. 
Provided that if the specified conditions are not met, the application  shall 
be treated as  that for grant of a fresh licence. 
20 
25 
30 
 
Deemed grant 
or renewal of 
licences. 
 41. If the licencing authority does not communicate its decision of whether to 
grant or refuse the licence or its renewal to the applicant within thirty working 
days from the receipt of application, or within thirty wo rking days from the 
date of receipt of reply from the applicant in respect of any requisition made 
by the licencing authority, whichever is later, the licence shall be deemed to 
have been granted or renewed, as the case may be, on the date immediately 
following the date of expiry of the stipulated thirty working days and such 
licence shall be deemed to be legally valid for all purposes under this Act: 
Provided that the applicant establishment whose application has been 
deemed granted or deemed renewed shall , before carrying on the business, 
inform the licencing authority, in the prescribed format, about the initiation 
or continuance of the business of the establishment by virtue of the deemed 
grant or renewal of licence, and the licencing authority shall rec ord the 
information which shall become part of the official record.  
Provided also that the business carried on, is strictly in conformity with 
the requirements of all the standards, rules and regulations for the time being 
in force framed under this Act, and any contravention shall invalidate the 
deemed grantor renewal of licence. 
35 
40 
45 
 
Fees for 
licences. 
 
 
 
42. (1) (a) Every licence granted or renewed under this Act shall, save as herein 
otherwise expressly provided, be chargeable with a fee, if any, as prescribed 50 
 

27 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
by the State Government on the recommendation of the State Bureau, after 
taking into consideration the following points, namely:— 
(i ) the area of the premises of the establishment in square metres; 
(ii) the class of local self -Government under whose jurisdiction it is 
situated; 
(iii) the type of business; 
(iv) the ratings, rank, etc., if any; and 
(v) any other considerations as may be prescribed. 
(b) In any case where the fee is prescribed for a year, the fee for a fraction of 
a year shall be the same as for a whole year. 
(2) Where a licensee submits an application for renewal of the licence after 
the expi ry of the period for which the licence was granted, the licencing 
authority may, if it decides to renew the licence, at its discretion, levy— 
(a) the full fee as for initial grant of the licence; and 
(b) a late fee as prescribed by the State Bureau if it is satisfied that the 
delay is not justifiable or excusable,  and not serious enough to warrant 
revocation of the licence or prosecution of the licensee. 
(3) The State Bureau may, by the issuance of a general or special order and 
for reasons to be recorded in writing and subject to such conditions, if any, as 
it may specify in the order, grant exemption from, or reduction of, the fee 
payable in respect of any licence: 
Provided that of every exemption from payment of the fee chargeable in 
respect of the grant or renewal of any licence shall be subject to the condition 
that if the application for renewal of such licence is not made within the 
prescribed period mentioned in sub- section (2) of section 40, the licencing 
authority may, unless the applicant sat isfies the licencing authority that he 
had sufficient cause for not making the application within that period, levy 
renewal fee at the rate prescribed by the State Bureau. 
(4) Any establishment— 
(a) wherein a woman or a person belonging to the third gender or any 
person with disabilities or an orphan above eighteen years of age or a 
person belonging to an economically backward class is the sole 
proprietor, no such fees shall be levied for application and renewal of 
the licence under this Act, or 
(b) that ensures a clean and hygienic toilet facility in their premises, 
especially for women and persons belonging to the third gender, may 
be granted an exemption or reduction in licence fees on the order of 
the State Bureau: 
Provided that this sub- section shall no t apply to establishments 
whose annual turnover exceeds the exemption limit prescribed by the 
State Bureau. 
 
45 
43. Where a licence granted or renewed under this Act is lost or accidentally 
destroyed, the licencing authority  shall grant a duplicate licence on payment 
of the fee as prescribed by the State Bureau. 
 Fee payable for 
copies and 
duplicates. 
  44. All fees payable shall be paid in cash or by way of bank pay- order or demand 
draft or electronic banking transfer at the time of application. 
 Collection of 
fees. 
  45. Any person who holds a licence granted or deemed granted or renewed under 
this Act shall forthwith produce such licence upon demand by any officer of 
 Production of 
licence. 

28 
 
the District, State or National Bureau or any magistrate or any police officer 
of a rank not below that of an officer-in-charge of a police station. 
Suspension, 
revocation and 
cancellation of 
licence. 
 46. (1) The licencing authority may, on receipt of any complaint or may suo moto 
initiate an inquiry and suspend or revoke any licence if the establishment 
which has been granted a licence under this Chapter or any person in 
connection with such establishment is f ound to indulge or participate in any 
activity punishable under this Act or commits any act contrary to the 
provisions mentioned under this Act, by passing a speaking order: 
Provided that, at the time of the inquiry, a notice shall be issued to such 
establishment or person, and they shall be  given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard. 
(2) If any establishment has been permanently closed for business, the 
licensee shall notify the same to the licencing authority within thirty days 
from the date of closing of the establishment, in such form and manner, as 
may be prescribed by the State Bureau. 
(3) The licencing authority shall, on receiving the information and being 
satisfied about its correctness, remove such establishment from the register 
of establishments and cancel the licence: 
Provided also that if the licencing authority does not receive the 
information, but  is otherwise satisfied on inspection that the establishment 
on the registered address has been permanently closed and after giving the 
establishment a reasonable opportunity of being heard by issuing a notice, it 
may prepare a detailed report including statements or any other evidence to 
show that the said establishment has been permanently closed at the 
registered address and then remove t he establishment from the register and 
cancel such certificate of licence. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
 
Licence not to 
indicate legality 
of business. 
 47. (1)The licence provided by the licencing authority under this Act shall not 
indicate the legality or authenticity of the establishment or its business, nor 
shall it confer legality upon any illegal establishment, business or act. 
(2)The licence under this Act shall not be  a proof of the existence of any 
establishment, business or place of business. 
(3)The licence under this Act shall be an independent licence without 
affecting the provisions of any other licences, permissions, or certifications 
necessary or mandatory under any other laws for the time being in force for 
the continuance of the establishment or its business. 
30 
35 
 
Search report on 
request. 
 48. (1)Without prejudice to any other provision under this Act, any person 
authorized and intending to use any premises or a vehicle whether the licence 
provisions under this Act apply to them or not, may make a request in the 
prescribed form accompanied with the prescribed fees, to the District Bureau 
under whose jurisdiction such property is situated or vehicle is available for 
the inspection of such property in order to ascertain whether or not the 
premises of such property is presently free from voyeurism. 
(2)The District Bureau shall, on receipt of the request, carry out the inspection 
of the specified premises and reply along with the search report to the 
applicant in writing within a period o f two working days from the date of 
receipt of the request whether or not the premises is privacy protected, 
voyeurism-free and safe. 
(3)In the case of private premises, the Bureau officials shall enter and inspect 
the premises or a vehicle only with the c onsent of the owner, possessor, 
40 
45 
 

29 
 
holder, occupier, his representative, driver or the person in whose possession 
or power such property is believed to be, as the case may be. 
(4)In cases of grant or renewal of the licence of establishments under this 
Chapter, the search report of the Bureau under this section may be considered. 
 5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
49. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall be the duty of every 
establishment which has been mentioned in the First Schedule to:— 
(a) take all necessary measures to prevent the offence of voyeurism in 
the premises of the establishment and ensure that all the premises of the 
establishment are voyeurism-free; 
(b) adhere to the standards set by the Bureau of Indian Standards under 
section 22 of this Act; 
(c) exhibit the certificate of licence granted by the licencing authority 
or the document under the proviso to section 41 relating to deemed grant 
of licence on a visible area of the premises of the establishment; 
(d) maintain an inspection register to record the visits of the officers 
of the National or State Bureau or District Bureau or the Local Police; 
(e) report, at the earliest, any offences under this Act committed within 
their premises, to the District Bureau or to the Local Police within 
whose local jurisdiction the establishment is situated; 
(f) accept any letter, complaint and application filed by any person and 
grant an acknowledgment of the same in the form as may be prescribed; 
(g) ensure that any cameras or CCTVs erected in the establishment for 
security purposes are present only in areas which are of public nature 
and subject to provisions and exceptions of section  147 of this Act. 
Provided that a display board informing about the presence of the 
camera and microphone, if a ny,  shall also be erected in its near 
proximity; 
(h) ensure that any evidence of voyeurism in possession of the 
establishment shall not be disseminated to any employee or any other 
person, and deliver the possession of the same to the officers of the 
National, State or District Bureau; and 
(i) ensure that the identity of the victim or any witnesses of voyeurism 
shall not be disclosed or disseminated. 
(2)The National and State Bureau  shall publish guidelines and duties to be 
followed under this Act by  every establishment at regular intervals. 
 Duties of 
establishments. 
   CHAPTER IX 
PROVISIONS FOR SENSITIVE SERVICE PROVIDERS 
  
 
40 
45 
50. (1) The Registrar of the National Bureau shall also work as the Registrar of 
the sensitive service providers and shall have the duty of verifying, registering 
and deregistering sensitive service providers  in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) A sensitive service provider, may register or deregister themselves on the 
Register of sensitive service providers by making an online application to the 
Registrar of the National Bureau in the prescribed form accompanied by the 
Aadhaar number of the indi vidual or Udhyam registration number of the 
entity, as the case may be. 
(3) The Registrar of the National Bureau shall grant registration to a sensitive 
service provider only after due online verification of the individual or entity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Online 
registration of 
sensitive 
service 
providers. 

30 
 
in the form, as specifi ed in the Fourth Schedule, and in the manner, as may 
be prescribed. 
(4) The unique registration number along with digital registration certificate 
for all sensitive service providers and digital identity card for sensitive service 
providers, under clause ( i) and (ii) of sub-section  (33) of section 2, shall be 
provided through a Government web portal and associated mobile 
application. 
(5) The National Bureau shall provide through its public web portal, 
Application Programming Interface (API) for unique registration number and 
standard mark, to be voluntarily exhibited on the websites and software 
applications if any, of a registered sensitive service provider, on the request 
of a registered sensitive service provider. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
10 
Rules for 
verification of 
sensitive service 
providers. 
 51. (1) The Ministry of Labour of the Central and State Governments along with 
the Ministry of Home Affairs of the State Government may, in collaboration 
with the National and State Bureau, make rules for character verification by 
Police, framing privacy policy, etc. and frame a code of conduct and ethics 
for sensitive service providers categorized under clause (i)  and (ii) of sub-
section (33) of section 2. 
(2) The Ministry of Information Technology of the Central and State 
Governments may, in collaboration with the National and State Bureau, make 
rules for verification by the cyber security experts, framing of privacy policy, 
etc. and frame a code of conduct and ethics for sensitive service providers 
categorized under clause (iii) and (iv) of sub-section (33) of section 2. 
(3) The Central and State Governments may make rules for other prescribed 
categories of sensitive service providers, if any. 
15 
20 
25 
 
National 
database of 
sensitive service 
providers. 
 52. (1) The Registrar of the National Bureau shall maintain an electronic database 
of all the registered sensitive service providers segregated on the basis of the 
types and subtypes of services. 
(2) The basic information such as the names, addresses, types of se rvice and 
other relevant particulars of each sensitive service provider, as may be 
prescribed, shall be made available to the public on the official websites of 
the Bureaus after approval of the sensitive service provider. 
(3) The database of sensitive service providers shall be regularly updated by 
the Registrar of the National Bureau. 
30 
 
Power of State 
Bureau to 
blacklist 
sensitive service 
providers. 
 53. The State Bureau may, on the recommendation of the District Bureau, 
blacklist any registered or unregistered sensitive service provider if any 
offence of voyeurism takes place in pursuance of such service by the service 
provider or any of their employees or representatives. 
35  
Procedure for 
blacklisting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54. (1) The District Bureau shall send to the State Bureau, a proposal for 
blacklisting any sensitive service provider against whom charges have been 
framed or conviction has been ordered by the Special Court for an offence 
under this Act. 
(2) The State Bureau shall, by a reasoned order, blacklist any sensitive service 
provider for a specific period as it may deem fit, subject to the provisions of 
this Act. 
(3) No sensitive service provider shall be blacklisted under sub- section (2) 
without being afforded a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(4) The State Bureau may order a sensitive service provider to be temporarily 
blacklisted for a specific period, if charges have been framed and to be 
permanently blacklisted, if a conviction has been or dered against it by the 
Special Court:  
40 
45 
 
50 
 

31 
 
5 
Provided that if in the opinion of the State Bureau, a delay in blacklisting 
may cause irreparable harm to the general public, it may, in its discretion, 
temporarily blacklist a sensitive service provider before the framing of 
charges. 
(5) The Registrar of the State Bureau shall forward a copy of the order of 
blacklisting to the Registrar of the National Bureau. 
 
10 
15 
55. (1) Any sensitive service provider that has been blacklisted shall be prevented 
from carrying on the same or similar business and using the Standard Mark 
all over India but may carry on any other business which does not involve 
access to privacy of a person. 
(2) The Registrar of the National Bureau shall suspend the registration or 
deregister any sensitive service provider against whom an order of temporary 
or permanent blacklisting has been passed, as the case may be, and the status 
of such suspension or deregistration shall be updated in the national database 
of sensitive service providers. 
(3) The Registrar of the National Bureau shall take any other action against 
such sensitive service provider as may be prescribed. 
 Effects of 
blacklisting. 
 
20 
56. (1) The sensitive service providers shall abide by the duties as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) The National and State Bureau shall publish guidelines and duties to be 
followed under this Act by the sensitive service providers at regular intervals. 
 Duties of 
sensitive 
service 
providers. 
   CHAPTER X 
OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUREAUS 
  
 
 
 
 
5 of 1908. 
25 
30 
35 
57. The National Bureau, State and District Bureaus, as the case may be, shall, 
while inquiring into any matter under this section, have the same powers as 
are vested in a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely: 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and 
compelling them to give oral or written evidence on oath and producing 
the documents or things; 
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or 
office; 
(e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
 Powers of the 
National,  
State and 
District 
Bureaus 
during 
inquiry. 
 
40 
45 
58. (1) The State Bureau under this Act shall, suo-moto or on the complaint of 
the victim, his legal heir, guardian or legal representative; or on the complaint 
of an accredited NGO for and on behalf of a victim or group of victims; or by 
the recommendations of t he District Bureau or the Registrar of the National 
Bureau; or by order of the Special Court; inquire into the case for determining 
losses and awarding compensation. 
(2) Where the inquiry discloses the commission of voyeurism or negligence 
in the preventio n of voyeurism or abetment thereof, or any act or omission 
contrary to any provisions of this Act, it may order to the concerned party to 
make payment of compensation to the complainant or to the victim or the 
members of his family as the State  Bureau may consider necessary. 
(3) The State Bureau shall conduct such inquiry following the principles of 
natural justice, including giving reasonable opportunity of being heard to all 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of 
State Bureau 
to order 
payment of 
compensation  
to the victims 
of voyeurism. 

32 
 
necessary parties and shall record reasons for its actions during the course of 
such inquiry. 
(4) An inquiry under this section shall be a summary enquiry. 
(5) The State Bureau may call for the report of an investigation, inquiry or 
opinion from the District Bureau, if deemed necessary and consider it during 
the course of its inquiry. 
(6) An order passed by the State Bureau under this section shall be executable 
by it as a decree of a civil court, and for this purpose, the State Bureau shall 
have all the powers of a civil court. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub- section (6), the State Bureau  
shall transmit any order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction 
and such civil court shall execute the order as if it were a decree made by that 
court. 
(8) No compensation awarded under this Act shall prevent the imposition of 
any penalty under this Act and award of compensation or imposition of 
penalty or punishment under any other law for the time being in force. 
(9) The amount of compensation awarded under this Act, if not paid, may be 
recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue. 
(10) The observations during inquiry and decisions of the State Bureau under 
this section shall not be binding on the Special Court. 
(11) The format of application, fee and procedure to  be followed for 
conducting inquiry, determining losses and awarding compensation shall be 
in  such manner as may be prescribed. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
Power to set 
aside ex parte 
orders. 
 59. Where an order is passed by the National or State Bureau ex parte , the 
aggrieved party may make an application to the respective Bureau for setting 
aside such order. 
25 
 
Finality of 
orders. 
 60. Every order of a Bureau under this Act shall, if no appeal has been preferred 
against such order under the provisions of this Act, deemed to be final. 
  
Appeal to State 
Bureau. 
 61. (1) Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the District Bureau 
concerning any subject under this Act, as may be prescribed, may prefer an 
appeal in the prescribed format, accompanied by the prescribed fee to the 
State Bureau within thirty days from the date of receipt of such decision: 
Provided that the State Bureau may admit the appeal after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
(2) In disposing of an appeal, the State Bureau shall follow such procedure as 
may be prescribed: 
Provided that no appeal shall be disposed of unless the appellant has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(3) The proceedings of the State Bureau in so far as i t concerns the appellate 
powers granted to it under this Act shall be quasi-judicial in nature. 
30 
35 
40 
 
Appeal to 
National 
Bureau. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62. (1) Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the State Bureau or 
Registrar of the National Bureau concerning any subjects under this Act, as 
may be prescribed, may prefer an appeal in the prescribed format, 
accompanied by the prescribed fee to the Natio nal Bureau within thirty days 
from the date of receipt of such decision: 
Provided that the National Bureau may admit the appeal after the expiry 
of the period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented 
by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time: 
45 
 

33 
5 
10 
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any 
amount in terms of an order of the State Bureau under section 58, shall be 
entertained by the National Bureau unless the appellant has deposited fifty 
per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) In disposing of an appeal, the National Bureau shall follow such procedure 
as may be prescribed:
Provided that no appeal shall be disposed of unless the appellant has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(3) The proceedings of the National Bureau in so far as it concerns the 
appellate powers granted to it under this Act shall be quasi-judicial in nature. 
15 
20 
25 
63. (1) In any appeal proceedings, the onus to prove that a denial of a request was
justified shall be on the Bureau, as the case may be, who denied the request. 
(2) In its decision, the National Bureau or State Bureau, as the case may be,
has the power to—
(a) allow or reject or partially allow the appeal with or without costs;
(b
) require the State Bureau, as the case may be, to compensate th e
a
ppellant for any loss or other detriment suffered;
(c) impose any of the penalties regarding licences or misuse of
Standard Mark provided under this Act; and
(d) take any other appropriate action against the establishments and
sensitive service providers in the interest of justice.
(3) Every Bureau shall give notice of its decision, including any right of
appeal and time limit for the same, to the applicant or appellant, as the case
may be, and in case of appeal, to the authority against whose decision the
appeal was filed.
(4) The National or State Bureau, as the case may be, shall decide the appeal
in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed.
Other 
provisions 
regarding 
appeal. 
30 
64. The Bureaus under this Act shall process the applications and appeals, as the
case may be, on a priority basis for an establishment or sensitive service 
provider, wherein the entity is run by a sole proprietor and such proprietor is 
a woman, a person belonging to the third gender, a person with disabilities, 
an orphan above eighteen years of age or a person belonging to an 
economically backward class. 
Priority in 
processing 
applications 
and appeals. 
35 
65. The Bureaus under this Act shall have the power to review any of the orders
passed by them if there is an error apparent on the face of the record, either 
of its own motion or on an application made by any of the parties within thirty 
days of such order. 
Review by 
Bureaus. 
40 
66. Where any Bureau under this Act, on an application by any person or
otherwise, is of the opinion that it involves the larger interest of the public, it 
may direct, within their jurisdiction, any individual or organisation or 
accredited NGO or expert to assist that Bureau. 
Experts to 
assist Bureaus. 
5 of 1908. 4 5 
67. Every order made by a State Bureau or the National Bureau shall be enforced
by it in the same manner as if it were a decree made by a Court in a suit before 
it and the provisions of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 shall, as far as may be, applicable, subject to the 
modification that every reference therein to the decree s hall be construed as 
reference to the order made under this Act. 
Enforcement 
of orders of 
the State and 
National 
Bureaus. 

34 
Right of appellant 
to appoint a 
representative. 
68. A person preferring an appeal under this Act to the State or National Bureau,
as the case may be, may either appear in person or take the assistance of and
authorise one or more advocates or legal practitioners, represent through any
law firm or appoint any person under the Powers of Attorney Act, 1882, or in
the case of an organization nominate a person by passing a resolution and
granting a Letter of Authority, to present his case before the State or National
Bureau.
5 
7
 of 1882. 
Public servants 
responsible for 
damages. 
69. (1) It shall be the duty of every public servant of the Bureaus to ensure that
the interests of the Bureaus are duly safeguarded.
(2) If it is found that damage or loss has been caused to the Bureaus by any
action on the part of any public servant of the Bureaus, not in conformity with 
the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations, except when done in good
faith, or any failure so as to act in conformity thereof, by willful neglect or
default on its or his part, such damage or loss shall be liable to be rec overed
from the public servant in accordance with the prescribed procedure.
10 
15 
Duty to inform 
other authorities 
70. If any officer, during the course of investigation under this Act, has reason to
believe that any goods, article, process, system or service is manufactured,
imported, distributed, sold, hired, leased, stored or exhibited for sale i n
contravention of any other law for the time being in force, they shall inform
the competent authority about such contravention. 20 
Power of 
Bureaus to 
make 
regulations. 
71. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Rules made thereunder, the
National Bureau with the previous approval of the Central Government an d
the State Bureau with the previous approval of the State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations to carry out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the matters mentione d
in the functions of the National Bureau under section 11 and State Bureau
under section 15 of this Act.
(3) Every regulation made under sub-section (1)  by the National Bureau shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or two or more successive sessions, and if, before t he expiry 
of the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the 
regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified for m or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that regulation. 
(4) Every regulation made under sub-section (1) by the State Bureau shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State 
Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature 
consists of one House, before that House. 
25 
30 
35 
40 
CHAPTER XI 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 45 
Voyeurism by 
physical spying. 
72. Whoever commits voyeurism by physically and directly observing or spying
on a person without the use of any apparatus or digital device shall—
(i) if the offence is committed by watching a private act, be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to one year, or with fine, or with both; or 50 

35 
5 
(ii) if the offence is committed by listening to a private conversation,
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term whic h
may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both; or
(iii) if the offence is committed by reading a letter or a document of
private conversation, be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine, 
or with both. 
10 
73. Whoever commits voyeurism of a private act by using a hidden or drone or
any other type of camera which works on visible light waves, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and also with fine which may extend to three la kh
rupees.
Voyeurism by 
hidden or 
drone or any 
other type of 
camera. 
15 
20 
25 
74. Whoever commits voyeurism of a private act by using a binocular for remote
viewing or by using special mirror shall—
(i) if the offence is committed by physical spying, be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both; or
(ii) if the offence is committed along with a camera, be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to four
years, and also with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “Special mirror” means a 
one-way mirror with other way transparent glass or a single visibility mirror, 
which is a type of glass that appears to be a mirror from one side and a 
transparent glass from the other side, and includes any o ther similar 
apparatus.  
Voyeurism by 
special 
glasses. 
21 of 2000. 
2
1 of 2000. 
30 
35 
40 
45 
75. Save as otherwise provided in section 43 of the Information Technology Act, 
2000, whoever commits voyeurism by hacking a digital device, juice
jacking, stealing data, retrieving deleted data or using any other cyber
techniques shall—
(i) if the offence is committed regarding a private act, be punished with
i
mprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less
than one year, but which may extend to five years, and also with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees.
(ii) if the offence is committed regarding a private conversation, in
audio, text, sign or digital code format, be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or
with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees, or with both.
(iii) if the offence is committed by capturing a private conversation, in
audiovisual format where facial identity of an interlocutor is disclosed,
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term whic h
m
ay extend to four years, or  with fine which may extend to four lakh
rupees, or with both.
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of this section, “Juice Jacking” means 
installing malware or accessing or copying sensitive data using a USB or 
other methods from a computer device attached to  a charging port equipped 
with a data connection. 
Explanation 2.— The terms used in this section but not defined, herein 
shall have the same meaning as assigned to them under the Information 
Technology Act, 2000. 
Voyeurism by 
hacking a 
digital device, 
juice jacking, 
stealing data, 
retrieving 
deleted data 
or other cyber 
techniques. 

36 
Voyeurism of 
private 
conversation by 
using 
eavesdropping 
device or 
audiovisual 
recording device. 
76. Whoever commits voyeurism of private conversation, in audio or audiovisual
format, by installing or using an eavesdropping device or audiovisual
recording device, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descriptio n
for a term which may extend to three years, and also with fine which may
extend to three lakh rupees. 5 
Voyeurism by use 
of mechanical or 
other 
electromagnetic 
waves. 
77. Whoever commits voyeurism of a private act by using an imaging or sensing
device that uses mechanical or electromagnetic waves other than cameras
mentioned in section 73, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or wit h
both. 10 
Voyeurism by 
influencing a 
person using 
narcotic drugs or 
other methods. 
78. Whoever commits voyeurism by administering narcotic drugs to another
person without their consent or by other methods, which results in the person
so influenced unconsciously or sub- consciously doing certain private act or
private conversation shall,—
(i) if the offence is committed by physically and live in- person
watching a private act, be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not be less than one year, but whic h
m
ay extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(ii) if the offence is committed by capturing a private act, be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be
less than two years, but which may extend to seven years, and also with
f
ine which may extend to seven lakh rupees.
(iii) if the offence is committed by physically and directly listening,
reading or sensing a private conversation, be punished wit h
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine, or with both;
(iv) if the offence is committed by capturing or accessing a private
conversation in audio, text, signs or digital codes format, be punishe d
w
ith imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, and also with fine which may extend  to three la kh
r
upees; and
(v) if the offence is committed by capturing a private conversation i n
a
udiovisual format where facial identity of an interlocutor is disclosed,
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term whic h
m
ay extend to four years, and also with fine which may extend to four
lakh rupees;
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the word ‘any other 
method’ includes the psychological act of influencing another person, which 
results in a change in the person’s ordinary state of consciousness, leading to 
an increased response to suggestions given by the perpetrator and the person 
so influenced does not know the nature and consequences of the act done 
under such influence. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Voyeurism by 
criminal force, 
during wrongful 
confinement or 
against trafficked 
human or bonded 
labour. 
79. Whoever commits voyeurism by criminal force, during wrongful
confinement or against trafficked human or bonded labour shall—
(i) if such offence is committed by physically and directly watching a
private act, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which shall not be less than one year, but which may extend to
five years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(ii) if such offence is committed by capturing a private act, be punishe
d
w
ith imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be
45 
50 

37 
 
 
5 
10 
15 
less than two years, but which may extend to seven years, and also with 
fine which may extend to seven lakh rupees; 
(iii) if such offence is committed by physically and live in -person 
listening, reading, sensing or accessing a private conversation, be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both; 
(iv) if such offence is committed by capturing or accessing a private 
conversation in audio, text, signs or digital codes format, be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to three years, and also with fine which may ex tend to three lakh 
rupees; and 
(v) if such offence is committed by capturing a private conversation in 
audiovisual format where facial identity of an interlocutor is disclosed, 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to four years, and also with fine which may extend to four 
lakh rupees. 
 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
80. Whoever commits voyeurism against a child, orphan, person with mental 
disability, blind person, foreign tourist, abandoned widow, pardanashin  
woman or person belonging to the third gender shall— 
(i) if the offence is committed by physically and live in-  person 
watching a private act, be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than one year, but which may extend to five 
years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
(ii) if the offence is committed by capturing a private act, be puni shed 
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two 
years, but which may extend to seven years, and also with fine which 
may extend to ten lakh rupees; 
(iii) if the offence is committed by physically and live in- person 
listening, reading or sensing a private conversation, be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one 
year, or with fine, or with both; 
(iv) if the offence is committed by capturing or accessing a private 
conversation in audio, te xt or signs format, be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three 
years, and also with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees; and 
(v) if the offence is committed by capturing a private conversation in 
audiovisual format where facial identity of an interlocutor is disclosed, 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to four years, and also with fine which may extend to four 
lakh rupees. 
 Voyeurism 
against a child, 
orphan, p erson 
with mental 
disability, 
blind person, 
foreign tourist, 
abandoned 
widow, 
pardanashin 
woman or 
person 
belonging to 
the third 
gender. 
 
45 
50 
81. (1) Whoever commits voyeurism against a third person and the voyeuristic 
material is recorded, captured, produced, procured, offered or disseminated 
with the help of a child, orphan, person with mental disability, blind person, 
or pardanashin woman shall— 
(i) if the offence is committed regarding a private act, be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less 
than one year, but which may extend to five years, and also with fine 
which may extend to three lakh rupees. 
(ii) if the offence is committed regarding a private conversation be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Voyeurism 
committed with 
the help of a 
child, orphan, 
person with 
mental 
disability, blind 
person or 
pardanashin 
woman. 

38 
 
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, 
or with both. 
(2) In cases under sub-section (1) the child, orphan, person with mental 
disability, blind person, or pardanashin woman shall not be punishable as 
an abettor.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Voyeurism of 
sensitive 
personal data. 
 
 82. Save as otherwise provided in the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023;  
or any other law for time being in force, whoever commits voyeurism of 
sensitive personal data shall— 
(1) if the offence is committed by a natural person, be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three 
years, and also with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees; and 
(2) if the offence is committed by a company, such company shall be 
punishable with a fine which may extend to twenty- five lakh rupees   
and every person who, at the time of commission of the offence, was in 
charge of and responsible to the company for the conduct of its business 
shall also be liable to be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be 
liable to fine: 
Provided that  no such person shall be liable to any punishment 
under this section if they prove that the offence was committed without 
their knowledge or that they exercised all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence. 
10 
15 
20 
22 of 2023.  
 
Voyeurism by 
repeatedly or 
constantly 
monitoring the 
location and 
movements of a 
person. 
 
 
 83. Save as otherwise provided in section 78 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
2023 sub-section (iv) of section 11 of the Protection of Children from Sexual 
Offences Act, 2012  or any other law for time being in force, whoever 
commits voyeurism by repeatedly or constantly monitoring the location and 
movements of a person shall— 
(1) if the offence is committed by a natural person, be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three 
years, and also with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees; and 
(2)if the offence is committed by a company, suc h company shall be 
punishable with a  fine which may extend to twenty five lakh rupees:  
and every person who, at the time of commission of the offence, was in 
charge of and responsible to the company for the conduct of its business 
shall also be liable to be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be 
liable to fine: 
Provided that no such person shall be liable to any punishment under 
this section if they prove that the offence was committed without their 
knowledge or that they exercised all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence. 
25 
30 
35 
40 
 
45 of 2023. 
 
32 of 2012. 
 
Dissemination 
of voyeuristic 
material. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 67, 67A and 67B of the 
Information Technology Act, 2000, whoever disseminates or causes to be 
disseminated any voyeuristic material in any electronic form shall— 
(i) if the information of a private act is disseminated, be punished with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year, 
but which may extend to five years, and also with fine which may 
extend to ten lakh rupees; 
(ii) if the information of a private conversation in audio, text or signs 
format is disseminated, be punished with imprisonment of either 
45 
50 
 
21 of 2000. 
 

39 
 
 
 
5 
10 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine 
which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both; 
(iii) if the information of a private conversation in audiovisual format is 
disseminated, where facial identity of an interlocutor is disclosed, be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, and also with fine which may extend to four lakh 
rupees; 
(iv) if sensitive personal data is disseminated be punished with fine 
which may be prescribed; and 
(v) if data of location and movements is disseminated, be punished with 
fine  as may be prescribed. 
 
45 of 2023. 
 
32 of 2012. 
21 of 2000. 
 
15 
20 
25 
30 
85. Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  this  Act  and  clause  (iii)  of 
sub-section (1) of section 75  of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, sub-
section (iii) of section 11 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences 
Act, 2012, sections 67, 67A and 67B of the Information Technology Act, 
2000 and any other law for time being in force; whoever— 
(1) shows on computer, television or smartphone or any other digital 
device, without transmitting, voyeuristic material of sexually explicit 
content to a child, orphan, person with mental disability or pardanashin 
woman, while in their presence, regardless of their consent, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to five years, and also with fine which may extend to five lakh 
rupees; and 
(2) transmits voyeuristic material of sexually explicit content to a child, 
orphan, person with mental disability or pardanashin woman, regardless 
of their consent, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to seven years, and also with fine which may extend 
to fifteen lakh rupees. 
Explanation.— For the pu rposes of this section, the term “Voyeuristic 
material of sexually explicit content” means any voyeuristic material of a 
private act having sexually explicit contains in image, audiovisual or video 
format. 
 Showing or 
transmitting 
voyeuristic 
material of 
sexually 
explicit content 
to a child, 
orphan, person 
with mental 
disability, 
pardanashin 
woman. 
 
 
 
 
35 
40 
86. Except as otherwise provided by section 114 of this Act, whoever discloses 
the identity of the victim under this Act, including his name, address, 
photograph, family details, educational institution, neighbourhood, business, 
profession, or any other particulars which may lead to the disclosure of 
identity, but does not disclose the voyeuristic material, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years 
or with fine or with both: 
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Special Court 
may permit such disclosure if, in its opinion, such disclosure is in the interest 
of the victim. 
 Prohibition of 
publication or 
making known 
any contents 
affecting the 
right to privacy 
of victim. 
 
45 
50 
87. (1) Whoever seeks, searches, browses, downloads or watches any voyeuristic 
material as the case may be shall— 
(i) if the voyeuristic material is of a private act, be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one 
year, or with fine, or with both; 
(ii) if the voyeuristic material is of a private conversation, be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine, or with both; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Seeking, 
searching, 
browsing, 
downloading, 
watching, 
listening, 
reading, 
sensing, storing 
and possessing 
of voyeuristic 
material. 

40 
 
(iii) if the voyeuristic material is of  a sensitive personal data, be 
punished with fine. 
(2) Whoever stores or possesses any voyeuristic material shall- 
(i) if the voyeuristic material is of a private act, be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three 
years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
(ii) if the voyeuristic material is of a private conversation, be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
six months, or with fine, or with both; and 
(iii) if the voyeuristic  material is of a sensitive personal data, be 
punished with fine. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
10 
Using voyeuristic 
material for 
pornographic or 
commercial 
purposes. 
 88. Whoever uses any voyeuristic material for pornographic or commercial 
purposes shall— 
(i) if the voyeuristic material is of a private act, be punished with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three 
years but may extend to ten years, and also with fine which may extend 
to twenty lakh rupees; and 
(ii) if the voyeuristic material is of a private conversation, be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with 
both. 
15 
20 
 
Using 
voyeuristic 
material, 
including a child, 
orphan, person 
with mental 
disability, blind 
person, foreign 
tourist, 
abandoned 
widow, 
pardanishan 
woman or person 
belonging to the 
third gender for 
pornographic or 
commercial 
purposes. 
 89. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, whoever uses any voyeuristic material which includes a child, orphan, 
person with mental disability, blind person, foreign tourist, abandoned 
widow, pardanishan woman or person belonging to the third gender for 
pornographic or commercial purposes shall— 
(i) if the voyeuristic material is of a private act, be punished with 
rigorous impri sonment for a term which shall not be less than three 
years but may extend to twelve years, and also with fine which may 
extend to twenty-five lakh rupees; and 
(ii) if the voyeuristic material is of a private conversation, be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with 
both. 
25 
30 
 
Creating or 
disseminating 
deepfake images, 
videos or audio 
of voyeuristic 
nature. 
 90. Save as otherwise provided in any other law for the time being in force, 
whoever creates or disseminates deepfake image, video, or audio of 
voyeuristic nature depicting a private act or a private conversation shall— 
(i) if the offence is committed by creating or disseminating a deepfake 
video, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to five years, and also with fine which may extend 
to five lakh rupees; 
(ii) if the offence is committed by creating or disseminating a deepfake 
image, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to three years, and with fine which may extend to 
three lakh rupees; and 
(iii) if the offence is committed by creating or disseminating deepfake 
audio, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to two 
lakh rupees, or with both. 
35 
 
40 
45 
 

41 
 
 
5 
91. Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any other law for the time being in 
force, whoever being a witness or a third party to the offence of rape or any 
other sexual offence, uses or disseminates any captured voyeuristic material 
of such offence against the rights and interests of the victim, shall be punished 
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three 
years, but which may extend to seven years, and also with fine which may 
extend to ten lakh rupees. 
 Using or 
disseminating 
voyeuristic 
material against 
rights and 
interests of 
victims in cases 
of sexual 
offences. 
 
10 
92. Whoever uses voyeuristic material to commit sextortion, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less 
than three years, but which may extend to seven years, and also with fine 
which may extend to ten lakh rupees. 
 Punishment 
for sextortion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 of 2016. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
93. (1) Save as otherwise provided in section 81 of this Act, where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a juvenile by using a smartphone; 
hidden, drone or security camera; location tracker, eavesdropping device, 
computer or any electronic device, spying software or deepfake software; the 
guardian of such juvenile or the owner, holder or licensee as the case may be 
of such equipment or software; shall also be deemed to be guilty of the  
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing in this sub- section shall render such guardian or 
owner liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the court shall presume 
that the use of the smartphone; hidden, drone or security camera; location 
tracker, eavesdropping device, computer or any electronic device, spying 
software or deepfake software by the juvenile was with the consent of the 
guardian of such juvenile or the owner, holder or licensee of the same, as the 
case may be. 
(2) In addition to the penalty under sub- section (1), such guardian or owner 
shall be punishable w ith imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
(3) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a juvenile, then 
such juvenile shall be punishable with such fines as provided in the Act while 
any custodial sentence may be modified as per the provisions of the Juvenile 
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,  2015. 
 Offences by 
juveniles. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  94. Whoever does anything with the intention to discriminate against a person by 
reason of them being a victim of voyeurism shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, 
or with fine, or with both. 
 Discriminating 
against victim 
of voyeurism. 
 40 
 
45 
95. Any establishment which has an obligation under this Act to obtain a valid 
licence from the licencing authority and carries on business without a valid 
licence, shall be punished with fine as may be prescribed: 
Provided that if any offence of voyeurism takes p lace in such 
establishment during the period when the establishment did not possess a 
valid licence, the establishment shall be punished with additional fine as may 
be prescribed, and the person in charge of such establishment who is in 
default shall be pu nished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to three years, or with fine or with both. 
 Punishment to 
establishments 
carrying on 
business 
without licence 
of Bureau. 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
96. Any establishment having an obligation under this Act to obtain a valid 
licence from the licencing authority under this Act, which uses as genuine a 
fake or forged copy of a licence and carries on business with such licence 
shall be punished with fine whic h may extend to five lakh rupees, and any 
 Punishment to 
establishments 
using fake or 
forged copy of 
licence. 
 

42 
 
person in charge of such establishment shall be liable to punishment as 
mentioned in Chapter XVIII of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
 
45 of 2023. 
Punishment to 
establishments for 
failing to exhibit 
licence on a 
visible area of 
their premises. 
 97. Any establishment which fails to comply with the duties laid down under this 
Act to exhibit the licence obtained from the licencing authority or the 
document under the proviso to section 41 relating to deemed grant of licence 
on a visible area of the premises of the establishment shall be punished with 
fine as may be prescribed. 
5 
 
Punishment to 
establishments that 
refuse to show 
their licence to 
certain officials. 
 98. Any establishment with an obligation under this Act to obtain a valid licence 
from the licencing authority which refuses to show the same to the officials 
mentioned in section 45, shall be punished with fine as may be prescribed. 10 
 
Punishment for 
using standard 
mark without 
bearing valid 
licence or 
registration or 
using deceptively 
similar mark. 
 99. Any establishment not bearing a valid licence granted or deemed granted; 
or any sensitive service provider not having valid registration under this Act, 
which makes use of the Standard Mark established under section 24 or a 
deceptively similar mark and contravenes provisions of sub -section (1) of 
section 25 shall be punished with fine as may be prescribed. 15 
 
Contempt of the 
lawful authority 
of public servants 
under this Act. 
 100. The provisions of Chapter XIII of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, save 
insofar as they are inconsistent with the express provisions of this Act, shall  
apply to this Act. 
 45 of 2023. 
 
Obstructing 
officials of 
Bureau or Police 
while discharging 
their duties. 
 101. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 132 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023, whoever deters or obstructs officials of the Bureau or the 
Police while discharging their duties under this Act, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
20 
 
45 of 2023. 
 
Punishment for 
false or malicious 
complaint or false 
information. 
 102. Whoever makes a false or malicious complaint or provides false information 
against any person or files a complaint in collusion with another person under 
the provisions of this Act, with the intention to humiliate, extort, threaten, 
pressurize or defame the person or avail benefits under this Act, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term  which may 
extend to two years or with fine or with both: 
Provided that and subject to presumption as to certain offences 
mentioned in  section 130 and presumption of culpable mantle state 
mentioned in section 131, a mere inability to substantiate a complaint or 
provide adequate proof or inability to prove the accusation beyond the 
reasonable doubt shall not attract action against the complainant or informer: 
Provided further that the malicious intent on part of the complainant or 
informant shall be e stablished after an inquiry conducted by the district 
bureau and approved by the state bureau, in accordance with the procedure 
as may be prescribed, before any action against complainant or informant. 
25 
30 
35 
 
Furnishing false 
information by 
establishments or 
sensitive service 
providers. 
 103. Any establishment or sensitive service provider that provides false 
information to any person or authority to avail any benefits under this Act 
shall be punished with fine as may be prescribed, and the p erson responsible 
for furnishing false information shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with 
both. 
40 
 
Punishment to 
intermediaries. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
104. (1) Any intermediary who fails to comply with the provisions of section 20 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees. 
(2) Any person in charge of the intermediary who acts in contravention of the 
provisions of section 20 shall be pun ishable with imprisonment for a term 
45  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
 
 
 
 
21 of 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
10 
15 
which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to ten lakh 
rupees, or with both. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 72A of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000, or any other law for the ti me being in force, any 
intermediary who, while providing services under the terms of lawful 
contract, has secured access to any voyeuristic material, with the intent to 
cause or knowing that he is likely to cause wrongful loss or wrongful gain, 
without the consent of the person concerned, or in breach of a lawful contract, 
discloses such material to any other person, shall be punished with fine which 
may extend to fifty lakh rupees. 
(4) Any person in charge of the intermediary who is in default of the 
provisions of sub -section (3), shall be punishable with other relevant 
provisions of this Act. 
(5) Any intermediary or person contravening provisions of section 21 shall 
be punishable as may be prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
20 
105. Whoever, having already been convicted by a Court in India for an offence 
punishable under this Act or by a foreign Court for any similar offence, with 
imprisonment of either description for a term of three years or upwards, is 
again convicted for any offence punishable u nder this Act with like 
imprisonment for the like term or a higher term, may be subject, for every 
such second or subsequent offence, to additional imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to five years, and may also be liable 
to additional fine. 
 Punishment to 
recidivists. 
 
 
45 of 2023. 
25 
106. Whoever abets any offence mentioned under this Act shall be liable to 
punishment as prescribed in Chapter IV of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
2023. 
 Abetment to 
commit 
voyeurism. 
 
 
30 
107. Whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable under this Act with 
imprisonment of either description for a term exceeding up to three years, or 
to cause such an offence to be committed, and in such attempt does any act 
towards the commission of the offence, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of any description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to 
one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence, or 
with fine, or with both. 
 Attempt to 
commit an 
offence 
punishable 
under this 
Act. 
 
35 
40 
45 
50 
108. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every 
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company 
as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that where a company has different branches or different units 
in any branch, the concerned Head or the person in- charge of such branch, 
unit nominated by the company as responsible for its activities shall be liable 
for contravention in respect of such branch or unit: 
(2) Nothing in sub -section (1) shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), where an offence under this 
Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has 
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any 
neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Offences by 
companies. 

44 
 
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly. 
(4) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a person, being 
a company, and the punishment for such offence is imprisonment and fine, 
then, without prejudice to sub-section (1) or sub-section (3), such company 
shall be punished with fine and every person, referred to in sub- section (1), 
or the director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company referred to 
in sub- section (3), shall be liable to be proc eeded against and punished in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
 Explanation.– For the purposes of this section— 
(a) “company” means a body corporate, and includes— 
(i) an unincorporated body; 
(ii) a Hindu undivided family; 
(iii) an establishment under this Act; 
(iv) a sensitive service provider company under this Act; 
(b) “director”, in relation to— 
(i) an unincorporated body, means a person in charge of the body; 
(ii) a Hindu undivided family, means the Karta of the family; 
(iii) a company, means a whole- time director, or where there is no 
such director, any other director or manager or officer, who is in 
charge of the affairs of the company; 
(iv) a firm, means a proprietor or partner in the firm; 
(v) a trust, means the managing trustee or secretary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
10 
15 
20 
Punishment for 
vexatious 
search. 
 109. The officers of the Bureaus or any other public servant, exercising powers 
under this Act, who knows that there are no reasonable grounds for so doing, 
without following the procedure established under law and without reasons 
recorded in writing— 
(a) searches, or causes to be searched any premises, record, register, 
document, article, smartphone or computer; or 
(b) seizes any record, register, document, article, smartphone or 
computer; or 
(c) detains or searches or arrests any person, shall, for every such 
offence, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to two years, or with fine or with both. 
25 
30 
 
Offences by 
public servants 
of Bureaus and 
police. 
 110. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, any public servant of the Bureaus and 
Police Department who commits the offence of voyeurism shall, in addition 
to the other punishments applicable under this Act, be punished with penalty 
as may be prescribed. 
35  
Exemptions and 
defences to 
offences 
mentioned in 
this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
111. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, whoever collects 
information by violating the privacy of others for the purpose of using such 
information in the court of law as evidence to prove the illegal act or 
omission; or for larger public interest; or for any other purposes as may be 
prescribed, he shall be exempted from the punishment mentioned under this 
Act: 
Provided that such person shall not disseminate or transmit the 
information or any part thereof to any person except the competent authority 
40 
45 
 

45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
10 
under this Act or any other law for the time being in force in order to lawfully 
deal with the collected information: 
Provided further that any person shall also be exempted if he 
disseminates such information to a third person other than the competent 
authority or the public at large, if  the competent authority is satisfied that 
such dissemination justifies the larger public interest or benefits  sovereignty 
and integrity of India, or the security, strategic, scientific or economic 
interests of the State,   or relation with foreign State, or prevention of an 
offence or illegality or for any other purposes, as may be prescribed. 
(2) Poor eyesight or hearing shall not be a defence for any offence under this 
Act. 
 
46 of 2023. 
15 
112. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, the offences under this Act for which the punishment is an 
imprisonment of either description for a term of three years and above shall 
be cognizable and non-bailable. 
 Offences to be 
cognizable and 
non-bailable. 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
20 
25 
30 
35 
113. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, any offence punishable under this Act whether committed by 
a company or any individual, either before or after the institution of any 
prosecution, may be compounded by— 
(a) the Bureaus, if any offence punishable with only fine, on the payment 
of such sum as may be prescribed, 
(b) the Special Court, if any offence for which the pun ishment is an 
imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding three years, 
on the payment of such sum as the Special Court may specify. 
(2) The Special Court may, in addition to such sum, require the offender to 
undertake a period of community service: 
Provided that community service shall be provided based on the 
suitability of the offender and for such time and in such manner as the Special 
Court thinks fit, under the supervision of the District Bureau. 
(3) When an offence has been compounded, the offender, if in custody, shall 
be discharged, and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in 
respect of the offence compounded. 
(4) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to an offence committed 
by a person for the second time or t hereafter within a period of five years 
from the date— 
(a) of commission of a similar offence which was earlier compounded; 
(b) of commission of a similar offence for which such person was earlier 
convicted. 
 Compounding 
of offences. 
 
 
 
40 
 CHAPTER XII 
INVESTIGATION INTO CASES UNDER THE ACT 
  
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
114. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, any person, who has apprehension that an offence under this 
Act is likely to be committed or has knowledge that such an offence has been 
committed against himself or any o ther person, shall provide such 
information to—  
(a) the District Bureau, or 
(b) the Local Police. 
(2) Every information received under sub-section (1) shall be— 
(a) ascribed an entry number and recorded in writing; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reporting of 
offences. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) read over to the informant; 
(c) entered in a book to be kept by the District Bureau and the Local 
Police; 
(d) taken by a woman officer only, if the informant is a woman or a 
child; and 
(e) taken, as far as practicable, by an officer belonging to the gender the 
informant is  comfortable with, if the informant belongs to the third 
gender. 
(3) Where any information under sub -section (1) is given by a child or 
pardanashin woman or a person with any temporary or permanent physical 
or mental disability or wherever deemed necessary , the same shall be 
recorded in a simple language so that the informant understands the contents 
being recorded and the information shall be recorded at the residence of the 
informant or a convenient place of choice of the informant. 
(4) In cases where the contents are being recorded in the language not 
understood by the child or pardanashin woman or person with any temporary 
or permanent physical or mental disability or wherever it is deemed 
necessary, a translator, interpreter or special educator, having such 
qualifications, experience and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, 
shall be provided by the District Bureau to such person if they fail to 
understand the same. 
(5) A copy of the information recorded under sub- section (2) shall be given 
forthwith, free of cost, to the informant, accused and victim. 
(6) The District Bureau or the Local Police, as the case may be, to whom the 
information regarding any offence under this Act is first received shall, 
without unnecessary delay but within a period of twenty -four hours, report 
the matter to the Special Court or where no Special Court has been 
designated, to the Court of Session, including the need of the victim for care 
and protection and steps taken in this regard. 
(7) For the purposes of sub- section (1), no person shall incur any liability, 
whether civil or criminal, for giving information in good faith. 
(8) If the District Bureau or the Local Police, as the case may be, denies to 
take cognizance of an offence or fails to give decision on the request  to take 
cognizance of the offence within twenty- four hours, the District Bureau or 
the Local Police, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have refused the 
request. 
(9) Any aggrieved person or any person or organization on behalf of the 
aggrieved person under sub -section (8), may prefer an appeal to the State 
Bureau and notwithstanding anything contained in section 210, and sub-
sections (3) and (4) of section 175 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 
2023, may file a complaint to the Special Court; t o order the District Bureau 
and local police to register the case. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
Preliminary 
inquiry and 
investigation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115. (1) Where the District Bureau first receives any information under sub -
section (1) of section 114, the Bureau may make a preliminary inquiry if 
required, and the officer of the District Bureau shall inform the officer in 
charge of the nearest Police Station under whose jurisdiction the offence is 
committed about the same and assist the complainant in filing a First 
Information Report under section 173 or section 174 of the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, as the case may be: 
Provided that in a case where the officer of the District Bureau takes suo 
moto cognizance of any offence under this Act, such officer shall file a First 
Information Report with the Local Police: 
45 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Provided further that in the above case, the officer of the Bureau who 
files the First Information Report shall not be the investigating officer for 
the same offence. 
(2) Where the officer in charge of the police station first receives such 
information, he shall immediately inform the District Bureau and then 
register the First Information Report under section 173 or section 174 of the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, as the case may be. 
(3) Any voyeuristic material in possession of the victim or accused, if any, 
shall be accessed only by the officials of the District Bureau. 
(4) Where the investigating officer of the District Bureau or the officer in 
charge o f the police station is satisfied that the victim against whom an 
offence has been committed is in need of care and protection, then, the officer 
shall, after recording the reasons in writing, make immediate arrangement to 
give the victim such care and pro tection including providing psychological 
counselling from expert psychologist, admitting the victim into a shelter 
home or to the nearest hospital within twenty-four hours of the report, as may 
be prescribed. 
(5) In cases where a woman or a child is the v ictim, any inquiry or 
investigation shall be conducted under the supervision of a woman officer 
only. 
(6) In cases where a person belonging to the third gender is the victim, any 
inquiry or investigation shall be conducted, as far as practicable, under the  
supervision of an officer belonging to the gender with which the person is 
comfortable, and all measures shall be taken to ensure that such person does 
not face any discrimination with respect to their gender. 
(7) All measures shall be taken to ensure that the right to privacy of the victim 
is not violated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
30 
35 
40 
116. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, no officer below the rank of inspector of the District Bureau 
may enter any place and search and arrest any person found therein who is 
reasonably suspected of having committed or of committing or of being about 
to commit any offence under this Act. 
(2) The provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 , shall, 
subject to the provisions of this section, apply, so far as may be, in relation to 
any entry, search or arrest, made under this section. 
(3) The State Government shall provide, for the detention of arrested persons 
in the territories under such Government, lock ups at every District Bureau 
constructed and regulated in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(4) The investigation officer of the District Bureau shall produce the arrested 
person before the Special Court after which the arrested person may be 
subjected to further custody or bail as per the provisions of section 187 of the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 
 Arrest and 
custody. 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
21 of 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
50 
117. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, the Information Technology Act, 2000  and in any other law 
for time being in force, the inquiry and investigation with respect to the 
offences under this Act shall be conducted by the District Bureau: 
Provided that in cases where any offence under this Act is committed in 
congruence with other offences mentioned in any other law for the time 
being in force, the part of the inquiry and investigation related to the 
offences under this Act shall be conducted by the District Bureau and the 
part of the inquiry and investigation related to other offences shall be 
conducted by the Local Police or other competent authority, as may be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedure for 
investigation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prescribed, as the case may be, under whose juris diction the offence is 
committed. 
(2) The investigation report, as prescribed under section 193 of the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, shall be filed by the investigating officer of 
the District Bureau, on completion of the investigation, to the Special Court 
or where no Special Court has been designated, to the Court of Session: 
Provided that in cases where any offence under this Act is committed in 
congruence with other offences mentioned in any other law for the time 
being in force, the officer  in charge of the local police station or other 
competent authority, as may be prescribed, shall file the investigation report 
with the assistance of the investigating officer of the District Bureau: 
Provided further that if any offence punishable under this Act with only 
fine, the investigation report, as prescribed under section 193 of the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, shall be filed by the 
investigating officer of the District Bureau, on completion of the 
investigation, to the State Bureau. 
(3) The investigation report shall be filed within ninety days from the date on 
which the information was first recorded by the District Bureau or the Local 
Police, whichever is the earlier. 
(4) The District Bureau, shall, while inquiring and investigating into any 
matter under this section, have the same powers as the Police under the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023  and other laws of the concerned 
State. 
(5) The powers to release the accused when evidence is deficient, under 
section 189 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 shall be vested 
with the District Bureau. 
(6) Any offences other than the offences mentioned under this Act, if 
committed during the inspection, inquiry or investigation process of the 
District Bureau against an employ ee of the Bureau, the employee may file a 
First Information Report with the Police Station under whose jurisdiction 
such offence is committed, and such a case shall be further investigated by an 
officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of the Police. 
(7) In certain cases, whenever deemed necessary, the investigation may be 
handed over, and the filing of the investigation report of the offences under 
this Act may be carried out by any other competent authority, as may be 
prescribed, on special ord er by the appropriate Government or the court of 
competent jurisdiction after recording its reasons in writing. 
(8) In cases of offences under this Act by Public Servants of Bureaus and 
Police department, the investigation shall be carried out in the manner as may 
be prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
Search and 
seizure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118. (1) For the purpose of conducting an investigation under this Act, the 
Superintendent of the District Bureau or any other officer authorised by him 
in this behalf may, if he has any reason to believe that any person has 
committed any offence under this Act, shall— 
(a) enter at any reasonable time into any such premises and search for 
any computer, smartphone; hidden, drone or security camera; location 
tracker, eavesdropping device, any electronic device, spying or 
deepfake software; document, record or article or any other form of 
evidence and seize such items; 
(b) make a note or an inventory of such record or article; or 
45 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
5 
(c) require any person to produce any item mentioned in sub -section 
(a). 
(2) Any public servant while conducting a search, seizure or investi gation 
under this Act, shall not violate the privacy of the users or consumers, if any, 
present in the premises under search. 
(3) The provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, relating 
to search and seizure shall apply, as far as may be, for search and seizure 
under this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
119. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, 
(i)  No person shall unlock any seized computer or access its data except 
with prior permission of the Special Court.  
(ii) The Special Court may, at its discretion, grant permission to the 
officers of the District Bureau to access the data of the computer: 
Provided that a special software to monitor the activities performed shall 
be installed on the seized computer and the computer on which the data is 
to be copied or cloned, if any, in the presence of the Special Court or any 
judicial magistrate or two technically competent witnesses and the record of 
the chain of custody shall be maintained:  
Provided further that the hash value of the seized computer shall be 
generated after installation of the special software, a report of the same 
forwarded to the Special Court and a copy of the same given to the accused 
or owner of the seized computer, as the case may be. 
Explanation.— 
“Special software” shall mean software developed, owned and 
controlled by the Government to record the activities on a seized 
computer and generate the report of the activity log of the same. 
(iii) The investigating officer shall, after completion of the search of the 
seized computer, submit the report of the activity log generated through the 
special software, report of hash value and report of chain of custody to the 
Special Court and the State Bureau and a copy of the same shall be provided 
to the accused or the owner of the computer, as the case may be. 
(iv) The State Bureau shall, during investigation, monitor the activities, hash 
value and chain of custody of the seized computer and the compute r on 
which the data is to be copied or cloned, if any, as the case may be, using 
the installed special software and report to the Special Court any misconduct 
on the part of the officers and employees. 
(v) The investigating officer shall, before returning the seized computer to 
the accused or owner, as the case may be, uninstall the special software in 
the presence of the Special Court or any judicial magistrate or two 
technically competent witnesses: 
Provided that the investigating officer shall generate t he report of hash 
value, report of activity log and report of chain of custody before handing 
over the possession of the computer to the accused or owner of the computer 
and the same shall be forwarded to the Special Court, S tate Bureau and 
accused or owner of the computer, as the case may be. 
(vi) It shall be the duty of the National Bureau to ensure that the special 
software and the data collected therefrom is secure at all times by using such 
means as maybe prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedure for 
accessing 
computer data 
during 
investigation. 

50 
 
(vii) Where any person is released without trial or discharged or acquitted 
by the court, after exhausting all legal remedies, the data from the computer 
copied or cloned shall, unless the Special Court, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing otherwise directs, be destroyed from records. 
(viii) Any person who does not follow the prescribed procedure under this 
Act for the seizure or search of a computer shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or both. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Procedure for 
dealing with 
voyeuristic 
material. 
 120. (1) Any voyeuristic material collected during the course of the investigation, 
if any, shall be sealed by the District Bureau after the completion of the 
investigation and shall be made accessible only to the Special Court. 
(2) Any public servant handling the voyeuristic material shall ensure that no 
such material is disseminated by any means at his instance to any person apart 
from those persons involved in the course of the investigation or trial. 
(3) The Special Court shall ensure that the identity of the victim is not 
disclosed at any time during the course of investigation or trial: 
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Special Court 
may permit such disclosure if, in its opinion, such disclosure is in the interest 
of the victim or society. 
Explanation.— 
For the purposes of this sub- section, the “identity of the victim” shall 
mean facial identity and shall also include the victim’s name, address, 
photograph, family details, educatio nal institution, relatives, 
neighbourhood, workplace, business, profession or any other 
information by which the identity of the victim may be revealed. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 72 of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000, any public servant, who fails to comply with the duty 
mentioned under sub -section (2) shall, in addition to the other punishments 
applicable under this Act, be punished with penalty as may be prescribed. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 of 2000. 
Obligation on 
public servant 
to maintain 
confidentiality. 
 121. (1) Every public servant, on receipt of any information by any means related 
to voyeurism which requires immediate search and seizure, shall maintain to 
the extent possible the confidentiality of any such information received which 
if disclosed may hamper any work of the District Bureau, until the completion 
of such work. 
(2) Any public servant who discloses such confidential information shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or both. 
30 
 
 
35 
 
Obligation on 
employees or 
personnel of 
establishment or 
sensitive service 
provider to 
report cases. 
 122. Any employee or personnel of an establishment or sensitive service provider, 
irrespective of the number of persons employed therein, shall, at their 
workplace on coming across, any incidence of offence of voyeurism, or any 
voyeuristic material, or any software, gadget or object which can be used to 
commit voyeuris m; provide such information to the District Bureau or the 
Local Police. 
40 
 
Punishment for 
failure to report 
or record a case. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
123. (1) Any person who fails to perform the duty under section 122  or who fails 
to record the offence under sub- section (2) of section 114 shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six 
months or with fine or with both. 
(2) Any person, being in charge of any establishment or sensitive service 
provider, by whatever name called, who fails to perform the duty under 
section 122 against a subordinate under his control, shall be punished with 
45 
 
50 
 

51 
 
 
 
5 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, 
or with fine, or with both. 
(3) Where an establishment or sensitive service provider commits an offence 
under section 122, every person who was in charge of, and was responsible 
to report or record a case under section 122, the establishment or sensitive 
service provider for the conduct of its business, as well as the establis hment 
or sensitive service provider, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and 
shall be liable to punishment in accordance with sub-sections (1) and (2). 
 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
124. (1) No person shall make any report or present comments on the accused or 
the victim without having complete and authentic information about the same 
to any form of media or studio or photographic facilities which may have the 
effect of lowering the reputation or infringing upon the privacy of the victim 
or accused.  
      Provided that no report or comment shall label or represent the accused 
person as a voyeur unless the accused person is convicted for the offence of 
voyeurism under this Act. 
(2) No reports in any media shall disclose the identity of the victim, 
including his name, address, photograph, family details, educational 
institution, neighbourhood, business, profession or any other particulars 
which may lead to the disclosure of identity: 
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Special Court, 
may permit such disclosure if, in its opinion, such disclosure is in the interest 
of the victim. 
(3) The publisher or owner of the media or studio or photographic facilities, 
by whatever name called, shall be jointly and severally liable for the acts and 
omissions of its employees. 
(4) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-  section (1) or sub-
section (2) shall be liable to be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may 
extend to one year or with fine or with both. 
 Procedure for 
media. 
  125. All officers of Police and other Government departments shall be required to 
assist the officers of the National, State and District Bureaus in the execution 
of this Act. 
 Other officers 
required to 
assist Bureau 
officers. 
  
35 
 CHAPTER XIII 
PROCEDURE FOR RECORDING OF STATEMENT OF THE VICTIM 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
40 
45 
50 
126. (1) The statement of the victim of voyeurism of a private act shall be recorded 
at the residence of the victim or at the place where he usually resides or the 
place where the offence was committed or was likely to be committed or in a 
special room in the office of the District Bureau specified for this purpose or 
at the place of his choice by an officer of the District Bureau, not below the 
rank of Inspector and as far as practicable by a woman officer in cases where 
the victim is a woman or a child and by an officer belonging to the gender the 
victim is comfortable with if the victim is a person belonging to the third 
gender. 
(2) The officer, while recording the statement of the victim of voyeurism of 
a private act, shall not be in uniform if the statement is being recorded outside 
the office of the Bureau, but shall carry proof of his official identity and show 
it to the victim before recording the statement. 
(3) The statements of a victim other than a victim of voyeurism of a private 
act shall be recorded as per the provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recording of 
statement of 
victim by 
District 
Bureau or 
police. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 
(4) The officer making the investigation shall, while examining the victim, 
ensure that at no point in time, the victim comes in contact in any way with 
the accused. 
(5) No victim shall be  detained in the office of the Bureau or Police Station 
in the night for any reason, nor shall the victim be subject to unnecessary 
restraint at any point in time. 
(6) The officer shall ensure that the identity of the victim is protected from 
the public media unless otherwise directed by the Special Court in the interest 
of the victim. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Recording of 
statement of 
victim by 
magistrate. 
 
 127. (1) If the statement of the victim is being recorded under section 183 of the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, the Magistrate recording such 
statement shall, notwithstanding anything contained therein, record the 
statement as spoken by the victim: 
Provided that the provisions contained in the first proviso to sub- section 
(1) of section 183 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 shall, so 
far as it permits the presence of the advocate of the accused shall not apply in 
the case of voyeurism of a private act, unless the Magistrate consents to the 
same. 
(2) The Magistrate shall provide to the victim or his representative a copy of 
the document specified under section 230 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, upon the final report being filed by the officer of the bureau or 
police as the case may be, under section 193 of that Sanhita: 
Provided that in cases where the victim is a minor or a person with such 
a disability which renders the person unable to make legally binding 
decisions, or where the Court deems fit, a copy of the same shall be provided 
to the parent or guardian. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 366 of the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, the recording of statements under this Act 
shall be conducted in camera. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained under section 183 of the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, in cases where the victim is a woman or a 
minor, the statement shall be recorded, as far as practicable, by a woman 
magistrate or a magistrate belonging to the gender the victim is comfortable 
with if the victim is a person belonging to the third gender. 
10 
 
15 
20 
25 
30 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
Additional 
provisions 
regarding 
statement to be 
recorded. 
 
 128. (1) The Magistrate or the officer, as the case may be, shall record the 
statement as spoken by the victim in the presence of any person in whom the 
victim has trust or confidence. 
(2) Wherever necessary, the Magistrate or the officer, as the case may be, 
may take the assistance of a translator or an interpreter, having such 
qualifications, experience and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, 
while recording the statement of the victim. 
(3) The Magistrate or the officer, as the case may be, may, in the case of a 
victim having a mental or physical disability, seek the assistance of a special 
educator or any person familiar with the manner of communication of the 
victim or an expert in that field, having such qualifications, experience and 
on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, to record the statement of the 
victim. 
(4) Wherever possible, the Magistrate or the officer, as the case may be, shall 
ensure that the statement of the victim is also recorded by audio -video 
electronic means. 
35 
 
40 
45 
50 
 

53 
 
   CHAPTER XIV 
SPECIAL COURTS 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
15 
129. (1) For the purposes of providing a speedy trial, the State Government shall 
in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, designate for each district, a Court of Session to be a Special 
Court, or any other Court as it may deem fit, to try the cases under this Act: 
Provided that if a Court of Session is notified as a Special Court 
designated for similar purposes under any other law for the time being in 
force, such a court shall be deemed a Special Court under this section.  
(2) While trying an offence under this Act , a Special Court shall also try an 
offence other than the offences under this Act, with which the accused may, 
under the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, be charged at the same 
trial. 
(3) The Special Court constituted under this Act, notwithstand ing anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, shall have jurisdiction 
to try offences under that Act in so far as it relates to definition of voyeurism 
under this Act. 
 Designation 
of Special 
Courts. 
 
20 
130. Where a person is prosecuted for committing or abetting or attempting to 
commit any offence under this Act regarding a private act, the Special Court 
shall presume that such person has committed or abetted or attempted to 
commit the offence, as the case may be, unless the contrary is proved. 
 Presumption 
as to certain 
offences. 
 
25 
30 
131. (1) In any prosecution for any offence under this Act which requires a 
culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the Special Court shall 
presume the existence of such mental state, but it shall be a defence for the 
accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental state with respect to the 
act charged as an offence in that prosecution. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved only when the 
Special Court believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt and not merely 
when its existence is established by a preponderance of probability. 
Explanation.— For the purpose of thi s section, “culpable mental state” 
includes intention, motive, knowledge of a fact and the belief in, or reason to 
believe, a fact. 
 Presumption 
of culpable 
mental state. 
 
46 of 2023. 
35 
132. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, including the provisions as to bail and 
bonds, shall apply to the proceedings before a Special Court, and for the 
purposes of the said provisions, the Special Court shall be deemed to be a 
court of Sessions and the person conducting a prosecution before a Special 
Court, shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor. 
 Application of 
the Bharatiya 
Nagarik 
Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 to 
proceedings 
before Special 
Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
40 
 
45 
133. (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint a Special Public Prosecutor for every Special Court for conducting 
certain cases under the provisions of this Act. 
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor 
under sub-section (1) only if he had been in practice for not less than seven 
years as an advocate. 
(3) Every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this section 
shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause (v) of 
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 
and provisions of that Sanhita shall have effect accordingly. 
 Special Public 
Prosecutors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

54 
 
   CHAPTER XV 
PROCEDURE AND POWER OF SPECIAL COURTS AND RECORDING OF 
EVIDENCE 
  
 
 
 
Procedure and 
powers of 
Special Court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
134. (1) A Special Court shall take cognizance of any offence, without the accused 
being committed to it for trial, upon receiving a complaint of facts which 
constitute such offence, or upon a police report or a report by the District 
Bureau or a private complaint by an aggrieved person, of such facts and shall 
follow the procedure prescribed by the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 
2023 for the trial of warrant cases by Magistrates. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 230 and 231 of the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 , the Special Court in its discretion 
shall, either order to supply a copy of the voyeuristic material to the accused 
by imposing conditions at the initial stage of the trial; or only allow to inspect 
it personally or through a legal representative or to both in the court whenever 
deemed necessary, considering the nature of the case, after recording its 
reasons in writing, to ensure the privacy of the victim. 
(3) The Special Public Prosecutor or the Public Prosecutor, or as the case may 
be, the counsel appearing for the accused shall, while recording the 
examination-in-chief, cross -examination or re -examination of the victim, 
communicate the questions to be put to the victim to the Special Court which 
shall, in turn, put those questions to the victim in cases where the victim is a 
child, orphan, blind person, person with mental disability, foreign tourist, 
pardanashin woman or person belonging to the third gender. 
(4) The Special Court may, if it considers necessary, permit frequent breaks 
for the victim during the trial. 
(5) The Special Court shall create a victim -friendly atmosphere by allowing 
a family member, guardian, friend or relative in whom the victim has trust or 
confidence to be present in the court. 
(6) The Special Court shall ensure that the victim is not called repeatedly to 
testify in the court. 
(7) The Special Court shall not permit aggressive questioning or character 
assassination of the victim and ensure that the dignity of the victim is 
maintained at all times during the trial. 
(8) Subject to provisions of section 58, in appropriate cases, the Special Court 
may, in addition to the punishment, direct payment of such damages, as may 
be prescribed, to the victim for any physical or mental trauma caused to him 
or for immediate rehabilitation of such victim. 
(9) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Special Court shall, for the purpose 
of the trial of any offence under this Act, have all the powers of a Court of 
Session and shall try such offence as if it were a Court of Session, and as far 
as may be, in accordance with the procedure specified in the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 for trial before a Court of Session. 
(10) Whenever two or more persons are prosecuted for an offence under this 
Act, the Special Court may, at any stage of the investigation or inquiry into 
or the trial of the offence, with a view to obtaining the evidence of any person 
supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to an 
offence, tender a pardon to such person on condition of his making a full and 
true disclosure of the whole circumstances withi n his knowledge relating to 
the offence and every other person concerned, whether as principal or abettor, 
in the commission thereof and any pardon so tendered shall, for the purposes 
of sub-sections (1) to (5) of section 345 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Surak sha 
Sanhita, 2023, be deemed to have been tendered under section 344 of that  
Sanhita. 
5 
 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 

55 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
10 
15 
20 
 
 
 
(11) Save as provided in sub-sections (1) or sub-section (2), the provisions of 
the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, shall, so far as they are not 
inconsistent with this Act, apply to the proceedings before the Special Court. 
(12) For the purpose of this Act, all the powers of the magistrate under the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, shall be vested with the Special 
Court. In particular and without preju dice to the generality of the other 
provisions contained in this chapter, the provisions of section 58, sub-section 
(3) and (4) of section 175, section 183, section 187, section 210, section 227, 
section 365 and 521 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhit a, 2023, shall, 
so far as may be, apply to the proceedings before the Special Court, and for 
the purposes of the said provisions, a judge of the Special Court shall be 
deemed to be a Magistrate. 
(13) The Special Court may pass upon any person convicted by it any 
sentence authorised by law for the punishment of the offence of which such 
person is convicted. 
(14) Where any person has been convicted for an offence punishable under 
this Act with imprisonment of either description for a period of one year and 
above, the Special Court shall order mandatory rehabilitation and counselling 
for the convicted person for such period as it deems fit. 
(15) The Special Court may, after taking into consideration the circumstances 
of the case, in its discretion, order that t he directions, orders and judgments 
in cases under this Act shall be published on the Court or Bureau website or 
Law Reporters only after concealing the name of the victim or any other 
person. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
30 
35 
135. (1) The evidence of the victim shall be recorded within a period of thirty days 
of the Special Court taking cognizance of the offence, and reasons for delay, 
if any, shall be recorded by the Special Court. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharati ya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, the trial of an offence by the Special Court shall be held, as far 
as practicable, on day-to- day basis and an endeavour shall be made to ensure 
that the said trial is concluded within a period as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Special Court shall ensure that the victim of voyeurism of sexual 
nature is not exposed in any way to the accused at the time of recording of 
the evidence, while at the same time ensuring that the accused is in a position 
to hear the statement of the victim and communicate with his advocate. 
(4) For the purposes of sub- section (3), the Special Court may record the 
statement of a victim through video conferencing or by utilising single 
visibility mirrors or curtains or any other device. 
 Period for 
recording of 
evidence of 
victim and 
disposal of 
case. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
40 
 
45 
136. The Special Court shall, on application by either party, try cases in camera 
and conduct the trial and pass the judgment in the presence of any person in 
whom the victim has trust or confidence: 
Provided that where the Special Court is of the opinion that the victim 
needs to be examined at a place other than the court, it shall proceed to issue 
a commission according to the provisions of section 319 of the Bhara tiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 
 Trials to be 
conducted in 
camera. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
137. (1) Wherever necessary, the Court shall take the assistance of a translator or 
interpreter having such qualifications, experience and on payment of such 
fees as may be prescribed while recording the evidence of the victim. 
(2) If a victim has a mental or physical disability, the Special Court shall take 
the assistance of a special educator or any person familiar with the manner of 
communication of the victim or an expert in that field, having such 
 Assistance of 
interpreter or 
expert while 
recording 
evidence of 
victim. 

56 
 
qualifications, experience and on payment of such fees as may b e prescribed 
to record the evidence of the victim. 
Guidelines to 
rehabilitate and 
assist the 
victims by 
experts. 
 138. Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the National Bureau shall 
prepare guidelines for the inclusion of accredited NGOs, professionals and 
experts or persons with knowledge of privacy laws, cyber security, data 
protection, psychology, social work, physical health, mental health, and 
human development to be associated with the pre-trial and trial stage to assist 
and rehabilitate the victims. 
5 
 
Power of 
Special Court to 
order 
destruction of 
voyeuristic 
material. 
 139. The Special Court may order for destruction of voyeuristic material or any 
copies of it as the case may be, in the custody of the Court or that are in the 
possession or power of the accused or convicted person, Bureaus, 
Intermediary or any other person. 
10 
 
   CHAPTER XVI 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO CENTRAL AND STATE GOVERNMENTS 
  
Special efforts 
by  appropriate 
Government. 
 140. The  appropriate Government shall endeavor to— 
(i) develop such mechanisms and artificial intelligence and take all 
necessary measures at regular intervals to permanently eliminate any 
voyeuristic material which may be available on any digital platform, 
(ii) collaborate with other countries and sign treaties to eliminate voyeuristic 
and non-consensual data from all international digital platforms, 
(iii) create a secure online portal for the forwarding, by any person, of 
voyeuristic material in order to obtain the unique digital code of the material 
whereby it can be used in the investigation to stop the dissemination of such 
material using reverse image or video search and linking them to Anti-virus 
and Software companies for removal of such material from any computer 
which uses such Anti-virus and other software or other means: 
Provided that notwithstanding anything inconsistent contained in this 
Act, forwarding any such information to such portal shall not be an offence 
under this Act. 
15 
 
20 
25 
 
Provision for 
comprehensive 
sex education in 
schools and 
colleges. 
 141. The Central, State, and Local Governments shall endeavour to incorporate 
comprehensive sexuality education which will also include information about 
Anti voyeurism and Privacy, in the curriculum at school and college level. 
30  
Public 
awareness about 
the Act. 
 
 
142. (1) The appropriate Government shall take all measures to ensure that— 
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through media, 
including the television, radio and the print media, at regular intervals in 
order to generate public awareness of the provisions of this Act, 
especially among children, orphans, pardanashin women, persons with 
disabilities, foreign tourists and persons belonging to the third gender. 
(b) the officers of the appropriate  Government, and other concerned 
persons (including the police officers) are imparted periodic training on 
the matters relating to the implementation of the provisions of the Act. 
(2) Every Police Station shall set up a notice board containing helpful 
information for the victim and the grievance redressal mechanism available 
under this Act along with the address of the nearest District Bureau and its 
contact information in English and the local language. 
(3) The appropriate Government may take any other mea sures, as may be 
prescribed, for the purposes of this section. 
35 
40 
45 
 

57 
 
 
 
 
10 of 1994. 
 
 
15 of 1993. 
 
 
 
40 of 2019. 
 
 
 
4 of 2006. 
 
 
11 of 2016. 
 
 
 
5 
 
10 
15 
20 
143. (1) The National Human Rights Commission constituted under section 3, or 
as the case may be, the State Human Rights Commission constituted under 
section 21, of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993; the National 
Commission for Women constituted under secti on 3 of the National 
Commission for Women Act, 1990 and the respective State Commissions for 
Women constituted under the respective State laws; the National Council for 
Transgender Persons constituted under section 16 of the Transgender Persons 
(Protection of Rights) Act, 2019; the National Commission for Protection of 
Child Rights constituted under section 3, or as the case may be, the State 
Commission for Protection of Child Rights constituted under section 17 of 
the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 and the Bureau of 
Indian Standards constituted under section 3 of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 2016 shall, in addition to the functions assigned to them under 
their respective Acts, also monitor the implementation of the provisions of  
this Act without undue interference in the regular activities of the authorities 
constituted under this Act or the quasi -judicial freedom of the National and 
State Bureaus under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 
(2) The Commissions referred to in sub-section (1) shall, while inquiring into 
any matter relating to the implementation of this Act, have the same powers 
as are vested in them under their respective Acts. 
(3) The Commissions referred to in sub- section (1) shall also include their 
activities under this section in their annual reports. 
 Monitoring of 
implementation 
of this Act. 
 
25 
144. The Central and State Governments may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament or the State Legislature, as the case may be, by law in this 
behalf, make to the Bureaus and accredited NGOs under this Act grants 
of such sums of money as that Government may think fit for being 
utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
 Grants by 
Central and  
appropriate 
Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 of 1999. 
30 
 
35 
40 
45 
50 
145. (1) The appropriate Government may, on the recommendations of the 
National and State Bureau, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Central Government may, in consultation with the National Burea u 
and the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
established under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority Act, 1999, make rules for introducing privacy 
insurance and cyber security insurance for establishments and sensitive 
service providers in order to compensate any loss incurred to their users. 
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the qualifications and experience of, and the fees payable to, a 
translator, an interpreter, a special educator or any person familiar with 
the manner of communication of the witness or an expert in that field, 
under sub-section (4) of section 114; sub -section (2) of section 128 and 
section 137; 
(b) care and protection and emergency medical treatment of the victim 
under sub-section (4) of section 115; 
(c) the manner of periodic monitoring of the provisions of the Act under 
sub-section (1) of section 143 and sub-section (3) of section 155; 
(d) the uniform, badges of ranks, medals, etc. to be used by the officials 
and employees of the Bureaus; and  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to 
make rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

58 
 
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(4) Every rule made under this sect ion, in case of Central Government shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament 
and in case of State Government, before each State Legislature while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comp rised in one 
session or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
10 
Power to amend 
the First 
Schedule. 
 146. (1) The appropriate Government may, if it is of opinion that it is expedient or 
necessary in the public interest so to do, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, add to the First Schedule any establishment to which the licence 
provisions under this Act shal l apply, and on any such notification being 
issued, the First Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accordingly. 
(2) Every notification issued under sub- section (1) shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament or the State 
Legislature, as the case may be. 
15 
20 
 
   CHAPTER XVII 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
  
General 
provisions 
relating to 
security 
cameras and 
CCTVs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 147. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person shall have the right to 
purchase, install and use security cameras or CCTVs with or without a 
microphone or similar devices, by whatever name called, in good faith and 
without any malafide intention for the purposes of security, larger public 
interest or any other lawful purpose. 
(2) Every person who installs a camera shall ensure that any cameras or 
CCTVs erected with or without microphones are only capturing public areas 
and that a display board warning about the presence of the camera and 
microphone if any, shall also erected in its proximity: 
Provided that and subject to section 111, no such obligation shall lie on 
persons who secretly use such cameras for collecting evidence, preventing 
any crime, proving any illegal act, for any investigation, etc. and where such 
obligation would adversely impact the purpose for which the cameras are 
used, in the manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The information on the display board mentioned in sub -section (2) shall 
be written in the local and English language and have a camera sign that shall 
be clearly visible to ordinary persons. 
(4) The privacy of the data generated by the software linked to the cameras 
and processed remotely by the third- party sensitive service pr oviders, shall 
be dealt in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Digital Personal 
Data Protection Act, 2023 and the rules and regulations made thereunder. 
(5) The District Bureau under this Act, shall have the power to verify 
compliance with t his section and take necessary action in case of 
contravention, in the manner as may be prescribed. 
25 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 of 2023. 
Provisions 
relating to 
privacy during 
the use of 
vehicles. 
 
 
 
 
 
148. (1) Subject to provisions of this Act, every owner of a vehicle shall have the 
right to purchase, install in their own vehicle and thereby use a location 
tracker device, security camera and audio recording device by whatever name 
called; in good faith and wit hout malafide intention for the purpose of 50 
 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 of 1988. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
10 
15 
20 
security, anti-theft, ease of journey and transportation, recording evidence of 
road accidents or any other lawful purpose: 
Provided that a warning message, warning light, indicator, sign or 
symbol, in the prescribed manner, informing about the presence of such 
device shall be displayed inside or on the vehicle, as the case may be. 
(2) In case of public transport vehicles, no device mentioned in sub- section 
(1) shall be installed in the privacy of any passenger. 
(3) The vehicle manufacturers may provide in -built facilities for the 
indicators or warning lights, as mentioned in the proviso to sub- section (1), 
to their vehicles. 
(4) The privacy of the data generated by the software linked to the vehicle 
and processed remotely by the third -party sensitive service providers, shall 
be dealt in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Digital Personal 
Data Protection Act, 2023 and the rules and regulations made thereunder. 
(5) The District Bureau under this  Act shall have the power to verify 
compliance with this section and take necessary action in case of 
contravention, in the manner as may be prescribed. 
(6) The penalty for any contraventions of this section shall be in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section and  section 48, the words 
“vehicle”, “owner” and “manufacturer” shall have the same meaning as 
ascribed to them in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
30 
149. Any person or a public servant who has made a disclosure in good faith 
regarding offences under this Act shall not be victimised by the initiation of 
any proceedings or otherwise merely on the ground that such person or a 
public servant had made a disclosure o r rendered assistance in inquiry or 
investigation under this Act and shall be given adequate protection by the 
Central or State Government, as the case may be, and may be rewarded by 
the Bureaus under this Act, in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the appropriate Government shall ensure that every 
disclosure shall be made in good faith and the person making the disclosure 
shall make a personal declaration stating that he reasonably believes that the 
information disclosed by him and allegation contained therein is 
substantially true. 
 Protection and 
rewards to 
whistleblowers. 
 35 150. The Bureaus and Special Court shall, in all cases where they have passed any 
order under this Act, order that a copy of such order shall be given free of 
cost to the victims, parties to the case, applicants or appellants, as the case 
may be. 
 Bureau and 
Court to give 
copies of order 
free of cost. 
 
40 
151. The Bureaus under this Act shall set up a round the clock quick response 
system of telephone numbers and email addresses operated manually to 
expeditiously attend and reply to complaints and queries. 
 Quick response 
system. 
 
45 
152. It shall be the duty of every intermediary, including anti -virus and operating 
system developers and service providers, and other software developers and 
providers as may be prescribed, to develop and adopt to the extent possible 
such mechanisms, artificial intelligence and other systems which prevent the 
dissemination of any voyeuristic material. 
 Obligation on 
intermediarie, 
including anti -
virus service 
providers, etc. 
 
50 
153. (1) The appropriate shall endeavour to promote films, literature, drama, art, 
streaming media and other digital content, which in larger public interest, 
generate awareness about right to privacy by providing grants, subsidies and 
other benefits to such production. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provisions for 
films, literature, 
drama, art, 
streaming 
media and other 
digital content. 

60 
 
(2) No producer or publisher of any films, literature, drama, art, streaming 
media and other digital content shall produce or publish any film or digital 
content which includes any dramatic scene or message that encourages or 
glorifies voyeurism. 
(3) The National Bureau shall, by itself or on the recommendation of the State 
Bureau, direct the appropriate governmental authority to censor the content 
and take appropriate action against the producer or publisher of such content 
in such case of contravention of sub-section (2). 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
 154. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or 
any rule made thereunder. 
10 
 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
 155. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any 
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have an overriding effect on 
the provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency. 15 
 
Monitoring and 
reporting. 
 156. (1) The National or State Bureau, as the case may be, shall, as soon as 
practicable after the end of each calendar year, prepare a report on the 
progress of implementation of the provisions of this Act during that year and 
forward a copy thereof to the appropriate Government. 
(2) Each District Bureau shall, in relation to the establishments and sensitive 
services providers within their jurisdiction, collect and provide such 
information to the State Bureau, as the case may be, as is required to enable 
the State Bureau to prepare the report under this section. 
(3) Each report shall state, in respect of the year to which the report relates, 
all such information as may be prescribed. 
(4) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case shall be, 
may, as soon as practicable after the end of each calendar year, cause a copy 
of the report of the National or State Bureau, as the case may be, referred to 
in sub-section (1) to be laid before each House of Parliament or, as the case 
may be, before each House of the State Legislature, where there are two 
Houses, and where there is one House of the State Legislature before that 
House. 
20 
25 
30 
 
Budget.  157. The National, State and District Bureaus shall prepare, in such form and at 
such time in each financial year as may be prescribed, its budget for the next 
financial year and the revised estimates for the current year, showing the 
estimated receipts and expenditure of the Bureaus and forward the same to 
the Central or State Governments, as the case may be. 
35 
 
Accounts and 
audit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
158. (1) The Bureaus under this Act shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed by the National Bureau in consultation with 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Bureaus shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and 
any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by 
the Bureaus to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any other person 
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Bureaus 
shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such 
audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India generally has, in 
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall 
have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected 
40 
45 
50 
 

61 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of 
the Bureaus. 
(4) The accounts of the Bureaus as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together 
with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central or 
State Government which shall cause the same to be laid before each House 
of Parliament or the State Legislature, as the case may be. 
 
10 
 
15 
159. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
appropriate Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removal of the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of the period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament or the State Legislature, as the 
case may be. 
 Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
 
20 
160. No court other than the courts empowered by this Act, shall entertain any suit, 
application or other proceedings in respect of any order made under this Act, 
and no such order shall be called in question otherwise than by way of an 
appeal under this Act. 
 Bar on 
jurisdiction of 
other courts. 
 
45 of 2023. 
21 of 2000. 
 
 161. The provisions of section 77, section 78 and words “or intrudes upon the 
privacy of such woman” in section 79 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, 
and section 66E of the Information Technology Act, 2000 are hereby 
repealed. 
 Repeal. 
 
 
  

62 
 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See sections 27, 28, 30 and 49) 
ESTABLISHMENTS TO WHICH THE LICENCE PROVISIONS UNDER THIS ACT APPLY 
1. Residential Hotels 
2. Guest houses 
3. Lodges 
4. Resorts 
5. Apartments open for public use or places of Commercial accommodation 
6. Diagnostic centres 
7. Hospitals 
8. Ayurvedic Panchkarma and other medicinal treatment centres 
9. Clothing stores 
10. Malls 
11. Swimming pools 
12. Hostels 
13. Dance, Yoga, Aerobics and other classes 
14. Gyms 
15. Water parks 
16. Public Toilets and washrooms 
17. Theatres 
18. Photo studios with changing rooms 
19. Fine arts schools where painting nude artists is a part of the curriculum 
20. Places of public amusement 
21. Prisons and jails 
22. Beauty Parlours 
23. Massage Parlours 
24. Saloons 
25. Marriage halls with accommodation facility 
26. Cruise ships with accommodation facility 
27. First class AC railway coaches 
28. Aeroplane with washroom/toilet facility 
29. Sleeper bus, Commercial Vanity Van 
30. Religious Ashrams, Dharmashalas and retreat centres with accommodation facility  
31. Vastrantar Griha (Changing rooms) on the banks of rivers, especially made for pilgrims 
32. Any temporary set-up where voyeurism is likely to take place 
33. Any other establishments or entities which provide a changing room or toilets and 
bathrooms to the public 
34. Any other place where voyeurism may take place and includes such other establishment 
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, notify to be an 
establishment for the purposes of this Act. 
 
 

63 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (33) (v)] 
LIST OF SENSITIVE SERVICE PROVIDERS THAT MAY VOLUNTARILY APPLY FOR REGISTRATION 
Service providers other than an establishment under this Act, who enters into or which have 
access to the privacy of a person through such services, whether physically or virtually, such as— 
1. Service providers which provide local repair services or service centres for
smartphones and other digital devices, etc.;
2. Doorstep service providers such as technicians for geysers, air conditioners or
computers, electricians, carpenters, civil contractors, plumbers, etc.;
3. Intermediaries;
4. Software service providers; and
5. any other category as may be prescribed.
 

64 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[See section 36 (2)] 
FORMAT OF LICENCE 
GOVERNMENT OF STATE 
OFFICE OF THE ANTI-VOYEURISM BUREAU OF DISTRICT. 
LICENCE 
WHEREAS the licencing authority is satisfied that (NAME OF ESTABLISHMENT/  
ADDRESS) complies with the Voyeurism (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2024 and 
the rules, regulations and standards thereunder, and it is found that the property and premises of 
this establishment are Privacy protected, Voyeurism-free and Safe for public use on the basis of 
the inspection carr ied out by or under the directions of the licencing authority of the Anti -
Voyeurism Bureau of  District as mentioned in the  table below, this licence is granted to the 
establishment to carry on their registered business. This establishment is hereby authorized to use 
the “Voyeurism-Free” Standard Mark. 
Name of Establishment :- 
Address of Establishment :- 
Type of premises/ Business activity :-  
Unique Identification Licence No. :-   
Date of Issue of Licence/Renewal :- 
Table – 1 
Sr. 
No. 
Date of 
Inspection 
Renewed/ 
Valid Till Date 
Fees 
paid 
Sign and Seal 
of Licencing 
Authority 
1. 
2. 
CONDITIONS : 
1. This Licence is exclusive and non-transferable.
2. This Licence remains valid up to one year from the date of issue/renewal.
3. This Licence is valid subject to regular and surprise inspections carried out by any inspecti ng
au
thority under the Act, and any malpractices may result in cancellation of the Licence.
4. This Licence shall be displayed at the main entrance or a strategic place within the
establishment in clear and visible writing.
5. Any change in the information furnished at the time of filing the application for this Licence
shall be intimated to the licencing Authority within a period of thirty days from the date of such
change.
6. This Licence shall not indicate the legality or authenticity of the establishment or its business,
nor shall it confer legality upon any illegal establishment, business or act.

65 
 
 
 
  THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 50 (3)] 
 
Format of Registration Certificate for 
Sensitive Service Providers 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
OFFICE OF THE ANTI-VOYEURISM BUREAU OF INDIA AT DELHI 
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION 
This is to certify that the sensitive service provider (NAME OF SSP/ADDRESS) has 
been voluntarily registered with the National Bureau and conforms to the mandatory 
standards under the Voyeurism (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2024 and the 
rules and regulations thereunder, on the basis of the verification carried out by or under  
the directions of the Registrar of the National Bureau. Therefore, this sensitive service 
provider is hereby authorized to use the following Standard Mark: 
“Voyeurism-free” 
Name of SSP :-     
Address of SSP:-     
Type of SSP:- Individual Body Corporate 
Type of services provided:- Door step service provider 
Local repair centre 
Intermediaries 
Software service providers 
Other 
Unique Registration No. :-   
Date of Registration :-    
Given under my hand on this day of month of year. 
Registrar, 
Anti-Voyeurism Bureau of India 
CONDITIONS: 
1. This is only a certificate of voluntary registration and not a licence to run a business.  
2. This registration certificate authorises the sensitive service provider to use the  “Voyeurism-
free” standard mark. 
3. This certificate is exclusive and non-transferable. 
4. This certificate may be subject to cancellation if the sensitive service provider is found to be 
violation of the provisions of the Voyeurism (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 
2024 and rules and standards thereunder. 
5. Any change in the information furnished at the time of filing the application for this certificate 
shall be intimated to the Registrar within a period of thirty days from the date of such change. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

66 
 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
    The Right to Privacy is a fundamental right derived under Article 21 of the 
Constitution of India as interpreted and declared by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
India in case of K. S. Puttaswamy Vs . Union of India Judgement .  Moreover , the 
Right to Privacy is internationally recognized as one of the most significant Human 
Rights as well. However, there is currently no dedicated statute that provides a 
separate, all-inclusive and comprehensive legal framework for various aspects of 
privacy, including human body privacy, communication privacy, location privacy 
and data confidentiality. Right without remedy is worthless. If India enacts such a 
separate and comprehensive Right to privacy legislation, it will become honoured 
as one of the first country to do so and set an example for other countries to follow. 
    Although the term Voyeurism is used in the title of the Bill, the provisions 
of the bill are not limited to human body privacy. In the proposed Bill, overall 
breach of Privacy is defined as Voyeurism.  
     Currently, the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 provides a 
framework for processing digital personal data, but it is not an all-inclusive privacy 
law and this Act has not yet to come into force. The Criminal Law (Amendment) 
Act, 2013 i nserted the offence of voyeurism under Section 354 -C of the Indian 
Penal Code, 1860 after the Nirbhaya rape and murder case in Delhi. The said 
section provided for punishment to male offenders committing Voyeurism for a 
period of one to three years on firs t conviction and three to seven years on 
subsequent conviction. Before that and even today, Section 66E of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 is being used to prosecute offenders of voyeurism 
committed with the help of digital devices with imprisonment of three years or fine 
of up to two lakh rupees or both. However, the cases of voyeurism are only on the 
rise.  Even sections 77, 78 and 79 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 
2023) have multiple limitations and need to be revised to meet the current 
requirements of society. Hence, all the above existing provisions are inadequate to 
deal with various aspects of voyeurism and privacy. Overall, there is a need for a 
separate, comprehensive and exhaustive preventive and remedial legislation on the 
Right to Privacy.  
    Today, the rapid technological development has led to easy availability and 
use of spy and web cameras, CCTVs, smartphones, computers, spying software, 
high-speed internet and other new instruments in the market at affordable prices 
and various new methods and modus operandi leading to an increase in voyeurism 
and breach of Privacy cases by unfathomable means. Smartphone and social media 
users are rapidly increasing. Research has demonstrated that Artificial Intelligence 
can easily see peo ple through walls using Wi -Fi signals and will lead to potential 
problems in the near future. The misuse of artificial intelligence and deepfake 
technology has led to serious privacy concerns. The loss caused to the victim is 
irreparable due to the continu ing nature of the crime of video voyeurism and its 
dissemination. In view of the foregoing, the following principles and observations 
underscore the urgent need for a comprehensive legislative framework: 
1. To ascertain the duty of the State to value the dignity and privacy of every 
human being, guarantee full respect for human rights and ought to penalize acts 
that would destroy the honour and dignity of a person. 
2. Currently, there is an absence of a separate, exhaustive preventive and 
remedial legislation against voyeurism and there exists a lacuna in our existing 
laws to deal with Voyeurism through digital technology. Moreover, there is an 
absence of a separate, all -inclusive and comprehensive legal framework on 
Right to Privacy of human body, communication privacy, location privacy and 
sensitive personal data confidentiality and related privacy issues. 
  

67 
 
3. All genders face situations of violation of their privacy, distribution of 
private material, etc. which may be later used to blackmail them leadi ng to 
revenge porn, sextortion etc.  
4. Voyeurism results in the violation of a person’s human right and 
fundamental right to privacy  life under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. 
The Right to Privacy is a gender-neutral right, and there is a need for a gender-
neutral law on Voyeurism and Privacy that protects all genders. 
5. There is a need to frame a new, improved and comprehensive definition 
of Voyeurism which will cover various other aspects of privacy. 
6. There is a need to enact a separate and broad legal framework on the right 
to privacy to protect various aspects of privacy and privacy of human body, 
communication privacy, location privacy and data confidentiality.  
7. There is a need to establish a procedure by law as per conditions stipulated 
in Article 21 of the Constitution of India for depriving the privacy of a person 
in exceptional cases and in good faith and also in view of the doctrine of 
necessity and fair trial. 
8. The Voyeurism (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Bill, 2024 is 
intended to prevent Voyeurism, provide protection against Voyeurism and for 
the redressal of complaints of Voyeurism and overall breach of privacy and 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. In the bill, overall breach of 
Privacy is defined as voyeurism.  It, inter alia, seeks to:— 
(i) set up mechanism to protect human body privacy, communication 
privacy, location privacy and data confidentiality, 
(ii) define the rights of users and consumers seeking of privacy services,  
(iii) bifurcate the services provided by establishments and sensitive service 
providers concerning privacy angles,   
(iv) establish specialized Bureaus, 
(v) set standards for privacy protections, 
(vi) set the Voyeurism-Free standard mark, 
(vii) set up mechanism for licenses and certifications, 
(viii) establish the licencing authority for Establishments and Registrar for 
sensitive service providers to certify as Voyeurism-Free, Privacy-Protected 
and Safe to eliminate the fear in the minds of the users and consumers 
thereof, 
(ix) strike down the copyright of accused and convicted persons over the 
Voyeuristic material, 
(x) prevent use of nonconsensual means Voyeuristic material for 
publicaphic and commercial purposes,  
(xi) set up a takedown mechanism, 
(xii) broaden the definition of Voyeurism to make its meaning equal to 
overall breach of privacy,   
(xiii) define new terms emerged out of developments in technology and 
new modus operandi, 
(xiv) set up mechanism to prevents false and misleading claims and offers, 
(xv) set up mechanism to prevent cyber voyeurism and cybercrime,  

68 
(xvi) set up procedure for protecting privacy rights during search and
seizure of a smartphone and computer by the State,
(xvii) protect the privacy rights of vulnerable populations and soft tar gets
i
ncluding a woman, child, orphan, foreign tourist, person belonging to third
gender, blind, person with disability, sex workers etc.,
(xviii) set up procedure for sting operation, as per conditions stipulated in
Article 21 of the constitution of India for depriving the privacy of a person
in exceptional cases and in good faith and also in view of the doctrine of
necessity and fair trial,
(xix) set provisions against sadistic Voyeurism,
(xx) set up a hassle -free administrative mechanism for victims t o
co
mpensate them,
(xxi) set up preventive and remedial law which will serve justice to all
parties rather only punishment to an offender, as loss caused to a sufferer
is almost irreparable,
(xxii) protect the privacy rights of accused during inquiry, investigation,
arrest and trial as well,
(xxiii) make consumer-centric law as a consumer is considered as a king
pin of economy,
(xxiv) boost tourism industry and government revenue,
(xxv) set up Application Programming Interface (API) for online services,
(xxvi) provide provisions for film makers and content creators,
(xxvii) designate a court of sessions to be a Special Court for the trial of
Voyeurism and related Privacy offences,
(xxviii) set up a separate and all-inclusive statute on Right to Privacy.
The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
Hence, this Bill.
SYED NASEER HUSSAIN 

69 
 
  FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to establish an Anti-Voyeurism Bureau of India, 
to be known as the National Bureau, having jurisdiction extending to the whole 
of India to exercise the powers conferred upon and assigned to it under this Bill 
and for its composi tion as well as its headquarters and other regional offices, as 
deemed necessary. Clause 10 provides for salaries and allowances of members of 
the National Bureau.  Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to establish Anti- Voyeurism 
Bureau  for each State, to be known as the State Bureau, having jurisdiction 
extending to the whole of that State to exercise the powers conferred upon and 
assigned to it under this Bill and its composition as well as its headquarters and 
other offices, as deemed necessary.  Clause 14 provide s for salaries and 
allowances of members of State Bureau. Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to establish 
Anti-Voyeurism  for each district in the States, to be known as the District Bureau, 
having jurisdiction extending to the whole of that District to exercise the powers 
conferred upon and assigned to it under this Bill and its composition and well as 
its headquarters and other offices, as deemed necessary.  Clause 17 of the Bill 
provides for the officers and other employees and staff of the District Bureaus as 
well the salaries and allowances payable to them and their terms and conditions 
of service. Clause 144 provides that the Central and State Governments shall 
provide grants to the Bureaus and accredited NGOs, as may be deemed necessary 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of 
recurring and non- recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, at this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely 
to be involved. 
 
  
 
  

70 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 17 (4) of the Bill provides that the State Government shall make 
rules to provide for the qualifications and experience, method of recruitment, 
procedure for appointment, expenditure, term of office, salaries and allowances, 
resignation and removal from office, promotions, and other terms and conditions 
of the employees of the District Bureau.  Clause 51 of the Bill provides that t he 
Ministry of Labour of the Central and State Governments along with the Ministry 
of Home Affairs of the State Government may, in collaboration with the National 
and State Bureau, make rules for character verification by Police, framing privacy 
policy, etc. and frame a code of conduct and ethics for sensitive service providers 
and the Ministry of Information Technology of the Central an
d State 
Governments may, in collaboration with the National and State Bureau, make 
rules for verification by the cyber security experts, framing of privacy policy, etc. 
and frame a code of conduct and ethics for sensitive service providers and that 
the Cen
tral and State Governments may make rules for other prescribed 
categories of sensitive service providers, if any.   Clause 71 of the Bill empowers 
the National and State  Bureaus  to make regulations, with the previous approval 
of the Central and State Governments respectively, for carrying out  the purposes 
of this Bill.   Clause 145 of the Bill  empowers the Central and State Governments 
to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  Clause 159 of the Bill 
empowers the appropriate Government to make such provisions, as may be 
considered necessary or expedient, to remove any difficulty that may arise in 
giving effect to any of the provisions of the Bill.   
The matters in respect of which rules or regulations or orders may be made 
are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to 
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide an all-inclusive legal framework to protect the Fundamental 
Right to Privacy of humans, prevent Voyeurism, provide consumer 
centric law and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
_________ 
(Dr. Syed  Naseer Hussain, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—103—10.02.2025. 