1
THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act,
2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 3 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act),—
(i) after clause ( b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ba) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;";
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER 2023
Amendment of
section 3.
5
10
Bill No. CIII of  2022

2
(ii) after clause ( c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ca) "child" means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of
eighteen years";"
(iii) after clause ( g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ga) "Council" means the Nutrition Council constituted under
section 17A;"; and
(iv) after clause ( h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ha) "educational institution" includes—
(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate
Government or a local authority; or
(ii) a school receiving aid or grants from the appropriate
Government or the local authority to meet whole or part of its expenses; or
(iii) a school belonging to specified category; or
(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to
meet its expenditure; or
(v) an educational institution managed by a private entity, society
or a trust, which imparts elementary education;".
3. After Chapter II of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections
thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER IIA
R
EGULA TION OF SALE AND ADVERTISING  OF FOOD PRODUCTS  CAUSING
OBESITY  AMONGST  CHILDREN
17A. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a council to be known as the Nutrition Council to regulate sale and advertising
of food products which cause obesity amongst children.
17B. The council shall consist of—
(a) the Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare, chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) not more than six members having expertise in medicine with at least
fifteen years of experience in handling issues related to nutrition and child
health;
(c) one expert each in the field of labeling and claims, advertisement, food
additives, processing aids;
(d) one member from the Union Ministry of Women and Child Development
not below the rank of Joint Secretary;
(e) three eminent personalities from medical fraternity; and
(f) two Members of Parliament to be nominated, one each from Rajya Sabha
and Lok Sabha.
17C. The Council shall—
(a) lay down policies and principles to regulate sale and advertising of food
products causing obesity amongst children;
(b) determine its procedure in the performance of its functions;
Insertion of
new Chapter
IIA.
Establishment
of Nutrition
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Composition
of the
Nutrition
Council.
Functions of
the Council.

3
(c) admit any complaints regarding non-implementation of its policies; and
(d) initiate action for violating provisions of this Chapter.
17D. The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and other
employees to the Council as may be necessary for efficient discharge of its functions.
17E. All food products containing high sugar, calories, sodium, saturated fat or
any other ingredient present in food products beyond limits stipulated and detrimental
to health of children shall bear label warning in black bold letters about the presence of
excess ingredients.
17F. All food products labelled under section 17E shall not be sold within a radius
of one kilometer of an educational institution and shall not to be sold to minor children.
17G. All food products labelled under section 17E shall not be advertised in print,
television or any other form targeting children below the age of eighteen years.
17H. (1) Whoever sells a labelled food product in contravention of the provisions
of this chapter shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto
three years and fine which may extend up to ten lakh rupees.
(2) whoever advertises a labelled food product in contravention of provisions of
this chapter shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto two
years and fine which may extend upto ten lakh rupees.".
5
10
15
Central
Government
to provide
officers and
employees.
Labeling of
food products
by the Council
Prohibition of
sale of labelled
food products
near
educational
institutions.
Prohibition on
advertising of
labelled food
products.
Punishment
for sale and
advertisement
of labelled
food products.
Punishment
for
advertisement
of labelled
food products.

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Increasing exposure to variety of fast foods has led to rise in consumption of
food products which are largely detrimental to the health of persons. While adults can
recognize the harmful effects, the targeted advertising of such unhealthy food products
towards younger population has led to poor lifestyle standards amongst youth. There
is a need to regulate the sale and advertising of such food products so as to save
children from their harmful effects.
Childhood obesity is a major challenge in the battle against rising rate of non-
communicable diseases in India. The prevalence of overweight and obesity amongst
children and adolescents aged 5 to 19 has risen dramatically from just 4% in 1975 to
over 20% in 2020. The rise has occurred similarly amongst both boys and girls. In 2020,
20% of girls and 21% of boys were overweight. The fundamental cause of obesity and
overweight is an energy imbalance between calories consumed and calories expended.
Globally, there has been an increased intake of energy-dense foods that are high in fat
and sugars; and an increase in physical inactivity due to the increasingly sedentary
nature of many forms of work, changing modes of transportation, and increasing
urbanization.
Changes in dietary and physical activity patterns are often the result of
environmental and societal changes associated with development and lack of supportive
policies in sectors such as health, agriculture, transport, urban planning, environment,
food processing, distribution, marketing and education.
While India is already facing strong challenge in providing affordable healthcare
access to its citizens, the effects of poor lifestyle habits amongst its urban citizens
adds further burden on the country's resources. The establishment of the Nutrition
Council under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare with adequate representation
of professionals will be vital in regulating the use of ingredients resulting in obesity. A
warning label on food products having more than the permissible limit of certain
ingredients too caution the consumers about their ill-effects should be made mandatory.
It is also necessary to place restriction on advertisement of food products which
cause obesity and sale of such food products near educational institutions. The Bill,
accordingly, seeks to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 with a view to
reduce consumption of unhealthy food products by children.
Hence, this Bill.
KANIMOZHI  NVN  SOMU.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute the Nutrition Council to regulate the sale
and advertising of food products which cause obesity amongst children and provides
for appointments of experts, officers and employees thereto. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
recurring expenditure of about one hundred crore rupees per annum would be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about two hundred crore rupees is also likely to
be involved.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE FOOD SAFETY  AND STANDARDS ACT, 2006
(No. 34 of  2006)
* * * * * * *
3. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * * * *
(b) "advertisement" means any audio or visual publicity, representation or
pronouncement made by means of any light, sound, smoke, gas, print, electronic media,
social media networks, internet or website and includes through any notice, circular,
label, wrapper, invoice or other documents;
(c) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Food Authority;
* * * * * * *
(g) "contaminant" means any substance, whether or not added to food, but which
is present in such food as a result of the production (including operations carried out in
crop husbandry, animal husbandry or veterinary medicine), manufacture, processing,
preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding of such food or as a
result of environmental contamination and does not include insect fragments, rodent
hairs and other extraneous matter;
(h) "Designated Officer" means the officer appointed under section 36;
* * * * * * *
Definitions.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
————
(Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu, M.P.)
RS–P&PS–PMB(E)–030–12.12.2023