1
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/ 4121RS
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. CIII of 2006
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India :—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2.  After article 19 of the Constitution the following article shall be inserted namely:—
“19A. Every citizen shall have the right to seek information from the record
maintained by the Government
Explanation: In this article unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Government" includes any body or non-government organisation by
whatever name called, owned, controlled or substantially financed directly or indirectly
by funds provided by the Central or the StateGovernment; as the case may be.
(b) “record” includes any document, manuscript or file or any microfilm, microfiche
or fascimile copy of the document or any reproduction of images embodied in such
microfilm (whether enlarged or not) and any other material produced by a computer or
any other device.
Insertion of
new article
19A.
Right to
Information.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006.
5
10

2
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/ 4121RS
(c) “right to seek information” means and includes:—
(i) inspection of work, documents, records;
(ii) taking notes, extracts or certified copies of documents or records;
(iii) taking certified samples or material; and
(iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes, video
cassettes or in any other electronic mode or through printouts where such
information is stored in a computer or in any other device.
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Right to Information Act, 2005, enacted by the Parliament has been well
received througout the country. Citizens in general and non-government organizations
in particular, are taking full benefits of the provisions contained in the historic legislation.
However, authorities responsible to make the law effectively operational for the
benefit of the society are not fully co-operating with the applicants, partly due to
ignorance and partly on account of arrogance.
In order to make everyone realize the relevance of the Right to Information, it is
essential that, besides enacting a legislation on the subject, the same is included in the
Constitution of India as a Fundamental Right.
This will help the applicants to seek constitutional remedy in case the appellate
authorities under the Act, are unduly influenced by any quarters, whatsoever.
Some of the countries adopting democratic form of government, in recent years,
have included Right to Information Act in their respective Constitutions.
Further, on account of the Economic Policy of liberalization, a large number of
activities presently undertaken by the government are likely to be undertaken by non-
government organizations, directly or indirectly financed by the government. If Right
to Information is made a Fundamental Right, getting information from such organizations
will be easier and, persons responsible to give information may not put fourth pretexts
to refuse information.
Hence the Bill.
SHANTARAM LAXMAN NAIK
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/RAJYA SABHA/ 4121RS

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
 ————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4121RS(S3)—8-12-2006.