THE REGISTRATION OF FOREIGNERS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Registration of Foreigners (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939, (hereinafter referred to as the Principal
Act), in section 3, in sub-section (1), clauses (a), (b) and (c) shall be omitted.
3. In the Principal Act, in section 6 after the proviso, the following provisos shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, impose such restrictions on the movement of certain class of foreigners as
may be necessary.
Provided also that a copy of such notification shall be placed on the table of
each House of Parliament as soon as it is published."
Bill No.  CIV  of 2006
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of section 3.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE  RAJYA SABHA
ON 16TH MARCH, 2007
Amendment
of section 6.
16 of 1939

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
According to a report, India has been ranked the fourth most travelled destination in a
group of hundred countries in the world. This high ranking among travellers reflects the
attraction of our country to foreigners. But unfortunately, the number is not very high as
compared to many other countries. According to World Tourism Organization, 33 lakh tourists
visited India in 2004. In the same year, China had over 4 crore tourists and Thailand had
around 1 crore. The inflow of tourist reflects proportionately on the revenue earned from
tourism by our country. It is abysmally low as compared to other countries. Our coutnry
despite its size and diversity is lagging far behind the other Asian countries let alone European
destinations. Similar trends are visible in foreign investments. According to World Bank, our
country ranked 134 among 175 countries for doing business. Our Asian counterparts like
China, Hong Kong, Singapore have developed as world's favourite investment countries.
One of the main reasons for India poor performance in tourism and FDI is its rigid and
harassing laws for foreigners keen on visiting our country. The foreigners visiting our country
on their arrival realize that they are in a system which is hostile to outsiders. The old legislation
on Registration of Foreigners and rules made under it make it necessary for foreigners to
report their passport and visa details to the Foreigners Registration Office (FRO)/Foreigners
Regional Registration Office (FRRO) within 14 days of their arrival on six months visa. If a
foreigner is staying with his friends,  his particulars have to be reported to the nearest Police
Station. Such draconian measures are sure to put off tourists besides being out of place in
today's liberalized environment for investments. In most of the developed countries, there is
no such law and the foreigners are allowed to move freely in those countries. When a
foreigner arrives in our country, his details are entered at the Immigration Counter of the
airport and the same is repeated when he leaves the country which should be sufficient.
There is no need for a separate registration.
No doubt, foreigners of certain class in our neighbourhood require to be dealt with
utmost caution in view of the militancy and disturbance on our borders but for this there
should not be general provisions for all foreigners. For this class there can be a separate
provision under the Act and they can be taken care by the police and intelligence agencies
of the Government. The bonafide foreigners should not be put to unnecessary inconvenience.
Therefore, it is proposed to amend the relevant provisions of the Foreigners Registration
Act, 1939.
Hence this Bill.
KALRAJ MISHRA

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE REGISTRA TION OF FOREIGNERS ACT, 1939
* * * *
3. (i) The Central Government may after previous publication, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules
 with respect to foreigners for any or all of the following purposes,
that is to say—
(a) for requiring any foreigner entering, or being present in, [India] to report his
presence to a prescribed authority within such time and in such manner and with
such particulars as may be prescribed;
(b) for requiring any foreigner moving from one place to another place in [India] to
report, on arrival at such other place, his presence to a prescribed authority
within such time and in such manner and with such particulars as may be
prescribed;
(c) for requiring any foreigner who is about to leave [India] to report the date of his
intended departure and such other particulars as may be prescribed to such
authority and within such period before departure as may be prescribed;
(d) for requiring any foreigner entering, being present in, or departing from, [India]
to produce, on demand by a prescribed authority, such proof of his identity as
may be prescribed;
(e) for requiring any person having the management of any hotel, boarding-house,
sarai or any other premises of like nature to report the name of any foreigner
residing therein for whatever duration, to a prescribed authority within such
time and in such manner and with such particulars as may be prescribed;
(f) for requiring any person having the management or control of any vessel or
aircraft to furnish to a prescribed authority such information as may be prescribed
regarding any foreigner entering, or intending to depart from. [India], in such
vessel or aircraft, and to furnish to such authority such assistance as may be
necessary or prescribed for giving effect to this Act;
(g) for providing for such other incidental or supplementary matters as may appear
to the Central Government necessary or expedient for giving effect to this Act.
* * * *
Power to
make rules.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939.
————
(Shri Kalraj Mishra,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1207RS(S-5)—16.03.2007.