Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  CIX of  2006
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India.
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In article 243G of the Constitution,—
(a) for the words “may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and
responsibilities upon Panchayats”, the words “shall contain provisions for the
devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Panchayats” shall be substituted.
(b) In sub-clause (b) after the words “Eleventh Schedule” the words “by
the year 2008” shall be inserted.
3. In article 243W of the Constitution,—
(a) for the words “may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and
responsibilities upon Municipalities”, the words “shall contain provisions for the
devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Municipalities,” shall be substituted.
(b) In sub-clause (b) after the words “Twelfth Schedule” the words “by the
year 2008” shall be inserted.
Amendment
of article
243G .
Amendment
of article
243W.
5
10
15
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006.

2
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/ RAJYASABHA\4125RS
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
After the 73rd and 74th constitutional amendments came into force, most of the states
enacted their respective legislations governing Panchayats and Municipal Bodies, in line
with the Constitutional amendments.
While some states have enumerated the powers to be exercised by Panchayats, by
enumerating the subjects mentioned in the XIth schedule of the Constitution in the respective
legislations and have allotted them to the Zilla, Tehsil and Village Panchayats and, similarly,
the State Governments have allotted the subjects mentioned in the XIIth schedule to the
various types of municipal bodies. These enumerations are rather cosmetic in nature and
necessary notifications, to actually allot these subjects to the respective Panchayats and
Municipal bodies have not been issued.
It is in this context, that the present Bill seeks to make devolution of powers
constitutionally mandatory by substituting the word “may” by the word “shall”, in the
respective articles.
Some State Governments have given undertakings for the devolution of such powers
by signing Memoranda of Understanding with the Government of India. However, a firm
constitutional requirement is the need of the hour if the dream of former Prime Minister Late
Shri Rajiv Gandhi, who was inspired by the ideals of Mahatma Gandhi of  “Gram Rajya”, is to
be achieved.
  Hence this Bill.
SHANTARAM LAXMAN NAIK

3
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/ RAJYASABHA\4125RS
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
***
243G. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.— Subject to the provisions
of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow the Panchayats with such
powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-
government and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and
responsibilities upon Panchayats at the appropriate level, subject to such conditions as may
be specified therein, with respect to—
(a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;
(b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice
as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to the matters listed in the
Eleventh Schedule.
** ** ** **
243W. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities, etc.— Subject  to the
provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow—
 (a) the Municipalities  with such powers and authority as may be necessary to
enable them to function as institutions of self-government and such law may contain
provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Municipalities,
subject to such  conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to—
(i) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;
(ii) the performance of functions and the implementation of schemes  as
may be entrusted to them including those in relation to the matters listed in the
Twelfth  Schedule;
(b) the Committees with such powers and authority as may be necessary to
enable them to carry out the responsibilities conferred upon them including those in
relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.
***

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
Bill
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4125RS(S3)—8-12-2006.