AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER 2023
  Bill No. CIX of 2022
THE HATE SPEECH AND HATE CRIMES (PREVENTION) BILL, 2022
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
OFFENCE OF HATE SPEECH
3. Hate speech.
4. Protection of action done in good faith.
5. Punishment for hate speech.
CHAPTER III
I
NVESTIGATION, PROSECUTION AND TRIAL FOR THE OFFENCE OF HATE SPEECH
6. Application of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
7. Powers to investigate.
8. Powers of Court of Session.
9. Rights of victims and witnesses.
10. Appeals.
CHAPTER IV
O
FFENCE OF HATE CRIME
11. Hate crime.
12. Punishment for hate crime.
CHAPTER V
R
EPORTING
13. Publication of registered hate speech and hate crime cases and convictions.
CHAPTER VI
MEASURES FOR EDUCATION AND RAISING AW ARENESS
14. Duties of the appropriate Government.
CLAUSES

CLAUSES
CHAPTER VII
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
15. Omission of section 153A.
16. Omission of section 153B.
17. Omission of section 295A.
18. Omission of section 298.
19. Insertion of new section 295AA.
20. Insertion of new sections 304C and 304D.
21. Amendment of section 505.
CHAPTER VIII
A
MENDMENTS TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
22. Amendment of section 95.
23. Amendment of section 106.
24. Amendment of section 108.
25. Amendment of section 196.
26. Amendment of section 320.
27. Amendment of the First Schedule.
CHAPTER IX
A
MENDMENT TO THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000
28. Insertion of section 66AA.
(ii)

1
Bill No. CIX of 2022
THE HATE SPEECH AND HATE CRIMES (PREVENTION) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to effectively prevent and combat hate speech and hate crimes, their
negative effects on individ
uals, groups and societies, and to
protect the constitutional values of autonomy, dignity, and
equality and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Rep ublic of India  
as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Hate Speech and Hate Crimes (Prevention)
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER 2023
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "accused person" means a person who has been arrested for or formally
charged with an offence under this Act;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "audience" means a person who is a listener or a viewer of hate speech;
(d) "Court of Session" means a court defined under section 9 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(e) "group of persons" means a group of two or more persons;
(f) "hate crime" means an offence defined under section 15 of this Act;
(g) "hate speech" means an offence defined under section 3 of this Act;
(h) "hatred" and "hostility" means intense and irrational emotions of
opprobrium, enmity and detestation towards the victim;
(i) "victim" means any person, who has suffered physical, mental,
psychological or monetary harm as a result of the commission of any offence
under this Act;
(j) "witness" means any person who is in possession of any information or
has knowledge necessary for the purpose of investigation, inquiry, or trial of any
crime involving an offence under this Act.
CHAPTER II
O
FFENCE  OF HATE SPEECH
3. A  person who intentionally and within the hearing or sight of another person or
group of persons uses, publishes, presents, produces, plays, provides, distributes or
directs the performance of any speech that:—
(i) incites, justifies, promotes or spreads discrimination, hatred, hostility, or
violence against a person or group of persons; or
(ii) denigrates a person or group of persons by reasons of their real or
attributed characteristics or status, which includes religion, race, caste or
community, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, place of birth, national or
ethnic origin, language, age, or disability shall be guilty of an offence of hate
speech.
4. No legal proceedings shall be instituted against a person under section 3 for an
action done in good faith in the course of engagement in:
(i) any artistic or creative, performance or other form of expression, to the
extent that such performance or expression does not advocate hatred or hate
speech; or
(ii) any academic or scientific inquiry; or
(iii) fair and accurate reporting or commentary in the public interest.
5. (1) Whoever commits the offence of hate speech shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years or with
fine, or with both.
(2) The award of punishment under this section shall be based on the severity of
the offence, which shall be assessed by the following six factors:—
Definitions.
Protection of
action done
in good faith.
Hate speech.
Punishment
for hate
speech.
2 of 1974
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(i) social and political context prevalent at the time the offence was
committed;
(ii) the position or status of the offender in the society;
(iii) the relationship between the intent of the offender, subject and object
of the offence, and the audience;
(iv) content of the offence which may include the degree to which the offence
was provocative and direct, as well as the form, style, nature of arguments deployed
in the offence;
(v) reach of the offence, its public nature, its magnitude and size of the
audience; and
(vi) probability that the offence would succeed in inciting actual action
against the victim. Punishment for hate speech.
(3) An offence of hate crime shall be cognizable, non-bailable and
non-compoundable and shall be triable by the Court of Session exercising jurisdiction
in that area in which the offence is committed.
CHAPTER III
INVESTIGATION , PROSECUTION  AND TRIAL FOR THE OFFENCE  OF HATE SPEECH
6. (1) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred
to as the Code of Criminal Procedure) shall apply to this Chapter, save as supplemented
to the extent provided under this Chapter.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), section 95 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure shall apply to any newspaper, book, painting, drawing or
photograph, the publication of which is punishable under section 5 of this Act.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), section 96 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure shall apply to any newspaper, book, painting, drawing or
photograph, punishable under section 5 of this Act against which a declaration of
forfeiture has been made under section 95 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
7. No police officer below the rank of Inspector shall investigate an offence
committed under section 3, of this Act.
8. (1) The Court of Session shall follow the procedure for the trial prescribed by
the Code of Criminal Procedure, while trying the accused person.
(2) The Court of Session may also try any offence, other than the offence under
section 3, with which the accused person may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure,
be charged at the same trial if the offence is connected with the offence under this Act.
(3) If, in the course of any trial under this Chapter, it is found that the accused
person has committed any other offence, the Court of Session may, try such person of
such offence and pass any sentence authorised by law for the punishment thereof.
9. (1) The Court of Session may, on an application made by a witness in any
proceeding before it or by the Public Prosecutor in relation to such witness or on its
own motion, take such measures as it deems fit for keeping the identity and address of
the witness secret.
(2) A victim shall have the right to reasonable, accurate, and timely notice of any
court proceeding and shall be entitled to be heard at any proceeding under this Chapter
Application
of the Code
of Criminal
Procedure.
Powers to
investigate.
Powers of
Court of
Session.
Rights of
victims and
witnesses.
2 of 1974
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
in respect of bail, discharge, release, parole, conviction or sentence of an accused or
any connected proceedings or arguments and file written submissions on conviction,
acquittal or sentencing.
(3) Notwithstanding the offender or any suspect as the case may be, having been
arrested, granted bail, charged, convicted or sentenced, the Superintendent of Police or
an officer designated by him shall inform the victim in writing about the details of the
offender or suspect, and the progress of investigations into the offence.
(4) The victim shall have the right to receive a copy of any statement of witness
recorded during investigation or inquiry, and a copy of all statements and documents
filed under section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, including the charge-sheet or
closure report submitted by police.
(5) A victim shall be entitled to receive free legal aid, if they so choose and to
engage any advocate who they choose from among those enrolled in the legal aid panel
under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, and the Legal Services Authority
established under the said Act shall pay all costs, expenses and fees of the advocate
appointed by the victim or informant in accordance with relevant rules.
(6) It shall be the duty and responsibility of the police for making arrangements
for the protection of victims and witnesses against any kind of intimidation, coercion or
inducement of violence or threats of violence.
(7) The police shall inform the Court of Session about the protection provided to
any victim, informant or witness and the Court of Session shall periodically review the
protection being provided under this section and pass appropriate orders.
10. (1) An appeal shall lie as a matter of right from any judgment, sentence or
order of a Court of Session to the High Court both on facts and on law.
(2) An appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of sixty days
from the date of the judgment, sentence or order appealed from:
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of sixty days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not
preferring the appeal within the period of sixty days.
CHAPTER IV
O
FFENCE  OF HATE CRIME
11. "Hate crime" means any offence recognised under the Indian Penal Code,
1860 (hereafter in referred to as the Penal Code), the commission of which is motivated
by the offender's prejudice or intolerance towards the victim by reasons of their real or
attributed characteristics or status, which includes religion, race, caste or community,
sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, place of birth, national or ethnic origin, language,
age or disability.
12. Whoever commits any offence which is hate crime in accordance with the
provisions of section 11 shall be punished with the punishment as provided for in the
Penal Code for such offence:
Provided that the severity of such punishment shall be determined by the fact
that such offence has been classified as a hate crime under section 11 of this Act:
Provided further that such punishment shall be just and reasonable.
Appeals.
Hate crime.
Punishment
for hate
crime.
45 of 1860
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
39 of 1987

5
CHAPTER V
REPORTING
13. (1) The Central Government shall publish annually in such manner as may be
prescribed, both national and State-wise data regarding:—
(a) hate speech cases and hate crime cases registered and at their disposal;
and
(b) persons convicted for the offence of hate speech and hate crime.
(2) The data under sub-section ( 1) shall be classified in a manner as may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER VI
MEASURES  FOR EDUCATION  AND RAISING  AWARENESS
14. The appropriate Government, in consultation with the National Human Rights
Commission and the State Human Rights Commissions, as the case may be, shall
promote awareness about the dangers of hate crimes and hate speech by:—
(i) conducting education and information campaigns to raise awareness of
the extent of hate speech and the harm it causes to individuals and communities;
(ii) conducting education and information campaigns to inform the public
about the prohibition against hate crimes and hate speech;
(iii) conducting educational and information campaigns specifically for
children and youth, parents and guardians, youth workers and volunteers working
with children to enable them to understand and deal with hate crimes and hate
speech;
(iv) taking specific measures to support Government and private educational
institutions in the conduct of activities and cultural programmes for the general
public that enhance commitment to human rights as part of a pluralistic
democratic society, encourage critical thinking, promote equality and inter-
cultural and inter-faith dialogue, and strengthen the competences needed to
identify and counter hate crimes and hate speech;
(v) providing assistance and advice to any person who wants to file a
complaint of a hate crime or hate speech;
(vi) ensuring that all public officials who may be involved in the investigation
and prosecution of hate crimes and hate speech are educated and informed of the
prohibition against these offences; and
(vii) training public officials on the prohibition, prevention and combating
of hate crimes and hate speech and educating them on the prevailing social
context in the country.
CHAPTER VII
A
MENDMENTS  TO THE INDIAN  PENAL CODE
15. Section 153A of the Penal Code shall be omitted.
16. Section 153B of the Penal Code shall be omitted.
Publication
of registered
hate speech
and hate
crime cases
and
convictions.
Omission of
section
153A.
Duties of the
appropriate
Government.
Omission of
section 153B.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
17. Section 295A of the Penal Code shall be omitted.
18 Section 298 of the Penal Code shall be omitted.
19. After section 295 of the Penal Code, the following new section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"295AA. A person who intentionally uses, publishes, presents, produces,
plays, provides, distributes or directs the performance of any speech that
advocates hatred or hostility against a religion or a religious belief of any class of
citizens of India, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both:
Provided that such punishment shall not apply to an interpretation in good
faith of any religious tenet, belief, teaching, doctrine or writings, to the extent that
such interpretation does not advocate hatred that constitutes incitement to cause
harm:
Provided further that such punishment shall be based on the severity of the
offence, which shall be assessed by the factors as specified in sub-section (2 ) of
section 5 of this Act.".
20. After section 304B of the Penal Code, the following new sections shall be
inserted, namely:—
"304C. Where a group of two or more persons, commit any act or series of
acts of violence or aid, abet or attempt an act of violence, whether spontaneous
or planned, by a mob on the grounds of religion, race, caste or community, sex,
gender identity, sexual orientation, place of birth, national or ethnic origin,
language, age, or disability, such a group shall be guilty of an offence of mob
lynching.
304D. Whoever commits the offence of mob lynching:—
(i) where the offence leads to the victim suffering hurt, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees;
(ii) where the act leads to the victim suffering grievous hurt, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five
thousand rupees and may extend to three lakh rupees;
(iii) where the act leads to the death of the victim, shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less
than one lakh rupees and may extend to five lakh rupees.".
21. In section 505 of the Penal Code, after clause (3 ), the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that such punishment shall be based on the severity of the offence,
which shall be assessed by the factors specified in sub-section ( 2) of section 5 of
the Hate Speech and Hate Crimes (Prevention) Act, 2022."
Omission of
section
295A.
Omission of
section 298.
Insertion of
new section
295AA.
Advocacy of
hatred and/or
hostility
towards a
religion or
religious
beliefs.
Insertion of
new sections
304C and
304D.
Mob
lynching.
Punishment
for Mob
lynching.
Amendment
of section
505.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
CHAPTER VIII
AMENDMENTS  TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE
22. In section 95 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, for the words, figures and
letters "section 124A or section 153A or section 153B or section 292 or section 293 or
section 295A", the words, figures and letters "section 124A or section 292 or section
293 or section 295AA" shall be substituted.
23. In section 106 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in clause ( a) of
sub-section ( 2), the words, figures and letters "section 153A or section 153B or"
shall be omitted.
24. In section 108 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-clause ( a) of clause (i)
of sub-section ( 1), for the words, figures and letters "section 124A or section 153A or
section 153B or section 295A", the words, figures and letters "section 124A or section
295AA" shall be substituted.
25. In section 196 of the Code of Criminal Procedure:—
(i) in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1), the words, figures and letters "section
153A section 295A", the words, figures and letters "section 295AA" shall be
substituted; and
(ii) in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1A), the words, figures and letters "section
153B" shall be omitted.
26. In section 320 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-section (1), the entry
pertaining to section 298 in the 
TABLE, shall be omitted.
27. In the First Schedule of the Code of Criminal Procedure, under the heading
"I. OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE":—
(1) entry relating to section 153A shall be omitted;
(2) entry relating to section 153B shall be omitted;
(3) entry relating to section 295A shall be omitted;
(4) entry relating to section 298 shall be omitted;
(5) after the entry relating to 295, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
Amendment
of section 95.
Amendment
of
section 106.
Amendment
of
section 108.
Amendment
of
section 196.
Amendment
of
section 320.
Amendment
of the First
Schedule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Section
295AA
Offence
Advocacy of
hatred or hostility
towards a religion
or religious beliefs
Punishment
Imprisonment for 3
years, or fine, or both
Cognizable
or Non-
Cognizable
Cognizable
Bailable
or Non-
Bailable
Non-
bailable
By what
Court
triable
Court of
Session

8
Insertion of
section
66AA.
Punishment
for hate
speech
through
electronic
communication.
(6) after the entry relating to section 304B, the following entry shall be
inserted, namely:—
21 of 2000.
5
10
15
20
CHAPTER IX
AMENDMENT  TO THE INFORMA TION TECHNOLOGY  ACT, 2000
28. After section 66 of the Information Technology Act, 2000, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"66AA. Any person who intentionally publishes, d istributes or oth erwise 
makes available an electronic communication that constitutes hate speech as 
contemplated in section 3 of the Hate Speech and Hate Cr imes (Prevention ) 
Act, 2022 which is accessible to another person, shall be punish able with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine.
Explanation: For the purpose o f this sectio n, an electronic co mmunication  
means a message or information created  or transmitted or received on a computer,  
computer system, computer resource o r co mmunication device including 
attachments in text, image, audio, video  and any other electr onic record, which 
may be transmitted with the messag e."
Section
304C
Offence
Mob Lynching
Punishment
Imprisonment for life,
or imprisonment for
10 years, or
imprisonment for
7 years and fine.
Cognizable
or Non-
Cognizable
Cognizable
Bailable
or Non-
Bailable
Non-
bailable
By what
Court
triable
Court of
Session

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In recent years, India has witnessed an increase in the discrimination and
dehumanisation of marginalised groups through hate speech. The Law Commission, in
its 267th report, and the Supreme Court, on several occasions, have expressed the need
for a specific law to combat hate speech. However, at present, no such law exists in our
country. Further, India has an international obligation under article 20( 2) of the
International Convention Civil and Political Rights, 1966, to prohibit hate speech. This
Bill seeks to remedy the issue.
Hate speech is problematic, mainly for three reasons. First, the hostile and
unwelcoming environment resulting from hate speech alienates the victims and leads
them to recede from the active fabric of the social structure. Thus, it deprives them of
choices and opportunities and undermines their autonomy. Second , hate speech affects
the dignity of the victims since it undermines the victim's self-worth and fails to recognise
them as full-fledged agents whose views count. Third , hate speech affects the victim's
status in the society, and is responsible for the entrenchment of stereotypes which
result in inequality and subordination. Hence, to effectively prevent and combat hate
speech, and to preserve and uphold the constitutional values of autonomy, dignity and
equality, the Bill: —
(a) defines the offence of hate speech and provides a list of exceptions;
(b) provides the punishment for hate speech;
(c) provides the manner in which investigations, prosecutions and trial
should be conducted;
(d) provides for the rights of victims and witnesses during the trial;
(e) mandates the annual reporting of the data related to hate speech in a
prescribed manner;
(f) mandates the appropriate Government, the National Human Rights
Commission, and the State Human Rights Commission to take up educational and
awareness-raising measures for the prevention of hate speech;
(g) makes requisite amendments in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; and
(h) inserts new provisions in the Information Technology Act, 2000 and the
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines) Rules, 2021 to prevent hate
speech on online platforms.
Hate Crimes have also witnessed a steady rise over the last few years in India.
Pertinently, the cases of mob lynching have plagued the country, and the Supreme
Court, in Tehseen S. Poonawalla v. Union of India and others , has urged the Parliament
to "create a separate offence for lynching and provide adequate punishment for the
same". Therefore, to prevent crimes that are motivated by the offender's prejudice
towards the victim, including the crime of mob violence, the Bill:
(a) defines the offence of hate crime and makes a provision for its
punishment;
(b) inserts a provision in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, which define the
offence of mob violence;
9

10
(c) inserts a provision in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, which provides for the
punishment of mob violence. Such punishment is proportionate to the harm caused
to the victim;
(d) makes requisite amendments in the Code of Criminal Procedure;
(e) mandates the annual reporting of the data related to hate crimes in a
prescribed manner; and
(f) mandates the appropriate Government, the National Human Rights
Commission, and the State Human Rights Commission to take up educational and
awareness-raising measures for the prevention of hate crimes.
Hence, this Bill.
K.R. SURESH REDDY.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the duties of the Central Government, towards
raising awareness of the dangers of hate crimes and hate speech. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve both non-recurring and recurring expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the
expenditures.
11

MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED   LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill provides that the data regarding hate crime and hate speech
shall be published by the National Crime Bureau of India in the 'Crime in India' Report
and the data so published shall also be classified in the manner as may be prescribed.
The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations may be made are generally
matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for
them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.
12

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE INDIAN  PENAL CODE,  1860
(45  OF  1860)
* * * * * * *
153A. (1) Whoever—
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible
representations or otherwise, promotes or attempts to promote, on grounds of
religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or community or any
other ground whatsoever, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will
between different religious, racials, language or regional groups or castes or
communities, or
(b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony
between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or 
communities, and which disturbs or is likely to disturb the public tranq uility, or
(c) organizes any exercise, movement, drill or other similar activity intending
that the participants in such activity shall use or be trained to use criminal force 
or violence or knowing it to be likely that the participants in such activity will use 
or be trained to use criminal force or violence, or participates in such activity 
intending to use or be trained to use criminal force or violence or knowing it to be 
likely that the participants in such activity will use or be trained to use criminal 
f
orce or violence, against any religious, racial, language or regional group or 
caste or community and such activity for any reason whatsoever causes or is 
likely 
to cause fear or alarm or a feeling of insecurity amongst members of such  
religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community, shall be  
punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with 
both.
(2) Offence committed in p lace of worship, etc.—Whoever commits an offence
specified in sub-section ( 1) in any place of worship or in any assembly engaged in the
performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.
153B. (1) Whoever, by words either spoken or written or by signs or by visible
representations or otherwise—
(a) makes or publishes any imputation that any class of persons cannot, by
reason of their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional group
or caste or community, bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India
as by law established or uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, or
(b) asserts, counsels, advises, propagates or publishes that any class of
persons shall, by reason of their being members of any religious, racial, language
or regional group or caste or community, be denied, or deprived of their rights as
citizens of India, or
(c) makes or publishes and assertion, counsel, plea or appeal concerning
the obligation of any class of persons, by reason of their being members of any
13
Promoting
enmity
between
different
groups on
ground of
religion, race,
place of
birth,
residence,
language,
etc., and
doing acts
prejudicial to
maintenance
of harmony.
Imputations,
assertions
prejudicial to
national
integration.

14
religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community, and such
assertion, counsel, plea or appeal causes or is likely to cause disharmony or
feelings of enmity or hatred or ill-will between such members and other persons,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section ( 1) in any place of
worship or in any assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious
ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to five years and
shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * * * *
295. Whoever destroys, damages or defiles any place of worship, or any object
held sacred by any class of persons with the intention of thereby insulting the religion
of any class of persons or with the knowledge that any class of persons is likely to
consider such destruction, damage or defilement as an insult to their religion shall.
295A. Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious
feelings of any class of citizens of India, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs
or by visible representations or otherwise, insults or attempts to insult the religion or
the religious beliefs of that class, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
* * * * * * *
298. Whoever, with the deliberate intention of wounding the religious feelings of
any person, utters any word or makes any sound in the hearing of that person or makes
any gesture in the sight of that persons or places any object in the sight of that person,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to one year, or with fine, or with both.
* * * * * * *
304B. (1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or
occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage
and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment
by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand
for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and such husband or relative shall
be deemed to have caused her death.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, "dowry" shall have the
same meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life
Dowry death.
* * * * * * *
505. (1) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement, rumour or report,—
(a) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, any officer, soldier, sailor
Injuring or
defiling place
of worship,
with intent to
insult the
religion of
any class.
Deliberate
and malicious
acts, intended
to outrage
religious
feelings of
any class by
insulting its
religion or
religious
beliefs.
Uttering
words, etc.,
with
deliberate
intent to
wound
religious
feelings.
Dowry death.
Statements
conducing to
public
mischief.

15
or airman in the Army, Navy or Air Force of India to mutiny or otherwise disregard
or fail in his duty as such; or
(b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear or alarm to the
public, or to any section of the public whereby any person may be induced to
commit an offence against the State or against the public tranquility; or
(c) with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any class or community
of persons to commit any offence against any other class or community, shall be
punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.
(2) Statements creating or promoting enmity, hatred or ill-will between classes.—
Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement or report containing rumour or
alarming news with intent to create or promote, or which is likely to create or promote,
on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or community or
any other ground whatsoever, feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between different
religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, shall be punished
with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Offence under sub-section ( 2) committed in place of worship, etc.—Whoever
commits an offence specified in sub-section ( 2) in any place of worship or in any
assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies,
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be
liable to fine.
Exception .—It does not amount to an offence, within the meaning of this section,
when the person making, publishing or circulating any such statement, rumour or report,
has reasonable grounds for believing that such statement, rumour or report is true and
makes, publishes or circulates it in good faith and without any such intent as
aforesaid.
* * * * * * *
E
XTRCTS  FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE , 1973
(2 OF 1974)
* * * * * * *
95. (1) Where—
(a) any newspaper, or book, or
(b) any document, wherever printed, appears to the State Government to
contain any matter the publication of which is punishable under section 124A or
section 153A or section 153B or section 292 or section 293 or section 295A of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the State Government may, by notification, stating
the grounds of its opinion, declare every copy of the issue of the newspaper
containing such matter, and every copy of such book or other document to be
forfeited to Government, and thereupon any police officer may seize the same
wherever found in India and any Magistrate may by warrant authorise any police
officer not below the rank of sub-inspector to enter upon and search for the same
in any premises where any copy of such issue, or any such book or other document
may be or may be reasonably suspected to be.
Power to
declare
certain
publications
forfeited and
to issue
search-
warrants for
the same.

16
(2) In this section and in section 96,—
(a) "newspaper" and "book" have the same meaning as in the Press and
Registration of Books Act, 1867 (25 of 1867);
(b) "document" includes any painting, drawing or photograph, or other
visible representation.
(3) No order passed or action taken under this section shall be called in question
in any Court otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of section 96.
* * * * * * *
106. (2) The offences referred to in sub-section (1 ) are—
(a) any offence punishable under Chapter VIII of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), other than an offence punishable under section 153A or section 153B
or section 154 thereof;
* * * * * * *
108. (1)(i)(a) any matter the publication of which is punishable under section
124A or section 153A or section 153B or section 295A of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), or
* * * * * * *
196. (1) (a) any offence punishable under Chapter VI or under section 153A,
section 295A or sub-section ( 1) of section 505 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or
* * * * * * *
(1A) No Court shall take cognizance of—
(a) any offence punishable under section 153B or sub-section ( 2) or
sub-section ( 3) of section 505 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or
* * * * * * *
320. (1) The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860) specified in the first two columns of the Table next following may be
compounded by the persons mentioned in the third column of that Table:—
TABLE
Security for
keeping the
peace on
conviction
Security for
good
behaviour
from persons
disseminating
seditious
matters.
Prosecution
for offences
against the
State and for
criminal
conspiracy to
commit such
offence.
Compounding
of offences.
Offence
Uttering words, etc., with
deliberate intent to
wound the religious
feelings of any person.
Section of the Indian
Penal Code
applicable
298
Person by whom offence may be
compounded
The person whose religious feelings
are intended to be wounded.

17
Section
153A
Offence
Promoting enmity
between classes.
Promoting enmity
between classes
in place of
worship, etc.
Punishment
Imprisonment for
3 years, or fine,
or both.
Imprisonment for
5 years, and fine.
Cognizable
or Non-
Cognizable
Ditto
Ditto
Bailable
or Non-
Bailable
Non-
bailable
Ditto
By what
Court
triable
Ditto
Ditto
CHAPTER XV .—OFFENCES RELA TING TO RELIGION
295 Imprisonment for
2 years, or fine
or both.
Cognizable Non-
bailable
Any
Magistrate
Destroying,
damaging or
defiling a place of
worship or sacred
object with intent
to insult the
religion of any
class of persons.
295A Imprisonment for
3 years, or fine
or both.
Ditto Ditto Magistrate
of the first
class.
Maliciously
insulting the
religion or the
religious beliefs of
any class.
304B Imprisonment of not
less than seven years
but which may extend
to imprisonment for life.
Ditto Non-
bailable
Court of
Session.
Dowry death.
CHAPTER XVI.—OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
* * * * *
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES
I.—OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
CHAPTER VIII.—OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILITY

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to effectively prevent and combat hate speech and hate crimes, their
negative effects on individuals, groups and societies, and to
protect the constitutional values of autonomy, dignity, and
equality and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy, M.P .)
RS–P&PS–PMB(E)–032–12.12.2023