1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For article 153 of the Constitution the following new article shall be substituted,
namely:—
"153. (1) The office of Governor shall cease to exist.
(2) All the existing powers and responsibilities of the Governor shall be vested in
the President of India; unless specified otherwise.".
Short title and
Commencement.
Bill No. CV of 2022
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Cessation of
office of
Governor.
5
Substitution of
article 153.
10

2
3. For article 154 of the Constitution the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
"154. The executive power of the State shall be vested in the Council of Ministers
of the State, headed by the Chief Minister of the State and shall be exercised by him
directly.".
4. Article 155 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
5. Article 156 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
6. Article 157 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
7. Article 158 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
8. Article 159 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
9. Article 160 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
10. Article 161 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
11. Article 162 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
12. Article 163 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
13. In article 164 of the Constitution,
(i) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Chief Justice of the State
and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the Chief Justice of the State on
the advice of the Chief Minister:
Provided that in the States of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh
and Odisha, there shall be a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in
addition be in charge of the welfare of the Scheduled Castes and Backward
Classes or any other work.";
(ii) for clause (3), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Chief Justice of the State
shall administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms
set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.".
14. For Article 200, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘200. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State or, in
the case of a State having a Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of
the Legislature of the State, it shall deemed to be passed and shall come into force on
such date, as the State Government may, by notification in the official gazette, appoint.’’.
15. Article 201 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
16. In article 356 of the Constitution, in clause (1),—
(i) for the word ‘Governor’, the words ‘‘Council of Ministers headed by the Chief
Minister’’ shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-clause (a), the words 'the Governor or', shall be omitted.
Executive
Power of the
State.
Substitution of
article 154.
5
Omission of
article 155.
Omission of
article 156.
Omission of
article 157.
Omission of
article 158.
Omission of
article 159.
Omission of
article 160.
Omission of
article 161.
Omission of
article 162.
Omission of
article 163.
Amendment
of article 164.
Substitution of
article 200.
Assent of the
Bill.
Omission of
article 201.
Amendment
to article 356.
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Governor of a State serves as its chief executive. He serves as the notional executive
leader and a representative of the Central Government. In contrast to being the constitutionally
designated head of State, the Governor has increasingly come under scrutiny for acting as
the Centre's representative. On numerous occasions, Governments have appointed Govenors
who are politicians or former bureaucrats. This is a violation of the legally mandated neutral
seat and has resulted in prejudice.
2. The Constituent Assembly was divided on the powers of the Governor of a State.
The Governors were unanimously agreed to be representatives of the Central Government,
similar to the Governors appointed under the British Raj. Many members pointed out that the
wordings of the articles related to State Governors were an identical replica of the provision
of the British-era Government of India Act of 1935. The British regent served as the Viceroy's
representative in each British Province prior to independence. However, following
independence, States are no longer the subjects of the Centre.
3. The architects of the Constitution, like all other constitutional authorities, bestowed
a tremendous deal of faith in the position of Governor. Whether the Constitution and its
framers' faith in the institution of Governor are honored is a subject that requires contextual
interpretation in the light of the Constitution's provisions and political realities. The Governor's
position has deteriorated to the point that it is imperative to abolish it and replace it.
Hence, this Bill.
RAGHA V CHADHA.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
153. There shall be Governor for each State:
Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent the appointment  of the same person
as Governor for two or more States.
154. (1) The executive power of the State shall be vested in the Governor and shall be
exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with
this Constitution.
(2) Nothing in this article shall—
(a) be deemed to transfer to the Governor any functions conferred by any existing
law on any other authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament or the Legislature of the State from conferring by law
functions on any authority subordinate to the Governor.
155. The Governor of a State shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his
hand and seal.
156. (1) The Governor' shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
(2) The Governor may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his
office.
(3) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this article, a Governor shall hold office for
a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that a Governor shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to
hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
157. No person shall be eligible for appointment as Governor unless he is a citizen of
India and has completed the age of thirty-five years.
158. (1) The Governor shall not be a member of either House of Parliament or of a
House of the Legislature of any State specified in the First Schedule, and if a member of either
House of Parliament or of a House of  Legislature of any such State be appointed Governor,
he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters
upon his office as Governor.
(2) The Governor shall not hold any other office of profit.
(3) The Governor shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use of his official
residences and shall be also entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as may
be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such
emoluments, allowances and privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule.
(3A) Where the same person is appointed as Governor of two or more States, the
emoluments and allowances payable to the Governor shall be allocated among the States in
such proportion as the President may by order determine.
(4) The emoluments and allowances of the Governor shall not be diminished during his
term of office.
159. Every Governor and every person discharging the functions of the Governor
shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief Justice
of the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the State, or, in his absence, the senior
Governors of
States.
Executive
Power of
State.
Appointment
of Governor.
Term of office
of Governor.
Qualifications
for
appointment
as Governor.
Oath or
affirmation by
the Governor.
Conditions of
Governor's
office.

5
most Judge of that Court available, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to
say—''I, A. B., do swear in the name of God that I will faithfully execute the solemnly affirm
office of Governor (or discharge the functions of the Governor) of....(name of the State) and
will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law and
that I will devote myself.
160. The President may make such provision as he thinks fit for the discharge of the
functions of the Governor of a State in any contingency not provided for in this Chapter.
161. The Governor of a State shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites
or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person
convicted of any offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of
the State extends.
162. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the executive power of a State shall
extend to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of the State has power to make
laws:
Provided that in any matter with respect to which the Legislature of a State and
Parliament have power to make laws, the executive power of the State shall be subject to, and
limited by, the executive power expressly conferred by this Constitution or by any law made
by parliament upon the Union or authorities thereof.
163. (1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister at the head to aid
and advise the Governor in the exercise of his functions, except in so far as he is by or under
this Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in his discretion.
(2) If any question arises whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects which the
Governor is by or under this Constituion required to act in his discretion, the decision of the
Governor in his descretion shall be final, and the validity of anything done by the Governor
shall not be called in question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in his
discretion.
(3) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by Ministers to the
Governor shall not be inquired into in any court.
164. (1) The Chief  Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the Ministers
shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor:
Provided that in the States of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Odisha,
there shall be a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in addition be in charge of the
welfare of the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes or any other work.
* * * * *
(3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Governor shall administer to him the
oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose in the Third
Schedule.
* * * * *
200. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State or, in the case
of a State having a Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of the Legislature 
of the State, it shall be presented to the Governor and the Governor shall declare either that 
he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for 
the
 consideration of the President:
Assent to Bills.
Discharge of
the Functions
of the
Governor in
certain
contingencies.
Power of
Governor to
grant pardons,
etc., and to
suspend, remit
or commute
sentences in
certain cases.
Extent of
Executive
Power of
State.
Council of
Ministers to
aid and advise
Governor.
Other
provisions as
to Ministers.

6
Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the presentation to
him of the Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message
requesting that the House or Houses will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions
thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such
amendments as he may recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the
House or Houses shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by
the House or Houses with or without amendment and presented to the Governor for
assent, the Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom:
Provided further that the Governor shall not assent to, but shall reserve for the
consideration of the President, any Bill which in the opinion of the Governor would, if it
became law, so derogate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position
which that Court is by this Constitution designed to fill.
201. When a Bill is reserved by a Governor for the consideration of the President, the
President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom:
Provided that, where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may direct the Governor
to return the Bill to the House or, as the case may be, the Houses of the Legislature of the
State together with such as message as is mentioned in the first proviso to article 200 and,
when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider it accordingly within a
period of six months from the date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the
House or Houses with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to the President for
his consideration.
* * * * *
356. (1) If the President, on receipt of a report from the Governor of a State or otherwise,
is 
satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the Government of the State cannot be carried 
on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, the President may by  
Proclamation—
(a) assume to himself all or any of the functions of the Government of the State
and all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the Governor anybody or
authority in the State other than the Legislature of the State;
* * * * *
Provisions in
case of failure
of
constitutional
machinery in
States.
Bills reserved
for
consideration.

RS-P&PS-PMB(E) –113–16.12.2023
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Raghav Chadha,  M.P .)