THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After Part XVI of the Constitution, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
"PART  XVIA
SPECIAL  PROVISIONS  RELATING  TO  FARMERS
342B. (1) There shall be a Commission for the socio-economic development of farmers
to be known as the National Commission for Farmers.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the
Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members
Bill No. CVI  of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 8TH DECEMBER,2023
5
10
Short title
and
commencement.
Insertion of
new Part
XVIA.
National
Commission
for Farmers.

2
5
10
and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for
farmers under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or
under any order of the Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) to inquire into the specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of
rights and safeguards of the farmers;
(c) to advise on the socio-economic development of the farmers and to evaluate
the progress of their development under the Union and any State;
(d) to work out a comprehensive medium-term strategy for food and nutrition
security in the country in order to move towards the goal of universal food security
over time;
(e) to advise on enhancing the productivity, profitability, stability and
sustainability of the major farming systems of the country based on an agro-ecological
and agro-climatic approach and the harnessing of frontier technologies;
(f) to bring about synergy between technology and public policy and recommend
measures for enhancing income and employment potential in rural areas through
diversification, application of appropriate technology including Information
Technology for information on market, weather, credit facilities and e-commerce, training
and market reforms;
(g) to suggest measures to attract and retain educated youth in farming and
recommend for this purpose; methods of technological upgrading of crop husbandry,
horticulture, animal husbandry, fisheries (inland and marine), agro-forestry and
agro-processing and associated marketing infrastructure;
(h) to recommend such measures that assure a remunerative and stable price
environment for farmers including improvements in the storage and marketing
infrastructure and procedures as well as adequate and appropriate support to producer
organisations;
(i) to monitor the prices being realised by farmers for various agricultural
commodities all over the country and forward prompt advisories to all concerned
agencies or departments for effective action to be taken;
(j) to recommend to the Central Government regulation of cost of agricultural
inputs including seeds, fertilisers, pesticides, electricity, diesel and farm equipment;
(k) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission
may deem fit, reports upon the working of the Commission; and
(l) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and
development and advancement of the farmers as the President may, subject to the
provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament
along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of
any of such recommendations.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which any
State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of
the State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations
relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such
recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in sub-clause (a)
or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5), have all the powers
of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
(9) The Central and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all major
policy matters affecting farmers".
3. In article 366 of the Constitution, after clause ( 10), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(10A) "Farmer" means a person actively engaged in the economic and/or
livelihood activity of growing crops and producing other primary agricultural
commodities and will include all agricultural operational holders, cultivators, agricultural
labourers, sharecroppers, tenants, poultry and livestock rearers, fishers, beekeepers,
gardeners, pastoralists, non-corporate planters and planting labourers, as well as
persons engaged in various farming related occupations such as sericulture,
vermiculture, and agro-forestry, and shall also include tribal families or persons engaged
in shifting cultivation and in the collection, use and sale of minor and non-timber forest
produce".
Amendment
of article
366.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Agriculture plays a vital role in India's economy. According to the census of 2011,
54.6% of the population is engaged in agriculture and allied activities and it contributes
17.4% to the country's Gross Value Added. Like Indian culture, agriculture in India is highly
pluralistic and multi-dimensional. India's ecological diversity, crop diversity and diet diversity
are inextricably inter-connected.
2. The share of agriculture in total employment jumped to 39.4% in the year 2020-21
from 38% in 2019-20. Agriculture sector plays an important role in the livelihood of people in
India, providing employment and income. This sector has also shown resilience in the face of
the COVID-19 pandemic when most of the other sectors of the economy registered marginal
or negative growth. The share of agricuture and allied sectors in the Gross Value Added
(GV A) of the country at current prices in 2019-20 was 16.5%. Although, the growth of GVA in
2019-20 was only 2.8% as compared to 6.3% in 2016-17, it was higher than all the other
sectors of the economy.
3. A National Commission on Farmers was established in the year 2004 through an
executive order and was later disbanded in the year 2006. The contribution of the Commission
has been immense in highlighting the issues around the agriculture industry, including those
of increase in number of farmer suicide, use of sustainable and viable means of farming etc.
It also gave pragmatic solutions to farmer distresses and the recommendations encompassed
issues of access to resources and social security entitlements.
4. The importance of the agriculture sector is evident from the aforementioned data,
therefore, it is only imperative that active measures are taken to revolutionize the sector and
address the challenges faced by the industry by making the National Commission on Farmers
a constitutional body. It will be entrusted with the task of highlighting and addressing the
issues faced by the primary stakeholders of the sector i.e., the farmers which would ensure
a holistic development of the whole sector.
Hence, this Bill.
ASHOK  KUMAR  MITTAL.
4

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (2) of clause 2 of the Bill, inter alia, provides that the National Commission
for Farmers shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and
the conditions of service and tenure of the offices of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
Members so appointed shall be such as the President may, by rule determine.
2. The Bill therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give an exact estimate of expenditure both
recurring and non-recurring, which will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about fifty crore rupees will be
involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
3. A non-recurring expenditure of about ten crore rupees is also likely to be involved.

RS-P&PS-PMB(E)109-15.12.2023.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal, M.P.)