THE WOMEN WORKERS (EQUAL PAY AND WELFARE) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for equal pay to women workers and their welfare and for matters connected
therewith or  incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Women Workers (Equal Pay and Welfare) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) "women worker" means a woman worker engaged in any shop, establishment,
industry, factory or agricultural operations or any other work where physical labour is
required.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No. CVI of  2006
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006.
5
10

SERVER 5 \ BILL2004 \ RS\ 4137RS
2
3.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every woman worker shall be paid equal pay for equal work performed by her as compared to
a male worker.
4.  Every person who is the owner or the in-charge of any establishment, industry,
factory or activity, where woman workers are engaged shall provide the following facilities
for such workers at the place of work:—
(i) Creche including mobile creche facilities;
(ii) rest rooms;
(iii) separate toilets;
(iv) drinking water; and
(v) health care facilities.
5. Every woman worker shall be entitled to half an hour rest after every three hours of
work performed by her with lunch break for one hour.
6. The appropriate Government shall appoint inspectors to inspect the facilities
provided by employers to women workers at work place and ensure compliance of the
provisions of this Act.
7. Whoever, contravenes the provisions of,—
(i) section 3 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees five lakhs
and the licence of such employer or the establishments shall also be cancelled.
(ii) sections 4 and 5, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees
ten lakhs.
8. The Provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as aforesaid, the
provisions of this Act shall be  in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being applicable to equal pay for equal work.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Facilities to
be provided
to the women
by employer.
Mandatory
rest to women
workers.
Appointment
of Inspectors.
Penalty.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
Equal pay for
equal work.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It has been observed that women workers are not paid equal wages even for the same
proportion of work done by them as compared to their male counterparts. In actual practice
they are given less wages though, at times, they are asked to acknowledge the receipt of full
wages. Though the Equal Remuneration Act is in place, it is not complied with.
Moreover, women workers are not getting adequate facilities at their work places. At
some places, there is no toilets or drinking water facilities for them. The infants of these
workers have to be taken care of but there are no creche facilities. There is no proper health
facilities or rest rooms for women workers. Due to biological reasons, women workers have
to take rest after performing work for some period, say, three hours.
At present, there is no law providing for facilities to women workers at their work
places. Therefore, it is proposed to provide for a comprehensive legislation to make way for
equal wages to women workers and provision of certain facilities to them at their work places.
Hence this Bill.
SYEDA  ANWARA  TAIMUR
3

4
FINANCIAL   MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for  making certain facilities to women workers at their
work places. Some of the organisations under the Government have also to provide these
facilities. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the appointment of Inspectors to inspect the
facilities provided by the employers.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. A recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore per annum and a non-
recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill provides for framing of rules for carrying out the provisions of the
Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of deficits only, the delegation of legislative power is of
a normal character.

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for equal pay to women workers and their welfare and for matters connected
therewith or  incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Syeda Anwara Taimur, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4137RS(S5)—8-12-2006.