1
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/ RAJYASABHA\4139RS
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  CVII of  2006
THE CHILD LABOUR (ABOLITION AND REHABILITATION)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for abolition of child labour in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Child Labour (Abolition and Rehabilitation) Act,
2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a state, Government of
that State and in all other cases, Central Government;
(b) “child” means a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 2006.
5
10

2
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/ RAJYASABHA\4139RS
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
child labour in any form is hereby abolished.
4. The appropriate Government shall ensure that no person employs any child for
performance of any of the following work, namely:—
(i) Domestic work;
(ii) Agricultural operations;
(iii) Construction activities and operations of transport industry;
(iv) Work in shop, factory, any establishment or organisation; and
(v) Manufacturing, trading or processing activity of any item.
Provided that any child may work at his own residence or perform any domestic
work out of his volition.
5. The appropriate Government within its territorial jurisdiction shall ensure that
no establishment sells or buys any product which has been manufactured or processed
by any industrial establishment or factory employing child labour and it shall be the
duty of every organisation to display in bold letters, at prominent location, in the
organisation that it does not deal with any activity or product where child labour is
involved.
6. Whoever,—
(i) employs or compels any child to render labour for remuneration without
sending him to a school shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three months and a fine of rupees ten thousand.
(ii) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
every person who, at the time, offences were committed, was in charge of and
was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company,
as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offences and shall be
punished with imprisonment which may extend to six months and a fine of not
less than rupees one lakh and not more than ten lakhs, and the license of that
organisation shall be cancelled and he shall also be required to meet the educational
and such other requirements of the child as may be necessary for his development
and education upto graduation level.
7. If any child is found to be self employed and he has no parents or guardians to
support him, he shall be immediately sent to a hostel for studies by the Central
Government and all expenditure on this account shall be met by the Central Government.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to
and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Abolition of
Child Labour.
Prohibition
on Child
Employment.
No establish-
ment to deal
with any
activity or
product
involving
child labour.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
expenditure
to the child
having no
parents.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
2

3
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/ RAJYASABHA\4139RS
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Child labour is very much prevalent in our country. Millions of children are engaged in
various activities like domestic, agriculture, industry, factory, construction activities, etc.
Due to poverty, they are sent for work instead of schools for education. Even at the work
place, they are harassed, and not even paid the minimum wages. No basic facilities are
provided to them. Sometimes, children are also engaged in hazardous industries. These
children are forced to work by their parents due to stark poverty.
The Bill seeks to provide for abolition of child labour and provides for their
rehabilitation. The Bill also proposes that no child below the age of eighteen years should be
employed in any work or activity and those who employ them should not only be subjected
to punishment but also they will be required to meet the cost of education of the child.
Moreover, ban on selling the products of the industrial establishments or factories
wherein child labour has been engaged for its manufacturing or processing, has also been
proposed.
Hence this Bill.
SYEDA  ANWARA TAIMUR

4
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/ RAJYASABHA\4139RSSERVER 3 BILL 2004/ RAJYASABHA\3902RS
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for educational facilities to those child labour who do not
have any parents or guardians. Since educational facilities are already provided in schools
without any cost, only nominal expenditure will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of
India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum will be involved
and a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is likely to be involved.

5
SERVER 3 BILL 2004/ RAJYASABHA\4139RS
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
Bill
to provide for abolition of child labour in the country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Syeda Anwara Taimur, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4139RS(S3)—8-12-2006.