AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA 
SABHA   ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Bill No.  CVIII of 2022
THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Amendment  of section 12.
3. Amendment  of section 40.
4. Amendment  of section 44.
5. Amendment  of section 56.
6. Amendment  of section 59.
7. Amendment  of section 66.
8. Amendment  of section 66A.
9. Amendment  of section  67.
10. Amendment  of section 72.
11. Amendment  of section 74.
12. Amendment  of section 88A.
13. Amendment  of section 93.
14. Amendment  of section 96.
15. Amendment  of section 114.
16. Amendment  of section 117.
17. Amendment  of section 161.
18. Amendment  of section 163.
19. Amendment  of section 166.
20. Amendment  of section 173.
21. Amendment  of section 177.
22. Omission  of  section 177A.
23. Amendment  of section 178.
24. Amendment  of section 179.
25. Amendment  of section 180.
26. Amendment  of section 181.
27. Amendment  of section 182.
28. Omission  of section 182A.

29. Omission  of section 182B.
30. Amendment  of section 183.
31. Amendment  of section 184.
32. Amendment  of section 185.
33. Amendment  of section 186.
34. Amendment  of section 187.
35. Amendment  of section 189.
36. Amendment  of section 190.
37. Amendment  of section 192A.
38. Amendment  of section 194.
39. Amendment  of section 200.
40. Amendment  of section 206.
41. Omission  of section 210A.
42. Omission  of section 215A.
C
LAUSES
(ii)

1
Bill No. CVIII of 2022
THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
BE it enacted by  Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:––
l. (1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2022.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In the Motor V ehicles Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 13—
(i) in sub section (5), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: —
''Provided that the license authority, after physical test in the testing yard
shall issue the licence after successful trial only ''; and
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
5
59 of 1988 Amendment of
section 12.
10

2
(ii) in sub-section ( 6), for the words "Central Government", the words "State
Government" shall be substituted.
3. In section 40 of the principal Act, for the words "any registering authority in the
state", the words "a registering authority" shall be substituted.
4. In section 44 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "shall not require
production", the words "shall be required to be produced" shall be substituted.
5. In section 56 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the words "testing station
mentioned in sub-section ( 2)" the words "and certified by transport authorities" shall be
inserted.
6. In section 59 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), after the words "exceeded their
life", the words "or if found not road worthy by the prescribed authorities" shall be inserted.
7. In section 66 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the fourth proviso, the words
"at the discretion of the vehicle owner" shall be omitted.
8. In section 66A of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause (vii) the word "competition" shall be omitted; and
(ii) in clause ( viii), the words "while seeking to enhance private participation
and public-private partnership in the transport sector" shall be omitted.
9. In section 67 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), clause (d) be omitted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), the proviso shall be omitted; and
(iii) in sub-section (3), clauses (g) and (m) shall be omitted.
10. In section 72 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the proviso shall be omitted.
11. In section 74 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (2), the proviso shall be omitted; and
(ii) in sub-section (3), in the proviso to clause (b), the sub-clause (vii), shall be
omitted.
12. In section 88A of the principal Act,—
(i) in the marginal heading, for the words "Central Government", the words
"State Government" shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (1),—
(a) for the words "Central Government", the words "State Government"
shall be substituted;
(b) clause (e) shall be omitted;
(c) in clause ( k), for the words "Central Government", the words "State
Government" shall be substituted.
13. In section 93 of the principal 
Act,—
(i) in the marginal heading, the words "or aggregator" shall be omitted;
(ii) in sub-section (1), clause (iii) shall be omitted; and
(iii) in sub-section (1), the proviso shall be omitted.
14. In Section 96 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clauses (xxxiia) and (xxxiib)
shall be omitted.
Amendment of
section 40.
Amendment of
section 44.
Amendment of
section 56.
Amendment of
section 59.
Amendment of
section 66.
Amendment of
section 66A.
Amendment of
section 67.
Amendment of
section 72.
Amendment of
section 74.
Amendment of
section 88A.
Amendment of
section 93.
Amendment of
section 96.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
15. In section 114 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), the words "or any other
person authorised in this behalf by the State Government" shall be omitted.
16. In section 117 of the principal Act, in the second proviso, the words "or any other
agency authorised by the Central Government" shall be omitted.
17. In section 161 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words "a fixed sum", the words "an interim relief" shall be
substituted; and
(ii) in clause (b), for the words "a fixed sum", the words "an interim relief" shall
be substituted.
18. In section 163 of the principal Act, —
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "shall be refunded to the insurer", the words
"shall be adjusted against the amount awarded by a Claims Tribunal" shall be
substituted; and
(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
19. In section 166 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the second proviso shall be
omitted.
20. In section 173 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "one lakh", the
words "ten thousand" shall be substituted.
21. In section 177 of the principal Act, for the words "five hundred rupees" and "one
thousand and five hundred rupees", the words "one hundred rupees" and "three hundred
rupees" respectively shall be substituted.
22. Section 177A of the principal Act shall be omitted.
23. In section 178 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (b), for the words
"five hundred rupees", the words "two hundred rupees" shall be substituted.
24. In section 179 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for the words "two thousand rupees", the words "five
hundred rupees" shall be substituted; and
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), for the words "two thousand rupees", the words "five
hundred rupees" shall be substituted.
25. In section 180 of the principal Act, for the words "of five thousand rupees", the
words "which may extend to one thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
26. In section 181 of the principal Act, for the words "of five thousand rupees", the
words "which may extend to five hundred rupees" shall be substituted.
27. In section 182 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "of ten thousand rupees", the words "which
may extend to five hundred rupees" shall be substituted; and
(ii) in sub-section (2 ), for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "one
hundred rupees" shall be substituted.
28. In section 182A of the principal Act shall be omitted.
29. Section 182B of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Amendment of
section 114.
Amendment of
section 117.
Amendment of
section 161.
Amendment of
section 163.
Amendment of
section 166.
Amendment of
section 173.
Amendment of
section 177.
Omission of
section 177A.
Amendment of
section 178.
Amendment of
section 179.
Amendment of
section 180.
Amendment of
section 181.
Amendment of
section 182.
Omission of
section 182A.
Omission of
section 182B.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
30. In section 183 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) Whoever, drives or causes any person who is employed by him or subjects
someone under his control to drive a motor vehicle in contravention of the speed limits
referred to in section 112 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
four hundred rupees, or, if having been previously convicted of an offence under this
sub-section is again convicted of an offence under this sub-section, with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees".
31. In section 184 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words "which may extend to one year but shall not be less than
six months or with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees but may extend
to five thousand rupees, or with both", the words "which may extend to six months or
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees" shall be substituted; and
(ii) for the words "of ten thousand rupees", the words "which may extend to
two thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
32. In section 185 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words "of ten thousand rupees", the words "which may extend to two
thousand rupees" shall be substituted;
(ii) after the words "and for a second or subsequent offence," the words "if
committed within three years of the commission of the previous similar offence," shall
be inserted; and
(iii) for the words "of fifteen thousand rupees", the words "which may extend to
three thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
33. In section 186 of the principal Act, for the words "one thousand rupees" and "two
thousand rupees", the words "two hundred rupees" and "five hundred rupees" respectively
shall be substituted.
34. In section 187 of the principal Act, —
(i) for the words "six months, or with fine of five thousand rupees", the words
"three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees" shall be
substituted; and
(ii) for the words "one year, or with fine of ten thousand rupees", the words "six
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
35. In section 189 of the principal Act, for the words "three months, or with fine of five
thousand rupees", the words "six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees" shall be substituted.
36. In section 190 of the principal Act, —
(i) in sub-section (1),—
(a) for the words "of one thousand five hundred rupees", the words "of
two hundred and fifty rupees" shall be substituted; and
(b) for the words "of five thousand rupees", the words "which may extend
to one thousand rupees" shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both
and he shall be disqualified for holding licence for a period of three months", the words
"a fine of one thousand rupees" shall be substituted;
Amendment of
section 183.
Amendment of
section 184.
Amendment of
section 185.
Amendment of
section 186.
Amendment of
section 187.
Amendment of
section 189.
Amendment of
section 190.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(iii) in sub-section (3),—
(a) for the words "with a fine of ten thousand rupees and he shall be
disqualified for holding licence for a period of three months", the words "which
may extend to three thousand rupees," shall be substituted; and
(b) for the words "of twenty thousand rupees", the words "five thousand
rupees" shall be substituted.
37. In section 192A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months and a fine of ten thousand rupees and for any
subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year but shall not be less
than six months or with fine of ten thousand rupees or with both:", the words "a fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees but shall not be less than two thousand rupees and for
any subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year but shall not be
less than three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be
less than five thousand rupees or with both:" be shall substituted.
38. In section 194 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for the words "fine of twenty thousand rupees and an
additional amount of two thousand rupees", the words "minimum fine of two thousand
rupees and an additional amount of one thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
(ii) sub-section (1A) shall be omitted; and
(iii) in sub-section (2 ), for the words "of forty thousand rupees", the words
"which may extend to three thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
39. In section 200 of the principal Act:—
(i) in sub-section (1), —
(a) for the words, figures and brackets "punishable under section 177,
section 178, section 179, section 180, section 181, section 182, sub-section (1) or
sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 182A, section 182B, sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2) of section 183, section 184 only to the extent of use of handheld
communication devices, section 186, section 189, sub-section (2) of section 190,
section 192, section 192A, section 194, section 194A, section 194B, section
194C, section 194D, section 194E, section 194F, section 196, section 198,", the
words, brackets, figures and letters "punishable under section 177, section 178,
section 179, section 180, section 181, section 182, sub-section ( 1) or
sub-section (2) of section 183, section 184, section 186, section 189, sub-section (2)
of section 190, section 192, section 194, section 196, or section 198," shall be
substituted;
(b) the proviso shall be omitted; and
(ii) in sub-section (2), the provisos shall be omitted.
40. In section 206 of the principal Act, sub-section (4) shall be omitted.
41. Section 210A of the principal Act, shall be omitted.
42. Section 215A of the principal Act, shall be omitted.
Amendment of
section 192A.
Amendment of
section 194.
Amendment of
section 200.
Amendment of
section 206.
Omission of
section 210A.
Omission of
section 215A.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Transport Industry is the life line of the economy. Such a vital segment of the economy
is now thrown into serious crisis.  Lakhs of lorries have been seized by the private finance
companies for default of payment of EMIs. The fate of the auto rickshaw and taxi drivers is
also the same. All the State Transport Undertakings in the country are in severe financial
crisis and not able to replace the old aged vehicles and augment the increasing needs of the
public. This has added burden on the people, particularly the poor and unorganised workers.
The COVID-19 pandemic has added fuel to the crisis. Even the individual vehicle owners are
afraid of the unbearable penalties to take out their vehicles. The victims of the motor vehicle
accidents are in peril like condition due to the compensation cap in the existing Act.  In such
a situation in the interest of the country and the people at large, it is imperative further to
amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
Hence, this Bill.
ELAMARAM  KAREEM.
6

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MOTER VEHICLES ACT, 1988
(ACT NO. 59 OF 1988)
* * * * * *
12. * * * * * *
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision, where any school or
establishment has been accredited by a body notified by the Central Government under any
other law for the time being in force, any person who has successfully completed a training
module at such school or establishment covering a particular type of motor vehicle shall be
eligible to obtain a driving licence for such type of motor vehicle.
(6) The curriculum of the training module referred to in sub-section (5) and the remedial
driver training course referred to in sub-section ( 5) of section 9 shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government and that Government may make rules for the regulation
of such schools or establishments.
* * * * * *
40. Subject to the provisions of section 42, section 43 and section 60, every owner of
a motor vehicle shall cause the vehicle to be registered by 1 [any registering authority in the
State] in whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of business where the vehicle is
normally kept.
* * * * * *
44. (1) Subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in this behalf, a motor vehicle sold by an authorised dealer shall not require
production before a registering authority for the purposes of registration for the first time.
* * * * * *
56. (1) Subject to the provisions of sections 59 and 60, a transport vehicle shall not be
deemed to be validly registered for the purposes of section 39, unless it carries a certificate
of fitness in such form containing such particulars and information as may be prescribed by
the Central Government, issued by the prescribed authority, or by an authorised testing
station mentioned in sub-section (2), to the effect that the vehicle complies for the time being
with all the requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder:
Provided that where the prescribed authority or the authorised testing station refuses
is issue such certificate, it shall supply the owner of the vehicle with its reasons in writing for
such refusal:
Provided further that no certificate of fitness shall be granted to a vehicle, after such
date as may be notified by the Central Government, unless such vehicle has been tested at an
automated testing station.
* * * * * *
59. *               *  *             *  *            *
(4) The Central Government may, having regard to the public safety, convenience,
protection of the environment and the objects of this Act, make rules prescribing the manner
of recycling of motor vehicles and parts thereof which have exceeded their life.
* * * * * *
66. (1) No owner of a motor vehicle shall use or permit the use of the vehicle as a
transport vehicle in any public place whether or not such vehicle is actually carrying any
Licensing and
regulation of
schools or
establishments
for imparting
instruction in
driving of
motor
vehicles.
Registration,
where to be
made.
Production of
vehicle at the
time of
registration.
Certificate of
fitness of
transport
vehicles.
Power to fix
the age limit of
motor vheicle.
Necessity for
permits.
7

8
passengers or goods save in accordance with the conditions of a permit granted or
countersigned by a Regional or State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority
authorising him the use of the vehicle in that place in the manner in which the vehicle is being
used:
Provided that a stage carriage permit shall, subject to any conditions that may be
specified in the permit, authorise the use of the vehicle as a contract carriage:
Provided further that a stage carriage permit may, subject to any conditions that may
be specified in the permit, authorise the use of the vehicle as a goods carriage either when
carrying passengers or not:
Provided also that a goods carriage permit shall, subject to any conditions that may be
specified in the permit, authorise the use of the vehicle for the carriage of goods for or in
connection with a trade or business carried on by him:
Provided also that where a transport vehicle has been issued any permit or permits, as
well as a licence under this Act, such vehicle may be used either under the permit, or permits,
so issued to it, or under such licence, at the discretion of the vehicle owner.
* * * * * *
66A. The Central Government may develop a National Transportation Policy consistent
with the objects of this Act in concurrence with the State Governments and other agencies
with a view to—
* * * * * *
(vii) promote competition, innovation, increase in capacity, seamless mobility
and greater efficiency in transport of goods or livestock or passengers, and economical
use of resources;
(viii) safeguard the interest of the public and promote equity, while seeking to
enhance private participation and public-private partnership in the transport sector;
* * * * * *
67. (1) A State Government, having regard to—
* * * * * *
(d) promoting effective competition among the transport service providers,
may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette issue directions both to the State
Transport Authority and Regional Transport Authority regarding the passengers'
convenience, economically competitive fares, prevention of overcrowding and road safety.
(2) Any direction under sub-section (1) regarding the fixing of fares and freights for
stage carriages, contract carriages and goods carriages may provide that such fares or
freights shall be inclusive of the tax payable by the passengers or the consignors of the
goods, as the case may be, to the operators of the stage carriages, contract carriages or
goods carriages under any law for the time being in force relating to tax on passengers and
goods:
Provided that the State Government may subject to such conditions as it may deem fit,
and with a view to achieving the objectives specified in clause (d) of sub-section (1), relax all
or any of the provisions made under this Chapter.
* * * * * *
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, modify any permit issued under this Act or make schemes
for the transportation of goods and passengers and issue licences under such scheme for
the promotion of development and efficiency in transportation—
National
Transportation
Policy.
Power to State
Government to
control road
transport.

9
* * * * * *
(g) the enhancement of economic vitality of the area, through competitiveness,
productivity and efficiency;
* * * * * *
(m) such other matters as the Central Government may deem fit.
* * * * * *
72. *               *  *             *  *            *
(2) The Regional Transport Authority, if it decides to grant a stage carriage permit, may
grant the permit for a stage carriage of a specified description and may, subject to any rules
that may be made under this Act, attach to the permit any one or more of the following
conditions, namely:—
(i) that the vehicles shall be used only in a specified area, or on a specified route
or routes;
(ii) that the operation of the stage carriage shall be commenced with effect from
a specified date;
(iii) the minimum and maximum number of daily trips to be provided in relation to
any route or area generally or on specified days and occasions;
(iv) that copies of the time-table of the stage carriage approved by the Regional
Transport Authority shall be exhibited on the vehicles and at specified stands and
halts on the route or within the area;
(v) that the stage carriage shall be operated within such margins of deviation
from the approved time-table as the Regional Transport Authority may from time to
time specify;
(vi) that within municipal limits and such other areas and places as may be
prescribed, passengers or goods shall not be taken up or set down except at specified
points;
(vii) the maximum number of passengers and the maximum weight of luggage
that may be carried on the stage carriage, either generally or on specified occasions or
at specified times and seasons;
(viii) the weight and nature of passengers; luggage that shall be carried free of
charge, the total weight of luggage that may be carried in relation to each passenger,
and the arrangements that shall be made for the carriage of luggage without causing
inconvenience to passengers;
(ix) the rate of charge that may be levied for passengers' luggage in excess of the
free allowance;
(x) that vehicles of a specified type fitted with body conforming to approved
specifications shall be used: Provided that the attachment of this condition to a permit
shall not prevent the continued use, for a period of two years from the date of
publication of the approved specifications, of any vehicle operating on that date;
(xi) that specified standards of comfort and cleanliness shall be maintained in
the vehicles;
(xii) the conditions subject to which goods may be carried in the stage carriage
in addition to or to the exclusion of passengers;
(xiii) that fares shall be charged in accordance with the approved fare table;
(xiv) that a copy of, or extract from, the fare table approved by the Regional
Transport Authority and particulars of any special fares or rates of fares so approved
Grant of stage
carriage
permits.

10
for particular occasions shall be exhibited on the stage carriage and at specified stands
and halts;
(xv) that tickets bearing specified particulars shall be issued to passengers and
shall show the fares actually charged and that records of tickets issued shall be kept in
a specified manner;
(xvi) that mails shall be carried on the vehicle subject to such conditions
(including conditions as to the time in which mails are to be carried and the charges
which may be levied) as may be specified;
(xvii) the vehicles to be kept as reserve by the holder of the permit to maintain
the operation and to provide for special occasions;
(xviii) the conditions subject to which vehicle may be used as a contract carriage;
(xix) that specified arrangements shall be made for the housing, maintenance
and repair of vehicle;
(xx) that any specified bus station or shelter maintained by Government or a
local authority shall be used and that any specified rent or fee shall be paid for such
use;
(xxi) that the conditions of the permit shall not be departed from, save with the
approval of the Regional Transport Authority;
(xxii) that the Regional Transport Authority may, after giving notice of not less
than one month,—
(a) vary the conditions of the permit;
(b) attach to the permit further conditions:
Provided that the conditions specified in pursuance of clause (i) shall not
be varied so as to alter the distance covered by the original route by more than
24 kilometers, and any variation within such limits shall be made only after the
Regional Transport Authority is satisfied that such variation will serve the
convenience of the public and that it is not expedient to grant a separate permit
in respect of the original route as so varied or any part thereof;
      ( xxiii) that the holder of a permit shall furnish to the Regional Transport
Authority such periodical returns, statistics and other information as the State
Government may from time to time prescribe;
     (xxiv) any other conditions which may be prescribed:—
Provided that the Regional Transport Authority may waive any such condition for a
stage carriage permit operating in a rural area, as it deems fit.
* * * * * *
74. * * * * * *
  (2) The Regional Transport Authority, if it decides to grant a contract carriage permit,
may, subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, attach to the permit any one or
more of the following conditions, namely:—
(i) that the vehicles shall be used only in a specified area or on a specified route
or routes;
(ii) that except in accordance with specified conditions, no contract of hiring,
other than an extension or modification of a subsisting contract, may be entered into
outside the specified area;
(iii) the maximum number of passengers and the maximum weight of luggage
Grant of
contract
carriage
permit.

11
that may be carried on the vehicles, either generally or on specified occasions or at
specified times and seasons;
(iv) the conditions subject to which goods may be carried in any contract carriage
in addition to, or to the exclusion of, passengers;
(v) that, in the case of motor cabs, specified fares or rates of fares shall be
charged and a copy of the fare table shall be exhibited on the vehicle;
(vi) that, in the case of vehicles other than motor cabs, specified rates of hiring
not exceeding specified maximum shall be charged;
(vii) that, in the case of motor cabs, a special weight of passengers' luggage shall
be carried free of charge, and that the charge, if any, for any luggage in excess thereof
shall be at a specified rate;
 (viii) that, in the case of motor cabs, a taximeter shall be fitted and maintained in
proper working order, if prescribed;
 (ix) that the Regional Transport Authority may, after giving, notice of not less
than one month,—
(a) vary the conditions of the permit;
(b) attach to the permit further conditions;
(x) that the conditions of permit shall not be departed from save with the approval
of the Regional Transport Authority;
(xi) that specified standards of comfort and cleanliness shall be maintained in
the vehicles;
(xii) that, except in the circumstances of exceptional nature, the plying of the
vehicle or carrying of the passengers shall not be refused;
(xiii) any other conditions which may be prescribed:
          Provided that the Regional Transport Authority may in the interests of last mile
connectivity waive any such condition in respect of any such types of vehicles as may be
specified by the Central Government.
(3) * * * * * *
(b) Where the number of contract carriages are fixed under clause (a), the Regional
Transport Authority shall, in considering an application for the grant of permit in
respect of any such contract carriage, have regard to the following matters, namely:—
(i) financial stability of the applicant;
(ii) satisfactory performance as a contract carriage operator including
payment of tax if the applicant is or has been an operator of contract carriages;
and
(iii) such other matters as may be prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that, other conditions being equal, preference shall be given to
applications for permits from—
* * * * * *
(vii) self-help groups.
* * * * * *
88A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, modify any permit issued under this Act or make
schemes for national, multimodal and inter-State transportation of goods or passengers, and
issue or modify licences under, such scheme for the following purposes, namely:—
* * * * * *
(e) the enhancement to the economic vitality of the area, especially
Power of
Central
Government
to make
schemes for
national,
multimodal
and inter-State
transport of
passengers and
goods.

12
* * * * * *
(k) such other matters as Central Government may deem fit:
Provided that the Central Government may, before taking any action under this
sub-section seek concurrence of the State Governments.
* * * * * *
93. (1) No person shall engage himself—
(i) as an agent or a canvasser, in the sale of tickets for travel by public service
vehicles or in otherwise soliciting custom for such vehicles, or
(ii) as an agent in the business of collecting, forwarding or distributing goods
carried by goods carriages,
(iii) as an aggregator,] unless he has obtained a licence from such authority and
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the State Government:
Provided that while issuing the licence to an aggregator the State Government may
follow such guidelines as may be issued by the Central Government:
Provided further that every aggregator shall comply with the provisions of the
Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) and the rules and regulations made thereunder.
* * * * * *
96. * * * * * *
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules under this section
may be made with respect to all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * * *
(xxxiia) framing of schemes under sub-section (3) of section 67;
(xxxiib) the promotion of effective competition, passenger convenience and
safety, competitive fares and prevention of overcrowding;
* * * * * *
114. (1) Any officer of the Motor Vehicles Department or any other person authorised
in this behalf by the State Government shall, if he has reason to believe that a goods vehicle
or trailer is being used in contravention of section 113 require the driver to convey the
vehicle to a weighing device, if any, within a distance of ten kilometres from any point on the
forward route or within a distance of twenty kilometres from the destination of the vehicle for
weighment; and if on such weighment the vehicle is found to contravene in any respect the
provisions of section 113 regarding weight, he may, by order in writing, direct the driver to
off-load the excess weight at his own risk and not to remove the vehicle or trailer from that
place until the laden weight has been reduced or the vehicle or trailer has otherwise been
dealt with so that it complies with section 113 and on receipt of such notice, the driver shall
comply with such directions.
* * * * * *
117. * * * * * *
Provided further that for the purpose of this section the National Highways Authority
of India, constituted under the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988 (68 of 1988)
or any other agency authorised by the Central Government, may also determine such places.
* * * * * * *
161. * * * * * *
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the scheme made under sub-section (3),
there shall be paid as compensation,—
(a) in respect of the death of any person resulting from a hit and run motor
accident, a fixed sum of two lakh rupees or such higher amount as may be prescribed
by the Central Government;
Agent or
canvasser or
aggregator to
obtain
licence.
Power of State
Government to
make rules for
the pruposes of
this Chapter.
Power to have
vehicle
weighed.
Parking places
and halting
stations.
Special
provisions as
to
compensation
in case of hit
and run motor
accident.

13
(b) in respect of grievous hurt to any person resulting from a hit and run motor
accident, a fixed sum of fifty thousand rupees or such higher amount as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
* * * * * *
163. (1) The payment of compensation in respect of the death of, or grievous hurt to,
any 
person under section 161 shall be subject to the condition that if any compensation  
(hereafter in this sub-section referred to as the other compensation) or other amount in lieu 
of or by way of satisfaction of a claim for compensation is awarded or paid in respect of such 
death or grievous hurt under any other provision of this Act or any other law fo r the time 
being in force or otherwise, so much of the other compensation or other amount aforesaid as 
is equal to the compensation paid under section 161, shall be refunded to the insurer.
(2) Before awarding compensation in respect of an accident involving the death of, or
bodily injury to, any person arising out of the use of a motor vehicle under any provision of 
this Act other than section 161 or any other law for the time being in force, the Claims 
Tribunal, court or other authority awarding such compensation shall verify as to whether in 
respect of such death or bodily injury compensation has already been paid under section 161 
or an application for payment of compensation is pending under that section, and such 
Tribunal, court or other authority shall—
(a) if compensation has already been paid under section 161, direct the person
liable to pay the compensation awarded by it to refund to the insurer, so much thereof
as is required to be refunded in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 1);
(b) if an application for payment of compensation is pending under section 161
forward the particulars as to the compensation awarded by it to the insurer.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, an application for compensation
under section 161 shall be deemed to be pending—
(i) if such application has been rejected, till the date of the rejection of the
application; and
(ii) in any other case, till the date of payment of compensation in pursuance of
the application.
* * * * * *
166. (1) An application for compensation arising out of an accident of the nature
specified in sub-section (1) of section 165 may be made—
(a) by the person who has sustained the injury; or
(b) by the owner of the property; or
(c) where death has resulted from the accident, by all or any of the legal
representatives of the deceased; or
(d) by any agent duly authorised by the person injured or all or any of the legal
representatives of the deceased, as the case may be:
* * * * * *
Provided further that where a person accepts compensation under section 164 in
accordance with the procedure provided under section 149, his claims petition before
the Claims Tribunal shall lapse.
* * * * * *
173. * * * * * *
(2) No appeal shall lie against any award of a Claims Tribunal if the amount in dispute
in the appeal is less than one lakh rupees.
Refund in
certain cases of
compensation
paid under
section 161.
Application
for
compensation.
Appeals.

14
* * * * * *
177. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule, regulation or
notification made thereunder shall, if no penalty is provided for the offence be punishable for
the first offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and for any second or
subsequent offence with fine which may extend to one thousand and five hundred rupees.
177A.Whoever contravenes the regulations made under section 118, shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than five hundred rupees, but may extend to one
thousand rupees.
178. * * * * * *
(3) If the holder of a permit or the driver of a contract carriage refuses, in contravention
of the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder, to ply the contract carriage or to carry
the passengers, he shall,—
(a) * * * * * *
(b) in any other case, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees.
179. (1) Whoever wilfully disobeys any direction lawfully given by any person or
authority empowered under this Act to give such direction, or obstructs any person or
authority in the discharge of any functions which such person or authority is required or
empowered under this Act to discharge, shall, if no other penalty is provided for the offence
be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever, being required by or under this Act to supply any information, wilfully
withholds such information or gives information which he known to be false or which he
does not believe to be true, shall, if no other penalty is provided for the offence, be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend
to 2 two thousand rupees, or with both.
180. Whenever, being the owner or person in charge of a motor vehicle, causes, or
permits, any other person who does not satisfy the provisions of section 3 or section 4 to
drive the vehicle shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with fine of five thousand rupees, or with both.
181. Whoever, drives a motor vehicle in contravention of section 3 or section 4 shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine of
five thousand rupees, or with both.
182. (1) Whoever, being disqualified under this Act for holding or obtaining a driving
licence drives a motor vehicle in a public place or in any other place, or applies for or obtains
a driving licence or, not being entitled to have a driving licence issued to him free of
endorsement, applies for or obtains a driving licence without disclosing the endorsement
made on a driving licence previously held by him shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine of ten thousand rupees or with both,
and any driving licence so obtained by him shall be of no effect.
(2) Whoever, being disqualified under this Act for holding or obtaining a conductor's
licence, acts as a conductor of a stage carriage in a public place or applies for or obtains a
conductor's licence or, not being entitled to have a conductor's licence issued to him free of
endorsement, applies for or obtains a conductor's licence without disclosing the endorsements
made on a conductor's licence previously held by him, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees, or with both, and any conductor's licence so obtained by him shall be of no effect.
General
provision for
punishment of
offences.
Penalty for
contravention
of regulations
under section
118.
Penalty for
travelling
without pass
or ticket and
for dereliction
of duty on the
part of
conductor and
refusal to ply
contract
carriage, etc.
Disobedience
of orders,
obstruction
and refusal of
information.
Allowing
unauthorised
persons to
drive vehicles.
Driving
vehicles in
contravention
of section 3 or
section 4.
Offences
relating to
licences.

15
182A.  (1) Whoever, being a manufacturer, importer or dealer of motor vehicles, sells or
delivers or alters or offers to sell or deliver or alter, a motor vehicle that is in contravention of
the provisions of Chapter VII or the rules and regulations made thereunder, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine of one lakh rupees per
such motor vehicle or with both:
Provided that no person shall be convicted under this section if he proves that, at the
time of sale or delivery or alteration or offer of sale or delivery or alteration of such motor
vehicle, he had disclosed to the other party the manner in which such motor vehicle was in
contravention of the provisions of Chapter VII or the rules and regulations made thereunder.
(2) Whoever, being a manufacturer of motor vehicles, fails to comply with the provisions
of Chapter VII or the rules and regulations made thereunder, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one
hundred crore rupees or with both.
(3) Whoever, sells or offers to sell, or permits the sale of any component of a motor
vehicle which has been notified as a critical safety component by the Central Government
and which does not comply with Chapter VII or the rules and regulations made thereunder
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine
of one lakh rupees per such component or with both.
(4) Whoever, being the owner of a motor vehicle, alters a motor vehicle, including by
way of retrofitting of motor vehicle parts, in a manner not permitted under the Act or the rules
and regulations made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine of five thousand rupees per such alteration or with
both.
182B.Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 62A, shall be punishable with
fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees, but may extend to ten thousand
rupees.
183. (1) Whoever, drives or causes any person who is employed by him or subjects
someone under his control to drive a motor vehicle in contravention of the speed limits
referred to in section 112 shall be punishable in the following manner, namely:—
(i) where such motor vehicle is a light motor vehicle with fine which shall not be
less than one thousand rupees but may extend to two thousand rupees;
(ii) where such motor vehicle is a medium goods vehicle or a medium passenger
vehicle or a heavy goods vehicle or a heavy passenger vehicle with fine which shall
not be less than two thousand rupees, but may extend to four thousand rupees; and
(iii) for the second or any subsequent offence under this sub-section the driving
licence of such driver shall be impounded as per the provisions of the sub-section (4)
of section 206.
* * * * * *
184.Whoever drives a motor vehicle at a speed or in a manner which is dangerous to
the public or which causes a sense of alarm or distress to the occupants of the vehicle, other
road users, and persons near roads, having regard to all the circumstances of case including
the nature, condition and use of the place where the vehicle is driven and the amount of
traffic which actually is at the time or which might reasonably be expected to be in the place,
shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year but shall not be less than six months or with fine which shall not be less than one
thousand rupees but may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, and for any second
or subsequent offence if committed within three years of the commission of a previous
similar offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine of
ten thousand rupees, or with both.
* * * * * *
Punishment
for offences
relating to
construction,
maintenance,
sale and
alteration of
motor
vehicles and
components.
Punishment
for
contravention
of section
62A.
Driving at
excessive
speed, etc.
Driving
dangerously.

16
185. Whoever, while driving, or attempting to drive, a motor vehicle,—
(a) has, in his blood, alcohol exceeding 30 mg. per 100 ml. of blood detected in a
test by a breath analyser, or in any other test including a laboratory test; or
(b) is under the influence of a drug to such an extent as to be incapable of
exercising proper control over the vehicle, shall be punishable for the first offence with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine of ten thousand
rupees or with both; and for a second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for
term which may extend to two years, or with fine of fifteen thousand rupees, or with
both.
* * * * * *
186. Whoever drives a motor vehicle in any public place when he is to his knowledge
suffering from any disease or disability calculated to cause his driving of the vehicle to be a
source of danger to the public, shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees and for a second or subsequent offence with fine which may
extend to two thousand rupees.
187. Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of clause 3 (a) of sub-section (1) of
section 132 or section 133 or section 134 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine of five thousand rupees, or with both or, if
having been previously convicted of an offence under this section, he is again convicted of
an offence under this section, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine of ten thousand rupees, or with both.
* * * * * *
189. Whoever without the written consent of the State Government permits or takes
part in a race or trial of speed of any kind between motor vehicles in any public place shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine of
five thousand rupees, or with both and for a subsequent offence shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine of ten thousand rupees;
or with both.
190. (1) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven in any public place a
motor vehicle or trailer while the vehicle or trailer has any defect, which such person knows
of or could have discovered by the exercise of ordinary care and which is calculated to render
the driving of the vehicle a source of danger to persons and vehicles using such place, shall
be punishable with fine of one thousand five hundred rupees or, if as a result of such defect
an accident is caused causing bodily injury or damage to property, with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three months, or with fine of five thousand rupees], or with both
and for a subsequent offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with a fine of ten thousand rupees for bodily injury or damage to
property.
(2) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any public place a motor
vehicle, which violates the standards prescribed in relation to road safety, control of noise
and air-pollution, shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with
both and he shall be disqualified for holding licence for a period of three months] and for any
second or subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.
(3) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any public place a motor
vehicle which violates the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder relating to the
carriage of goods which are of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life, shall be
punishable for the first offence with a fine of ten thousand rupees and he shall be disqualified
for holding licence for a period of three months, or with imprisonment for a term which may
Driving by a
drunken
person or by a
person under
the influence
of drugs.
Driving when
mentally or
physically
unfit to drive.
Punishment
for offences
relating to
accident.
Racing and
trials of speed.
Using vehicle
in unsafe
condition.

17
extend to one year, or with both, and for any second or subsequent offence with fine of
twenty thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or
with both.
* * * * * *
192A. (1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be
used in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 66 or in contravention
of any condition of a permit relating to the route on which or the area in which or the purpose
for which the vehicle may be used, shall be punishable for the first offence with  imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months and a fine of ten thousand rupees and for any
subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year but shall not be less
than six months or with fine of ten thousand rupees or with both:
Provided that the court may for reasons to be recorded, impose a lesser punishment.
* * * * * *
194. (1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be
driven in contravention of the provisions of section 113 or section 114 or section 115 shall be
punishable with fine of twenty thousand rupees and an additional amount of two thousand
rupees per tonne of excess load, together with the liability to pay charges for off-loading of
the excess load:
Provided that such motor vehicle shall not be allowed to move before such excess load
is removed or is caused or allowed to be removed by the person in control of such motor
vehicle.
(1A) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be driven
when such motor vehicle is loaded in such a manner that the load or any part thereof or
anything extends laterally beyond the side of the body or to the front or to the rear or in
height beyond the permissible limit shall be punishable with a fine of twenty thousand
rupees, together with the liability to pay charges for off-loading of such load:
Provided that such motor vehicle shall not be allowed to move before such load is
arranged in a manner such that there is no extension of the load laterally beyond the side of
the body or to the front or to the rear or in height beyond the permissible limit:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply when such motor vehicle
has been given an exemption by the competent authority authorised in this behalf, by the
State Government or the Central Government, allowing the carriage of a particular load.
(2) Any driver of a vehicle who refuses to stop and submit his vehicle to weighing
after being directed to do so by an officer authorised in this behalf under section 114 or
removes or causes the removal of the load or part of it prior to weighing shall be punishable
with fine of forty thousand rupees.
* * * * * *
200. (1) Any offence whether committed before or after the commencement of this Act
punishable under section 177, section 178, section 179, section 180, section 181, section 182,
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 3) or sub-section ( 4) of section 182A, section 182B,
sub-section (1) or sub-section ( 2) of section 183, section 184 only to the extent of use of
handheld communication devices, section 186, section 189, sub-section (2) of section 190,
section 192, section 192A, section 194, section 194A, section 194B, section 194C, section
194D, section 194E, section 194F, section 196, section 198,] may either before or after the
institution of the prosecution, be compounded by such officers or authorities and for such
amount as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this
behalf:
Provided that the State Government may, in addition to such amount, require the
offender to undertake a period of community service.
Using vehicle
without
permit.
Driving
vehicle
exceeding
permissible
weight.
Composition
of certain
offences.

18
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (1), the offender, if in
custody, shall be discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect
of such offence:
Provided that notwithstanding compounding under this section, such offence shall be
deemed to be a previous commission of the same offence for the purpose of determining
whether a subsequent offence has been committed:
Provided further that compounding of an offence will not discharge the offender from
proceedings under sub-section ( 4) of section 206 or the obligation to complete a driver
refresher training course, or the obligation to complete community service, if applicable.
* * * * * *
206. *               *  *             *  *            *
(4) A police officer or other person authorised in this behalf by the State Government
shall, if he has reason to believe that the driver of a motor vehicle has committed an offence
under any of sections 183, 184, 185, 189, 190, 194C, 194D, or 194E, seize the driving licence
held by such driver and forward it to the licensing authority for disqualification or revocation
proceedings under section 19:
Provided that the person seizing the licence shall give to the person surrendering the
licence a temporary acknowledgement therefor, but such acknowledgement shall not authorise
the holder to drive until the licence has been returned to him.
* * * * * *
210A. Subject to conditions made by the Central Government, a State Government,
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify a multiplier, not less than one and not
greater than ten, to be applied to each fine under this Act and such modified fine, shall be in
force in such State and different multipliers may be applied to different classes of motor
vehicles as may be classified by the State Government for the purpose of this section.
* * * * * *
215A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,—
(a) the Central Government shall have the power to delegate any power or
functions that have been conferred upon it by the Act to any public servant or public
authority and authorise such public servant or public authority to discharge any of its
powers, functions and duties under this Act;
(b) the State Government shall have the power to delegate any power or functions
that have been conferred upon it by the Act to any public servant or public authority
and authorise such public servant or public authority to discharge any of its powers,
functions and duties under this Act.
* * * * * *
Power of
police officer
to impound
document.
Power of State
Government
to increase
penalties.
Power of
Central
Government
and State
Goverment to
delegate.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
————
(Shri Elamaram Kareem, M.P .)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—121—16-12-2023.