1
Bill No. CVII of 2022
THE  SHOPKEEPERS’  WELFARE  BILL,  2022
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of a Shopkeepers' Welfare Fund and a Board that shall
administer the Fund for the welfare of Shopkeepers and for penalizing
the derogatory use of the word 'dukaandari' in order to uphold the
dignity of shopkeepers and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Shopkeepers' Welfare Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Short title and
commencement.
5 Definitions.

2
Shopkeepers’
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(b) "Board" means the Shopkeepers' Welfare Board established under section 4;
(c) "Fund" means Shopkeepers' Welfare Fund set up under section 3;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "Shopkeeper" means any person who is engaged in the sale of goods either
by retail or wholesale or where services are rendered to cutomers and includes an
office, a store room, godown, warehouse or workhouse or workplace.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up
a Fund to be known as the Shopkeepers' Welfare Fund for the purpose of welfare of
shopkeepers.
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions from Central Government and the State
Governments in such ratio, as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Fund shall be administered by a Board to be called the Shopkeepers Welfare
Board, consisting of—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointment by the Central Government;
(b) one representative from each State Government as may be prescribed; and
(c) two representatives from the Retailers Association of India.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Board shall determine the purposes for which the Fund shall be utilized.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the Fund
shall be utilized for the following purposes:—
(i) payment of old-age pension at the rate of ten thousand rupees per month
after the shopkeeper has attained the age of sixty years and is incapable of performing
his job on account of physical illness, infirmity or incapacity;
(ii) free healthcare facilities for the shopkeepers and their dependent family
members at the designated Government and other hospitals;
(iii) free insurance cover to shopkeepers; and
(iv) free housing facilities for shopkeepers.
(3) The Board shall have such number of employees and such number of offices in the
country, as may be prescribed.
(4) The terms and conditions of service of employees of the Board shall be such, as
may be prescribed.
6. Whoever intentionally insults or intimidates with an intent to humiliate a shopkeeper
in any place within public view through the use of the word "Dukaandari" in a derogatory
manner or in a manner wherein it is used to draw a comparison with malpractices done by
organisations or individuals or services or activity shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to one year and with
fine, or both.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide funds for the effective implementation of the provisions of
this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, after due appropriation made by the Parliament
or the Legislature of a State, as the case may be, provide adequate fund to the Board.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force providing for matters dealt with in this Act.
Shopkeepers
Welfare Board.
Utilisation of
the Fund.
Punishment
and penalties.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other law.

3
5
9. (1)  The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid,  both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
So, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House before that House.
Power to make
rules.
10

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
A retail merchant or tradesman who owns or operates a small store or shop is referred 
to as a shopkeeper
. In India, there are more than seventy million small merchants who 
collectively control almost ninety per cent. of India's retail trade. The small trader or shopkeeper 
has had a significant impact on the Indian economy because it is the direct point of contact 
between buyer and seller and can be found anywhere. In 2020, the retail market size in India 
was 883 billion US dollars, which in the year 2018, was around 950 billion US dollars. Due to 
pandemic, there is a slight shift in the retail market size. Nevertheless, the market is growing 
with time and is expected to reach as high as 1750 billion US dollars by the year 2026. The 
major contributor of retail market in India is the shopkeeper, who can be found at each turn of 
the society. Due to the variety of the products which these shops sell, it is estimated that the 
contribution of these shops account for 75 to 78 per cent. of the consumer goods market.
2. However
, during the time of pandemic, the shopkeepers had to face challenges
ranging from shortage of labour to shortage of supply.  Not only that due to shortage of 
supply and strict lockdown, some small shopkeepers faced financial crunch which severely 
affected their savings. The supply chain and distribution mechanisms of Fast Moving  
Consumer Goods (FMCG) companies and distributors are paralysed, but there is definitely a 
lag due to shortage of manpower. Reverse migration of labourers has led to a 15 to 20 per 
cent. shortage of manpower, resulting in d
elays in products reaching the stores.
3. When the economic and physical lockdown happened, the street corner shopkeepers
had to shut down their shops within a matter of few hours. Thus, they were in for an abrupt 
closure. Shopkeepers also did not have any idea as to when their shops would reopen as the 
lockdown period was extended in phases. The shopkeepers like small business owners had 
to figure out how to initiate business in the short to medium term. This uncertainty to a great 
extent affects the profit of shopkeepers.
4. Furthermore, there have been instances where shopkeepers have been treated
disrespectfully and have been demeaned by the buyers. There have been instances of the 
word
 dukandaari being u sed as an accusation or insult. Such usage is derogatory to the 
shopkeepers' community which is an important cog in the wheels of the economy. However, 
the law does not permit such behaviour against any person, and the shopkeeper has the 
same right. Thus, shopkeepers have the right to be treated with utmost dignity and respect.
5
. Keeping in mind, the difficulties faced by the shopkeepers during the pandemic and
in general, this 
Act provides for the establishment of a welfare fund for shopkeepers, which 
can be used as specified in the provisions of Act. It also stated that the members of the 
W
elfare Board shall be held responsible for the proper execution of funds. This Act also 
provides for the punishment of anyone who attempts to use the word " Dukaandari" in a 
derogatory manner.  Thus, in a nutshell, this Act provides shopkeepers with a sense of  
sec
urity in times of need.
Hence, this Bill.
ASHOK  KUMAR  MITTAL.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 provides for setting up of a Shopkeepers' Welfare Fund for welfare of
shopkeepers. Clause 4 provides for constitution of a Board for administration of the
Shopkeepers Welfare Fund. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide
adequate Funds to the Board for effective implementation of the provisions of the Bill. The
Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
2. It is estimated that a sum of three hundred crore rupees is likely to be involved out
of the Consolidated Fund of India per annum.
3. A non-recurring expenditure of two hundred crore rupees is also likely to be involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

RS–P&PS–PMB(E)–069–12.12.2023.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of a Shopkeepers' Welfare Fund and a Board that shall
administer the Fund for the welfare of Shopkeepers and for penalizing
the derogatory use of the word ' dukaandari' in order to uphold the
dignity of shopkeepers and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal, M.P.)