1
Bill No. CX of  2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
 further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall  come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
5

2
2. In article 102 of the Constitution, after clause (2), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Provided that a member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political party
who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule
shall continue to be disqualified for a further period of six years from the date of his
disqualification."
3. In article 191 of the Constitution, after clause (2), the following priviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Provided that a member of Legislative Assembly of a State or either House of the
Legislature of a State having Legislative Council belonging to any political party who is
disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall
continue to be disqualified for a further period of six years from the date of his disqualification."
4. In the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution—
(i) in paragraph 1, for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely—
'(a) "Adjudicating Committee" means a committee appointed to pass any
order or decision under this Act.
(aa) "House" means either Houses of Parliament or the Legislative
Assembly or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State;'
(ii) for paragraph 4, the following paragraph, shall be substituted, namely:—
"4. (1) The Members of a House, comprising not less than one-third of the
total membership of a political party of that House, who—
(a) give up the membership of their original political party and merge
with another political party, or
(b) form a new political party and function ind ependently, shall
be liable to disqualification under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule 
and their seats in the House shall automatically be vacated, as per the 
provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (3) of article 101 of the 
Constitution and such members shall have to seek fresh elections to the 
House, if they so desire.
(2) In the event of defection by members of the House of the People or of
the Legislative Assembly of a State, comprising not less than one-third of the 
total membership of a political party in that House, a special session shall be 
convened for the purpose of discussion and voting on a motion expressing  
confidence or want of confidence in the Council of Ministers within a period of 
forty-eight hour
s, from the date of vacation of seat(s) by such Member(s) on 
defection.
(iii) for paragraph 6, the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely:—
(1) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House has become
subject to disqualification under this Schedule, the question shall be referred
for the decision of a three-member Adjudicating Committee, constituted in
such manner as the President may determine, comprising the following:
(a) a retired Judge of the Supreme Court as Chairperson;
(b) a retired Judge of the High Court as Member;
(c) a retired Chief Election Commissioner as Member.
(2) No person who has held office as a judge of the Supreme Court or as
the Chief Election Commissioner shall be appointed as a member of the
adjudicating committee before the expiry of six years from the date he ceases to
hold such office.
5
Amendment
of article 102.
Amendment
of article 191.
Disqualification
and vacation
of seat in
cases of
merger etc.
Amendment
of the Tenth
Schedule.
Decisions on
question as to 
disqualification
on ground of
defection.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(3) The Conditions of service and tenure of the members of the committee
shall be such as the President may determine:
Provided that the conditions of service and tenure of the members shall
not be varied to their disadvantage either after their appointment or during the
course of their tenure in such capacity.
(4) The decision of the Adjudicating Committee shall be final.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India's political system has undergone tremendous changes since independence. 
While the formation of coalition governments since 1960s has on the one hand helped 
ensure wider representation and diversity of voices in the governance system, it has also 
parallelly increased the instances of political manoeuvring. Accordingly, India enacted 
anti-defection law in 1985. However, despite the legislation being in force, elected 
representatives have been using various loopholes in the laws to continually pursue 
defection.
Such a defection mostly arising out of the power tussle and political considerations 
often erodes the public trust in the fundamentals of a democracy. Paragraph (4) of the 
Tenth Schedule to the Constitution which validates mergers, where two-thirds of the 
members of a legislative party have consented to such merger, remains in effect as a tool 
of misuse by majority of the legislators.
The Tenth Schedule of the Constitution as it originally existed recognised the 
concept of 'split' if one-third members of any political party decided to form a new 
political party or join another political party. However, this provision was later modified 
by the Constitution amendment in 2003. While the anti-defection law aims at preventing 
horse-trading of the legislators, the extant provisions in Tenth Schedule fails to prevent 
such practices by way of misuse of loopholes therein. The defections are often instigated 
not by independent individual disagreement of the members, but rather by use of money 
and muscle power.
Additionally, putting the final authority to decide the cases of disqualification in 
cases of defection on the Speaker of the House may also compromise the decision. Hence, 
to provide for greater independence, fairness, and impartiality, there is a need to refer such 
a decision to a separate Adjudicating Authority.
Therefore, this Bill provides for immediate disqualification of a candidate who 
defects from a political party and vacation of his seat necessitating him to seek fresh 
mandate. Such a clause shall ensure that the legislators have a moral responsibility to the 
political party and to the people who trust him at large.
Hence, this Bill.
PRIYANKA  CHATURVEDI.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMOR ANDUM
Sub-clause (iii) of clause 4 of the Bill inter-alia provides for constitution of a three-
member Adjudicating Committee comprising a Retired Judge of the Supreme Court as 
Chairperson; a retired Judge of the High Court as Member; and a retired Chief Election 
Commissioner as Member. Therefore, if enacted, this Bill would involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is difficult to estimate the actual financial 
expenditure likely to be incurred at this stage.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
102. * * * * *
(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of either House of Parliament if he
is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule. 
*  * * * *
191. * * * * *
(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative Assembly or
Legislative Council of a State if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.
* * * * *
TENTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 102(2) and 191 (2)]
Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection
1. In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "House" means either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly or, as the
case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State; * * 
* * *
4. (1) A member of a House shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1) of
paragraph 2 where his original political party merges with another political party and he 
claims that he and any other members of his original political party—
(a) have become members of such other political party or, as the case may be, of a
new political party formed by such merger; or
(b) have not accepted the merger and opted to function as a separate group,
and 
from the time of such merger, such other political party or new political party or 
group, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the political party to which he 
belogns for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and to be his original 
political party for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.
(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the merger of the original
political party of a member of a House shall be deemed to have taken place if  and only if, 
not less than two-thirds of the members of the legislature party concerned have agreed to 
such merger.
* * * * *
6. (1) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House has become subject to
disqualification under this Schedule, the question shall be referred for the decision of the 
Chairman or, as the case may be the Speaker of such House and his decision shall be final:
Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the Chairman or 
the Speaker of a House has become subject to such disqualification, the question shall be 
referred for the decision of such member of the House as the House may elect in this 
behalf and his decision shall be final.
6
Disqualifications
for
membership.
Disqualifications
for
membership.
Interpretation.
Disqualification
on ground of
defection not
to apply in
case of
merger.
Decision on
questions as to
disqualification
on ground of
defection.

7
(2) All proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation to any
question 
as to disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule shall be 
deemed to be proceedings in Parliament within the meaning of article 122 or, as the case 
may be, proceedings in the Legislature of State within the meaning of article 212.
* * * * *

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi, M.P .)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—075—13 -12-2023.