THE ADMINISTRA TIVE TRIBUNALS (SECOND AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act  may be called the Administrative Tribunals  (Second Amendment)
Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different  provisions
of this Act.
2. In section 3 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (hereinafter  referred to as
the principal Act),—
(I)  in clause (i) for the words "The Chairman or a Vice-Chairman" the words "The
Chairman" shall be substituted.
(II) in clause (ia), the words "and a Vice-Chairman" shall be omitted.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 3.
SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ LAW \ 4312RS
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
Bill No. CX of 2006
13 of 1985.

SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ LAW \ 3901LAW\3901LAW
2
(III) for clause (u), the following  clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(u) “Vice-Chairman" means a Member who has been authorised by the
appropriate Government to perform administrative functions at each of the places
where Bench of the Tribunal have been set up.’.
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the words "Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and other Members", the words "Chairman and other Members" shall  be
substituted.
4. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words "a Chairman and such number  of Vice-
Chairman and  Judicial and Administrative Members", the words "a Chairman and
such number of judicial and Administrative Members" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (4),—
(i) in clause (b), for the  words "The Vice-Chairman or other Members",
the words "a Member" shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (c),—
(I) For the words "the Vice-Chairman or the Judicial Member", the
words "the Judicial Member" shall be substituted;
(II) for the words "the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, the
Judicial Member or  the Administrative Member", the words “the Judicial
Member or the Administrative Member, as the case may be” shall be
substituted.
5. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"6. (1) A person shall be qualified for appointment as the Chairman unless he
is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court:
Provided that a person appointed as  Vice-Chairman before the commencement
of this Act shall be qualified for appointment as Chairman if such person has held the
office of the Vice-Chairman at least for a period of two years.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment,—
(a) as an Administrative Member, unless he has held for atleast two years
the post of Secretary to the Government of India or any other post under the
Central or State Government and carrying the scale of pay which is not less
than that of a  Secretary to the Government of India for atleast two years or
held a post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India for atleast five
years or any other post under the Central or State Government carrying the
scale of pay which is not less than that  of Additional Secretary to the Government
of India atleast for a period of five years:
Provided that the officers belonging to All India services who were or
are on Central deputation to a lower post shall be deemed to have  held the post
of Secretary or Additional Secretary, as the case may be, from the date such
officers were granted proforma promotion or actual promotion whichever is
earlier to the level of Secretary or  Additional Secretary, as the case may be,
and the period spent on  Central deputation after such date shall count for
qualifying service for the purposes of this clause;
(b) as a Judicial Member, unless he is or qualified to be a Judge of a High
Court or he has for atleast two years held the post of a  Secretary to the
Government of India in the Department of Legal Affairs or the Legislative
Department including Member-Secretary, Law Commission of India or held a
Amendment of
section 4.
Amendment of
section 5.
Substitution of
new section for
section 6.
Qualifications
for appointment
as Chairman,
Vice-Chairman
and other
members.

SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ LAW \ 3901LAW\3901LAW
3
post of  Additional Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of
Legal Affairs and Legislative Department at least for a period of five years.
(3) The Chairman and every other Member of the Central Administrative
Tribunal shall be appointed after consultation with the Chief Justice of India by the
President.
(4) Subject to the provision of sub-section ( 3), the Chairman and every other
Member of an  Administrative Tribunal for a  State shall be appointed by the President
after consultation with the Governor of the concerned State.
(5) The Chairman and every other Member of a  Joint  Administrative Tribunal
shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 3) and subject to the terms of the
agreement between the participating State Governments published under sub-section
(3) of section 4 of  the principal Act, be appointed by the President after consultation
with the Governors of the concerned States.
Explanation.— In computing for the purpose of this section, the period during
which a person has held any post under the Central or State Government, there shall
be included the period during which he  has held any other post under the  Central or
State Government (including an office under this Act) carrying the same scale of pay
as that of first mentioned post on a higher scale of pay.''.
6. In Section 7 of the principal Act, for the words "Vice-Chairman or, as the case may
be, such one of the Vice-Chairman", the words "such one of the Members" shall  be
substituted.
7. For section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"8. (1) The Chairman shall hold office as such for a term of five years from the
date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that no Chairman shall hold office as such after he has  attained the
age of sixty-eight years.
(2) A Member shall hold office as such for a term of five years from the date on
which he enters upon his office extendable by one or more term of five years:
Provided that no Member shall hold office as such after he has attained the age
of sixty-five years.
(3) The conditions of service of Chairman and Members shall be the same as
applicable to Judges of the High Court.".
8. In section 9 of the principal Act, the word "Vice-Chairman" wherever it occurs
shall be omitted.
9. In section 10 of the principal Act,—
(i) the word "Vice Chairman" wherever it occurs shall be omitted;
(ii) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,  namely:—
"Provided further that where a  serving Government officer is appointed
as a Member, he shall be deemed to have retired from the service to which he
belonged on the date on which he assumed the charge of the Member but his
subsequent service as Member shall, at his option, be reckoned as a post-
retirement, re-employment counting for pension and other retirement benefits
in the service to which he belonged.".
Amendment of
section 7.
Substitution of
new section for
section 8.
Amendment of
section 9.
Amendment  of
section 10.
Term of office.

SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ LAW \ 3901LAW\3901LAW
4
10. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"10A. The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Member of a Tribunal appointed
before the commencement of the Administrative Tribunals (Second  Amendment)
Act, 2006 shall continue to be governed by the provisions of the Act, and the rules
made thereunder as if the Administrative Tribunals (Second Amendment) Act, 2006
had not come into force:
Provided that, however, that such Chairman and the  Members appointed before
the coming into force of Administrative Tribunals (Second Amendment) Act, 2006,
may on completion of their term or  attainment of the age of sixty-five or sixty-two
years, as the case may be, whichever is earlier may, if eligible in terms of section 8 as
amended by the Administrative Tribunals (Second Amendment) Act, 2006 be
considered for a fresh appointment in accordance with the  selection procedure laid
down for such appointments subject to the condition that the total term in office of
the Chairman shall not exceed five years and that of the Members, ten years.".
11. In section 11 of the principal Act,—
(I) in clause (b), the words "Vice-Chairman or" shall be omitted;
(II) clause (c) and clause (d) shall be omitted; and
(III) in clause (e), the words "or Vice-Chairman" at both the places where they
occur shall be omitted:
(IV) in clause ( f), the word "Vice-Chairman"  at both the places where they
occur shall be omitted.
12. For section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"12. (1) The Chairman shall exercise such financial and administrative powers
over the Benches as may be vested in him under the rules made by the appropriate
Government.
(2) The appropriate Government may designate one or more Members to be
the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, Vice-Chairman thereof and the Members
so designated shall exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions of
the Chairman as may be delegated to him by the Chairman by a general or special
order in writing.".
13. In section 31 of the principal Act, for the words "Chairman, Vice-Chairman and
other Members", the words "Chairman and other Members" shall be substituted.
14. In section 32 of the principal Act, the word "Vice-Chairman" wherever it occurs
shall be omitted.
15. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) in clause (b), for the words "Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member",
the words “Chairman or other Members”shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (c), for the words "Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members",
the words "Chairman and other Members" shall be substituted.
Insertion of new
section 10A.
Saving terms
and conditions
of service of
Vice-Chairman.
Amendment of
section 11.
Substitution of
new section for
section 12.
Amendment of
section 31.
Amendment of
section 32.
Amendment of
section 35.
Financial and
administrative
powers of the
Chairman.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In pursuance of Article 323-A of the Constitution the Administrative Tribunals Act,
1985 (the Act for short) was enacted. Administrative Tribunals have been set up under the
Act for adjudication or trial of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and
conditions of service of persons appointed to Public Services and posts in connection with
the affairs of the Union or any State or any local or other authority within the territory of
India or under the control of Government of India or in Corporations owned or controlled
by the Government.
The term of office of the Chairman, Vice-Chairmen and Members of the Tribunal is
five years with eligibility for re-appointment for another term of five years. The upper age
limit for holding the office of Chairman and Vice-Chairman is 65 years and that of the
Member is 62 years.
Prior to the increase in the age of retirement from the services of the Government
from 58 to 60 years in 1998, a person appointed as Member in an Administrative Tribunal
would normally have a tenure of about four years which has effectively come down to two
years now. The appointments in the Tribunals need to be made attractive for the most
competent and deserving persons. Hence, it is proposed to revise the retirement age of
Members from 62 to 65 years and enhance their status. It is also necessary to raise the
retirement age of Chairman from 65 to 68 years so that the Chairman could serve for a full
term of five years.
With the enhancement of status of Members, it would no longer be necessary to
appoint Vice-Chairmen as all Members other Chairman would enjoy equal status.
Consequently, the office of the Vice-Chairman is proposed to be abolished except as an
executive arrangement to perform certain administrative functions.
As the purpose of the changes is to attract the experienced and deserving persons in
future, the amendments are proposed to be given prospective effect applicable to those
appointed thereafter.
Some consequential amendments are also proposed.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; SURESH PACHOURI.
The 11th December , 2006.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
All the expenses towards the Central Administrative Tribunal are borne by the Central
Government and in respect of State Administrative Tribunal the same are borne by the
respective State Government. The Bill involves financial consequences in future as and
when new Members are appointed on expiry of the term of office of the existing Members
since such new Members will be entitled to the service conditions as admissible to a sitting
Judge of the High Court. The additional expenditure in this regard would be Rupees 2 lakhs
(approximately) per Member per annum.
6

SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ LAW \ 3901LAW\3901LAW
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS ACT, 1985
(13 OF 1985)
* * * * *
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Judicial Member" means a Member of a Tribunal appointed as such
under this Act, and includes the Chairman or Vice-Chairman who possesses
any of the qualifications specified in sub-section ( 3) of section 6;
(ia) "Member" means a Member (whether Judicial or Administrative) of
a Tribunal, and includes the Chairman and a Vice-Chairman;
* * * * *
(u) "Vice-Chairman" means the Vice-Chairman of a Tribunal.
Explanation.—In the case of a Tribunal having two or more Vice-Chairmen,
references to the Vice-Chairman in this Act shall be construed as a reference to each
of those Vice-Chairmen.
CHAPTER II
E
STABLISHMENT OF TRIBUNALS AND BENCHES THEREOF
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an Administrative
Tribunal, to be  known as the Central Administrative Tribunal, to exercise the jurisdiction,
powers and authority conferred on the Central Administrative Tribunal by or under this
Act.
(2) The Central Government may, on receipt of  a request in this behalf from any
State Government, establish, by notification, an Administrative Tribunal for the State to be
known as the ........(name of the State) Administrative Tribunal to exercise the jurisdiction,
powers and authority conferred on the Administrative Tribunal for the State by or under
this Act.
(3) Two or more States may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2)
and notwithstanding that any or all of those States has or have Tribunals established under
that sub-section, enter into an agreement that the same Administrative Tribunal shall be the
Administrative Tribunal for each of the States participating in the agreement, and if the
agreement is approved by the Central Govenment and published in the Gazette of India and
the Official Gazette of each of those States, the Central Government may, by notification,
establish a Joint Administrative Tribunal to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority
conferred on the Administrative Tribunals for those States by or under this Act.
(4) An agreement under sub-section (3) shall contain provisions as to the name of the
Joint Administrative Tribunal, the manner in which the participating States may be associated
in the selection of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members of the Joint
Administrative Tribunal, the places at which the Bench or Benches of the Tribunal shall sit,
the apportionment among the participating States of the expenditure in connection with the
Joint Administrative Tribunal and may also contain such other supplemental, incidental
and consequential provisions not inconsistent with this Act as may be deemed necessary or
expedient for giving effect to the agreement.
Definitions.
Establishment
of Administra-
tive Tribunals.
7

SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ LAW \ 3901LAW\3901LAW
8
5. (1) Each Tribunals shall consist of a Chairman and such number of Vice-Chairmen
and other Member as the appropriate Government may deem fit and, subject to the other
provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal may be exercised
by Benches thereof.
* * * * *
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 3), the
Chairman—
* * * * *
(b) may transfer the Vice-Chairman or other Member from one Bench to another
Bench;
(c) may authorise the Vice-Chairman or the Judicial Member or the
Administrative Member appointed to one Bench to discharge also the functions of
the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, the Judicial Member or the Administrative
Member of another Bench; and
* * * * *
6. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman unless he—
(a) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or
(b) has, for at least two years, held the office of Vice-Chairman; or
*****
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Vice-Chairman unless he—
(a) is, or has been or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High Court; or
(b) has, for at least two years, held the post of a Secretary to the Government of
India or any other post under the Central or a State Government carrying a scale of
pay which is not less than that of a Secretary to the Government of India; or
(bb) has, for at least five years, held the post of an Additional Secretary to the
Government of India or any other post under the Central or a State Government
carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that of an Additional Secretary to the
Government of India; or
(c) has, for a period of not less than three years, held office as a Judicial Member
or an Administrative Member.
(3)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial Member unless he—
(a) is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High Court; or
(b) has been a Member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade
I of that service for at least three years.
(3A) A Person shall not be qualified for appointment as an Administrative Member
unless he—
(a) has, for at least two years, held the post of an Additional secretary to the
Government  of India or any other post under the Central or a State Government
carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that of an Additional Secretary to
Government of India; or
(b) has, for at least three years, held the post of a Joint Secretary to the
Government of India or any other post under the Central or a State Government
carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that of  a Joint Secretary to the Government
of India,
and shall, in either case, have adequate administrative experience.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 7), the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and
every other Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal shall be appointed by the
President.
Qualifications
for appointment
as Chairman,
Vice-Chairman
or other
Member.
Composition of
Tribunals and
Benches
thereof.

SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ LAW \ 3901LAW\3901LAW
9
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 7), the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and
every other Member of an Administrative Tribunal for a State shall be appointed by the
President after consulation with the Governor of the concerned State.
(6) The Chairman, Vice-Chariman and every other Member of a Joint Administrative
Tribunal shall, subject to the terms of the agreement between the participating State
Governments published under sub-section (3) of section 4, and subject to the provisions of
sub-section (7) be appointed by the President after consulation with the Governors of the
concerned States.
(7) No appointment of a person possessing the qualifications  specified in this section
as the Chariman, a Vice-Chairman or a Member shall be made except of the consultation
with the Chief Justice of India.
Explanation.— In computing, for the purposes of this section, the period during which
a person has held any post under the Central or a State Government, there shall be included
the period during which he has held any other post under the Central or a State Government
(including an office under this Act carrying the same scale of pay as that of the first mentioned
post or a higher scale of pay).
7. (1) In the event of the occurrance of any vacancy in the office of the Chairman by
reason of his death resignation or otherwise, the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be,
such one of the Vice-Chairman as the appropriate Government may, by notification, authorise
in this behalf, shall act as the Chairman until the date on which a new Chairman, appointed
in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy enters upon his office.
(2) When the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness
or any other cause, the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice-Chairman
as the appropriate Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall discharge
the functions of the Chairman until the date on which the Chairman resumes his duties.
8. The Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member shall hold office is such for a term
of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office, but shall be eligible for re-
appointment for another term of five years:
Provided that no Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member shall hold office as
such after he has attained,—
(a) in the case of the Chairman or Vice-Chairman, the age of sixty-five years,
and
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-two years.
9. (1) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman, or other Member may, by notice in writing
under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member shall, unless he is
permitted by the President to relinquish his office sooner, cointinue to hold office until the
expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed
as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is
the earliest.
(2) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman or any other Member shall not be removed from
his office except by an order made by the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour
or  incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court in which such Chairman,
Vice-Chairman or other Member had been informed of the charges against him and given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation
of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member referred
to in sub-section (2).
Vice-Chairman
to act as
Chairman or to
discharge his
functions in
certain
circumstances.
Terms of office.
Resignation and
removal.

SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ LAW \ 3901LAW\3901LAW
10
10. The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and other Members shall be such as may be pescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Members shall be varied to his disadvantage
after the appointment.
11. On ceasing to hold office,—
* * * * *
(b) the Chairman of a State Administrative Tribunal or a Joint Administrative
Tribunal shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be eligible for appointment
as the Chairman or Vice-Chairman or any other Member of the Central Administrative
Tribunal or as the Chairman of any other State Administrative Tribunal or Joint
Administrative Tribunal, but not for any other employment either under the
Government of India or under the Government of a State;
(c) the Vice-Chairman of the Central Administrative Tribunal shall, subject to
the other provisions of this Act, be eligible for appointment as the Chairman of the
Tribunal or as the Chairman or Vice-Chairman of any State Administrative Tribunal
or Joint Administrative Tribunal, but not for any other employment either under the
Government of India or under the Government of a State;
(d) the Vice-Chairman of a State Administrative Tribunal or a Joint
Administrative Tribunal shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be eligible
for appointment as the Chairman of that Tribunal or as the Chairman or Vice-Chairman
of the Central Administative Tribunal or of any other State Administrative Tribunal
or Joint Administrative Tribunal, but not for any other employment either under the
Government of India or under the Government of a State;
(e) a Member (other than the Chairman or Vice-Chairman) of any Tribunal
shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be eligible for appointment as the
Chairman or Vice-Chairman of such Tribunal, or as the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or
other Member of any other Tribunal, but not for any other employment either under
the Government of India or under the Government of a State;
(f) the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member shall not appear, act or plead
before any Tribunal of which he was the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, employment under the
Government of India or under the Government of a State includes employment under
any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the
Government of India or under any corporation owned or controlled by the Government.
12. The Chairman shall exercise such financial and adminstrative powers over the
principal Bench and each of the additional Benches as may be vested in him under the rules
made by the appropriate Government:
Provided that the Chairman shall have authority to delegate such of his financial and
administrative powers as he may think fit to the Vice-Chairman, or any officer of the Tribunal,
subject to the condition that the Vice-Chairman or such officer shall, while exercising such
delegated powers, continue to act under the direction, control and supervision of  the
Chairman.
* * * * *
31. The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members and the officers and other
employees provided under section 13 to a Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the India Penal Code.
Salaries, and
allowances and
other terms
and conditions
of service of
Chairman,
Vice-Chairman
and other
Members.
Provision as to
the holding of
offices by
Chairman, etc.,
on ceasing to be
such Chairman,
etc.
Financial and
administrative
powers of the
Chairman.
45 ot 1860.
Members and
staff of Tribunal
to be public
servants.

SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ LAW \ 3901LAW\3901LAW
11
32. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central or
State Government or against the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member of any Central
or Joint or State Administrative Tribunal, or any other person authorised by such Chairman,
Vice-Chairman or other Member for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.
* * * * *
35. (1) * * * * *
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(b) the procedure under sub-section ( 3) of section 9 for the investigation of
misbehaviour or incapacity of Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Members;
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of, the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members;
* * * * *
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Power of the
Central
Government to
make rules.

RAJY A SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
————
(Shri Suresh Pachouri, Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs and Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions )
MGIPMRND—4312LAW(S5)—13-12-2006.