THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT WORKPLACE
(PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL)
AMENDMENT  BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Sexual Harassment of Women at workplace (Prevention, Prohibition 
and Redressal) Act,  2013.
BE
 it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Sexual Harassment of Women at workplace  (Prevention, 
Prohibition
 and Redressal) Amendment Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Sexual Harassment of Women at workplace(Prevention, Prohibition
and Redressal) Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(a) for the words "District Officer '', wherever they occur in the principal Act, the
words "District Judge", shall be substituted;
Bill No. CXI  of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 
8TH DECEMBER,2023
5
10
Short title and
commencement.
General.
14 of 2013.

2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
(b) for the words "Local Complaints Committee" or ''Local Committee '', wherever
they occur in the principal Act, the words ''Employment Tribunal '', shall be substituted.
3. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be substituted,
namely,:—
"6. (1) Every District Judge shall constitute in the district concerned, a tribunal to be 
known as the "Employment Tribunal" to receive complaints of sexual harassment from 
establishments where Internal Committee has not been constituted or the Internal Committee 
or aggrieved person directly and such complaints would be considered as legal trials.
(2) Every District Judge shall designate one nodal officer in every block, taluka and
tehsil in rural or tribal area to receive complaints and forward the same to the concerned 
Employment T ribunal within a period of seven days.
(3) The jurisdiction of the Employment Tribunal shall extend to the areas of the
district where it is constituted."
4. For section 7 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be substituted,
namely,:—
"7. (1) The Employment Tribunal shall consist of the following members to be
nominated by the collegium of the concerned District Court in a manner as may be
prescribed, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson to be nominated from amongst the retired female judges
of the District Court;
(b) One retired judge to be nominated from amongst the retired judges of
District Court;
(c) one member to be nominated from amongst the eminent social activists
in the field of gender-based discrimination;
(d) one member to be nominated from amongst the women working in
block, taluka or tehsil in the district;
(e) two members of whom at least one shall be a woman to be nominated
from amongst eminent sociologists:
Provided that at least one of the nominees should, preferably, have a
background in law or legal knowledge:
Provided further that at least one of the nominees shall belong to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes or
any minority community notified by the CentraI Government, from time to
time;
(f) one member to be nominated from amongst the female advocates of the
District Court.
(2) The Chairperson and every Member of the Employment Tribunal shall hold office
for such period, not exceeding three years, from the date of their appointment as may be
specified by the District Judge.
(3) Where the Chairperson or any Member of the Employment Tribunal,—
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 16; or
(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under any law
for the time being in force is pending against him; or
(c) has been found guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary
proceeding is pending against him; or
Subsitution of
Section 6.
Constitution
and
jurisdiction of
the
Employment
Tribunal.
Composition,
tenure and
other terms
and
conditions of
the
Employment
Tribunal.
Subsitution of
Section 7.

3
5
10
15
20
25
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest;
such Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, shall be removed from the
Committee and the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy shall be filled by fresh
nomination in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(4) The Chairperson or Members of the Employment Tribunal other than the Members
nominated under; clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (1) shall be entitled to such fees or
allowances for holding the proceedings of the Employment Tribunal as may be prescribed.".
5. In section 9 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
"(1) Any aggrieved woman may make, in writing, a complaint of sexual harassment
at workplace to the Internal Committee if so constituted, or the Employment Tribunal,
within a reasonable period of time with regard to the facts and circumstances
surrounding the making of such a complaint and the personal circumstances of the
complainant, to be determined by the Tribunal:
Provided further that the Internal Committee or the Employment Tribunal as the
case may be, may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the time limit based
on the discretion of the Employment Tribunal, if it is satisfied that the circumstances
were such which prevented the woman from filing a complaint within the said period.".
6. In section 13 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (3), for the words "recommend to", the word "direct" shall be
substituted;
(ii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(4) The employer or the District Judge shall act upon the directions of the
Employment Tribunal within sixty days of its receipt.".
7. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), for the words
"recommend to '', the word "direct" shall be substituted.
8. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words ''Local Committee", the words
"Employment Tribunal and Internal Committee" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of Section 9.
Amendment
of Section 13.
Amendment
of Section 14.
Amendment
of Section 20.
.

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Every incident of Sexual Harassment against women at workplace is an infringement of 
the fundamental rights ensured by the Constitution of India. It is an extension of violence 
experienced by women in  everyday life that not only  violates their right to equality and 
freedom but also contravenes their r ight to live with dignity and equal opportunity for 
livelihood as guaranteed by article 21 of the Constitution. According to the ''Crime in India 
report 2021'' of the National Crime Records Bureau, 7797 working women in India experienced 
some form of harassment at their places of work and such reports have intensified after the 
reopening of workplaces in the post pandemic period. With the evolving times, as the role of 
women is extending to the pro fessional world they are beco ming more vulnerable to the 
offence of sexual harassment at workplace. Further, the ground reality highlighted by various 
subject matter experts suggest that these numbers are highly underreported as many women 
fear the loss of their personal and professional dignity and source of income, owing to the 
social stigma.
Presently, the Sexual Harassment at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) 
Act, 2013 mandates the creation of Internal Committee (ICC) in every workplace, with ten or 
more employees, and Local Co mplaint Committee (LCC) at district level to receive and 
adjudicate the co mplaints of the aggrieved woman against sexual harassment. While the 
existing law has provided a platform for women to voice this crime against them and punish 
the offenders, the high rate of pending cases, under Section 509 of the Indian Penal Code, 
1860, highlighted by the "Crime in India report of 2021'', questions the efficacy of the current 
ecosystem in place. Additionall y, the J.S. Verma Committee constituted to recommend 
amendments to the Criminal Laws in 2012, addressed that the constitution of ICC and LCC is 
counter-productive to  the ends of the act as the in house red ressal o f grievances would  
discourage women from filin g complaints and "may  promote a culture of sup pression of 
legitimate complaints." Another limitation highlighted by the Committee is the fixed time 
period of three months to make a complaint contained in Section 9 (1) of the Act. This may 
prevent women from filing complaints about the repeated instances of harassment or filing 
complaints after three months of incident.
The instant Bill accordingly, proposes amend ments to the Sexual Harassment at 
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013, to nullify the roles and powers 
of the Local Complaint Committee by mandating constitution of the Employment Tribunal. 
The Employment Tribunal shall hold the power to treat the cases of sexual harassmen t as 
thorough legal cases which would give more cognizance to the cases of sexual harassment 
and improve the efficiency in resolving the cases and increase the rate of conviction.
The Bill further seeks to extend the time period where aggrieved women can file or 
report the complaint of sexual harassment. Thus, the prop osed amendments address the 
need for many organizations or workplaces to make grievance redressal systems more effective 
in order to create a safer workplace environment for women.
Hence, this Bill.
FAUZIA KHAN.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a tribunal to be known as the
''Employment Tribunal'' by the District Judge in the district concerned, and clause 4 of the Bill
provides for composition, tenure and other terms and conditions of the Employment Tribunal,
which shall nullify the duties and powers of the existing Local Complaint Committee (LCC)
established by the principal Act. This will involve diversion of funds and grants utilised by
erstwhile LCC to the Employment Tribunal. Additionally, it will require consultation with
subject matter experts and various agencies who will be compensated for their involvement
and will involve recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is
difficult to estimate the actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at this stage.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT WORKPLACE (PREVENTION, PROHIBITION
AND REDRESSAL) ACT, 2013
(ACT NO. 14 OF 2013)
*****
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
*****
(c) ''Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Local Complaints Committee
nominated under sub-section (1) of section 7;
(d) ''District Officer '' means on officer notified under section 5;
*****
(i) ''Local Committee '' means the Local Complaints Committee constituted
under section 6;
(j) "Member" means a Member of the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be;
*****
CHAPTER III
CONSTITUTION OF LOCAL COMPLAINTS COMMITTEE
5. The appropriate Government may notify a District Magistrate or Additional or the
Collector or Deputy Collector as a District Officer for every District to exercise powers or
discharge functions under this Act.
6. (1) Every District Officer shall constitute in the district concerned, a committee to be
known as the "Local Committee" to receive complaints of sexual harassment from
establishments where the Internal Committee has not been constituted due to having less
than ten workers or if the complaint is against the employer himself.
(2) The District Officer shall designate one nodal officer in every block, taluka and
tehsil in rural or tribal area and ward or municipality in the urban area, to receive complaints
and forward the same to the concerned Local Committee within a period of seven days.
(3) The jurisdiction of the Local Committee shall extend to the areas of the district
where it is constituted.
7. (1) The Local Committee shall consist of the following members to be nominated by
the District Officer, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson to be nominated from amongst the eminent women in the field
of social work and committed to the cause of women;
(b) one Member to be nominated from amongst the women working in block,
taluka or tehsil or ward or municipality in the district;
(c) two Members, of whom at least one shall be a woman, to be nominated from
amongst such non-governmental organisations or associations committed to the cause
of women or a person familiar with the issues relating to sexual harassment, which may
be prescribed:
Provided that at least one of the nominees should, preferably, have a background
in law or legal knowledge:
Definitions.
Notification
of District
Officer.
Constitution
and
jurisdiction of
Local
Committee.
6
Composition,
tenure and
other terms
and
conditions of
Local
Committee.

7
Provided further that at least one of the nominees shall be a woman belonging to
the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes or
minority community notified by the Central Government, from time to time;
(d) the concerned officer dealing with the social welfare or women and child
development in the district, shall be a member ex officio.
(2) The Chairperson and every Member of the Local Committee shall hold of office for
such period, not exceeding three years, form the date of their appointment as may be specified
by the District Officer.
(3) Where the Chairperson or any Member of the Local Committee—
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 16; or
(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under any law
for the time being in force is pending against him; or
(c) has been found guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary
proceeding is pending against him; or
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest, such Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, shall be
removed from the Committee and the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy shall
be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(4) The Chairperson or Members of the Local Committee other than the Members
nominated under clauses (b) and (d) of sub-section (1 ) shall be entitled to such fees or
allowances for holding the proceedings of the Local Committee as may be prescribed.
8.* * * * *
(3) The agency shall pay to the District Officer, such sums as may be required for the
payment of fees or allowances referred to in sub-section (4) of section 7.
*****
9. (1) Any aggrieved woman may make, in writing, a complaint of sexual harassment at
workplace to the Internal Committee if so constituted, or the Local Committee, in case it is not
so constituted, within a period of three months from the date of incident and in case of a
series of incidents, within a period of three months from the date of last incident:
Provided that where such complaint cannot be made in writing, the Presiding Officer or
any Member of the Internal Committee or the Chairperson or any Member of the Local
Committee, as the case may be, shall render all reasonable assistance to the woman for
making the complaint in writing:
Provided further that the Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local Committee
may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the time limit not exceeding three
months , if it is satisfied that the circumstances were such which prevented the woman from
filing a complaint within the said period.
*****
10. (1) The Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local Committee, may, before
initiating an inquiry under section 11 and at the request of the aggrieved woman take steps
to settle the matter between her and the respondent through conciliation:
Provided that no monetary settlement shall be made as a basis of conciliation.
(2) Where settlement has been arrived at under sub-section (1), the Internal Committee
or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall record the settlement so arrived and
forward the same to the employer or the District Officer to take action as specified in the
recommendation.
Grants and
audit.
Complaints of
sexual
harassment.
Conciliation.

8
(3) The Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall provide 
the copies of the settlement as recorded under sub-section (2) to the aggrieved woman and 
the respondent.
(4) Where a settlement is arrived at under sub-section (1), no further inquiry shall be 
conducted by the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be.
11. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 10, the Internal Committee or the Local  
Committee, as the case may be, shall, where the respondent is an employee, proceed to make 
inquiry into the complaint in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable 
to the respondent and where no such rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed or in 
case of a domestic worker, the Local Committee shall, if prima facie case exist, forward the 
complaint to the police, within a period of seven days for registering the case under section 
509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and any other relevant provisions of the said Code 
where applicable:
Provided that where the aggrieved woman informs the Internal Committee or the Local 
Committee, as the case may be, that any term or condition of the settlement arrived at under 
sub-section (2) of section 10 has not been complied with by th e respondent, the Intemal 
Committee or the Local Committee shall proceed to make an inquiry into the complaint or, as 
the case may be, forward the complaint to the police:
*****
(3) For the purpose of making an inquiry under sub-section (1), the Internal Committee
or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall have the same powers as are vested in a 
civil court the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) when trying
 a suit in respect of the 
following matters,
 namely:—
*****
12. (1) During the pendency of an inquiry on a written request made by the aggrieved
woman, the Internal Committee or the local Committee, as the case may be, may recommend
to the employer to—
*****
 (3) On the recommendation of the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the
case may be, under sub-section ( 1), the employer shall implement the recommendations
made under sub-section ( 1) and send the report of such implementation to the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be.
13. (1) On the completion of an inquiry under this Act, the Internal Committee or the
Local Committee, as the case may be, shall provide a report of its findings to the employer, or
as the case may be, the District Officer within a period of ten days from the date of completion
of the inquiry and such report be made available to the concerned parties.
(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be arrives at
the conclusion that the allegation against the respondent has not been proved, it shall
recommend to the employer and the District Officer that no action is required to be taken in
the matter.
(3) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be arrives at
the conclusion that the allegation against the respondent has been proved, it shall recommend
to the employer or the District Officer, as the case may be—
(i) to take action for sexual harassment as a misconduct in accordance with the
provisions of the service rules applicable to the respondent or where no such service
rules have been made, in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) to deduct, notwithstanding anything in the service rules applicable to the
respondent, from the salary or wages of the respondent such sum as it may consider
appropriate to be paid to the aggrieved woman or to her legal heirs, as it may determine,
in accordance with the provisions of section 15:
Inquiry into
complaint.
Action during
pendency of
inquiry.
Inquiry report.

9
Provided that in case the employer is unable to make such deduction from the
salary of the respondent due to his being absent from duty or cessation of employment
it may direct to the respondent to pay such sum to the aggrieved woman:
Provided further that in case the respondent fails to pay the sum referred to in
clause (ii), the Internal Committee or as, the case may be, the Local Committee may
forward the order for recovery of the sum as an arrear of land revenue to the concerned
District Officer.
(4) The employer or the District Officer shall act upon the recommendation within sixty
days of its receipt by him.
14. (1) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may  be,
arrives at a conclusion that the allegation against the respondent is malicious or the aggrieved 
woman or any other person making the complaint has made the complaint knowing it to be 
false or the aggrieved
 woman or any other person making the complaint has produced any 
forged or misleading document, it may recommend to the employer or the District Officer, as 
the case may be, to take action against the woman or the person who has made the  
complaint
  under  sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 9, as the case may be,  
in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to her or him or where 
no such service rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed:
*****
(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives
at a conclusion that during the inquiry any witness has given false evidence or produced
any forged or misleading document, it may recommend to the employer of the witness or the
District Officer, as the case may be, to take action in accordance with the provisions of the
service rules applicable to the said witness or where no such service rules exist, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
15. (1) For the purpose of determining the sums to be paid to the aggrieved woman
under clause ( ii) of sub-section ( 3) of section 13, the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case may be, shall have regard to—
*****
16. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to Information Act, 2005 (22 of
2005), the contents of the complaint made under section 9, the identity and addresses of the
aggrieved woman, respondent and witnesses, any information relating to conciliation and
inquiry proceedings, recommendations of the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as
the case may be, and the action taken by the employer or the District Officer under the
provisions of this Act shall not be published, communicated or made known to the public,
press and media in any manner:
*****
19. Every employer shall—
*****
(d) provide necessary facilities to the Internal Committee or the Local Committee,
as the case may be, for dealing with the complaint and conducting an inquiry;
(e) assist in securing the attendance of respondent and witnesses before the
Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be;
(f) make available such information to the Internal Committee or the Local
Committee, as the case be, as it may require having regard to the complaint made under
sub-section (1) of section 9.
*****
Punishment
for false or
malicious
complaint and
false
evidence.
Determination
of
compensation.
Prohibition of
publication or
making
known
contents of
complaint and
inquiry
proceedings.
Duties of
employers.

10
CHAPTER VII
DUTIES AND POWERS OF DISTRICT OFFICER
20. The District Officer shall, —
(a) monitor the timely submission of report furnished by the Local Committee;
*****
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
21. (1) The Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall in
each calendar year prepare, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual
report and submit the same to the employer and the District Of
ficer.
(2) The District Officer shall forward a brief report on the annual reports received under
sub-section (1) to the State Government.
22. The employer shall include in its report the number of cases filed, if any, and their
disposal under this Act in the annual report of his organisation or where no such report is
required to be prepared, intimate such number of cases, if any, to the District Officer.
*****
24. The appropriate Government may, subject to the availability of financial and other
resources,—
(a) develop relevant information, education, communication and training
materials, and organise awareness programmes, to advance the understanding of the
public of the provisions of this Act providing for protection against sexual harassment
of woman at workplace;
(b) formulate orientation and training programmes for the members of the Local
Committee.
25. (1) The appropriate Government, on being satisfied that it is necessary in the
public interest or in the interest of women employees at a workplace to do so, by order in
writing,—
(a) call upon any employer or District Officer to furnish in writing such information
relating to sexual harassment as it may require;
*****
(2) Every employer and District Officer shall produce on demand before the officer
making the inspection all information, records and other documents in his custody having a
bearing on the subject matter of such inspection.
*****
27. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or any
rules made thereunder, save on a complaint made by the aggrieved woman or any person
authorised by the Internal Committee or Local Committee in this behalf.
*****
29. (1)* * * * *
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
*****
(m) the form and time for preparation of annual report by Internal Committee and the
Local Committee under sub-section (1) of section 21.
*****
Duties and
powers of
District
Officer.
Committee to
submit annual
report.
Employer to
include
information
in annual
report.
Appropriate
Government
to take
measures to
publicise the
Act.
Power to call
for
information
and
inspection of
records.
Cognizance of
offence by
courts.
Power of
appropriate
Government
to make rules.

RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—099—15-12-2023.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Sexual Harassment of Women at workplace (Prevention, 
Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013.
————
(Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P .)