Bill No. CXIV of 2005
THE PALM INDUSTRY WORKERS WELFARE BILL, 2005
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of palm industry workers and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Palm Industry Workers Welfare Act, 2005.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(i) ‘Palm Industry’ means and includes all processes connected with produce
obtained from palm tree, including manufacture and trading and also connected with
palm oil, whether used as a commodity or an item of handicraft or daily use and
whether used for domestic consumption or for export purposes;
(ii)  ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under the Act;
(iii) ‘worker’ means any worker connected with palm industry.
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, set up a
Palm Industry Workers Welfare Fund.
A
S  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 17TH FEBRUARY, 2006.
Short title
and Com-
mencement.
Definitions.
Palm Industry
Workers Wel-
fare Fund.
5
10

2
(2) The Fund shall be administered by a Board of Trust comprising:—
(a) a Chairman, who possesses adequate knowledge in palm industry, to be
appointed by the Central Government;
(b) three other members to be nominated by the Government of the States where
palm trees are grown in abundance;
(c) a representative of the palm industry workers.
(3) The Fund shall consist of contribution from Central Government, State
Governments, donations and contributions received from Employers.
(4) Every State Government or a Union Territory shall conduct a survey of palm
industry workers in the State and send the information to the Central Government.
4. The fund shall be utilised for the following purposes:—
(i) education of children of palm industry workers;
(ii) investment of a prescribed amount in case a worker decides to set up his own
establishment connected with the palm industry;
(iii) healthcare for palm industry workers and their families;
(iv) concessional accommodation facilities;
(v) disability allowance if a worker meets with accidents during work;
(vi) old age pension to be payable after sixty years of age;
(vii) insurance premium for life insurance of palm industry workers;
(viii) family pension after the death of a worker.
5.  The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette, make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
Utilisation
of the Fund.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS   AND  REASONS
Palm industry workers come under unorganised sector. They live in distress conditions.
Their working conditions are not safe and prone to accidents. Palm trees grow in abundance
in certain States like Tamil Nadu. Tamil Nadu was the first State to set up a Board for the
welfare of palm workers. After they become unfit to work further, they suffer a lot. No social
security provision is available for them.
Therefore, it is proposed to constitute a fund for their welfare.
Hence this Bill.
C.  PERUMAL
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India in
respect of setting up of a Fund for the welfare of palm industry workers under Clause 3. It is
likely that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore will be
involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crores also likely to be involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Act. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of palm industry workers and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri C.Perumal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND— 5396RS(S4)—17-02-2006.