As PASSED BY THE Ragya SABHA
on THE 4TH Apri, 977.
३
Bill No. I-C of 977
THE FOOD CORPORATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 797
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Corporations Act, 964.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the Repub-
lic of India as follows:—
I. 0) This Act may be called the Food Corporations (Amendment) — short
Act, 977. title
and
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 3lst day of com-
December, 976. mence-
ment.
37 of i964. 2. In section 2A of the Food Corporations Act, 964 (hereinafter Amend-
referred to as the principal Act)— ment of
४ section
2A,
(i) in sub-section (3), for the words, brackets and figures “sub-
ject to the provisions of sub-sections (4), (5) and (6)”, the words,
\ brackets, figures and letters “subject to the provisions of sub-sections
il (4), (4A), (4B); (४2), (5) and (6)” shall be substituted;
70


2
(४) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be
inserted, namely: —
४ (44) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(४),
(a) every officer or other employee in respect of whom 5
an order of transfer under sub-section (7) had been made
before the date of commencement of the Food Corporations
(Amendment) Act, 977 (hereafter in this section referred
to as the appointed day) shall, whether or not he had
exercised the option under sub-section (4) before the 0
appointed day, exercise such option within six months from
the appointed day; and
(6) every officer or other employee in respect of whom
an order of transfer under sub-section (3) may be made
after the appointed day shall, within six months from the date Is
of such order, exercise his option under sub-section (4),
and in each such case such option once exercised shall be final:
Provided that where an officer or other employee having
exercised an option under sub-section (4) before the appointed
day— 20
(४) has died or retired before the appointed day, or dies
or retires after the appointed day, before exercising the
option as required by this sub-section, or
(9) “Goes not exercise the option as required by this
sub-section, 35
the option already exercised by him shall be deemed to have
been validly exercised by him under sub-section (4).
(4B) Where an officer or other employee—
(a) has died or retired, or dies or retires, after an order
of transfer under sub-section (7) in respect of such officer or 39
other employee is made but before exercising the option
under sub-section (4) or, as the case may be, as required by
sub-section (4A); or
(0) has died or retired, or dies or retires, before an order
of transfer under sub-section (7) in respect of such officer 35
or other employee is made,
he shall, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4)
or sub-section (4A) —
(@) in a case falling under clause (a), be deemed to
have exercised an option under sub-section (4); and 40


Se
6 of 976,
3 ne :
(४) in a case fallmg under clause (9), be deemed to
have been transferred under sub-section (7) and exercised
an option under sub-section (4),
to be governed by the leave, provident fund, retirement or
5 other terminal benefits admissible to the employees of the
Central Government in accordance with the rules and orders of
the Central Government as amended from time to time:
Provided that nothing in clause (a) of this sub-section shall
apply to an officer or other employee who has, before the
Io appointed day, been paid the terminal benefits as admissible to
the employees of the Corporation under the regulations made by
the Corporation under this Act, unless such officer or cther em-
ployee refunds in a lump sum within six months from the ap-
pointed day the amount of contributions made by the Corporation
I5 towards such terminal benefits:
Provided further that nothing in clause (b) of this sub-sec-
tion shall apply to an officer or other employee who has inti-
mated, under the proviso to sub-section (3), his intention of not
becoming an employee of the Corporation.
20 (4C) Where an officer or other employee has exercised an
option under sub-section, (4), or exercises, or is deemed to have
exercised, an option under that sub-section, read with sub-section
(4A) or sub-section (4B), to be governed by the leave, provident
t fund, retirement or other terminal benefits admissible to the
25 employees of the Central Government, such benefits shall be
calculated on the basis of the pay and allowances drawn by him
in the Corporation.”.
3. (7) The Food Corporations (Amendment) Ordinance, 976, is
hereby repealed.
30 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended
by this Act.
Repeal
and
saving.
