AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. L of 1999
THE SEMICONDUCTOR INTEGRATED CIRCUITS LAYOUT-DESIGN BILL, 1999

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions,
CHAPTER II
The rEGISTER AND CONDITIONS OF rEGISTRATION
3. Registrar of Semiconductor Integrated Circuits layout-design.
4, Power of Registrar to transfer pending matters.
5. Registry.
6. Register of Layour-Design.
7. Prohibtion of registration of certain layout-designs.
CHAPTER पा
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION
8. Application for registration.
9. Withdrawal of acceptance.
10. Advertisement of application.
11. Opposition to registration.
12. Correction and amendment.
13. Registration.
14. Jointly owned layout design.

15, Duration of registration.


Gi)
CHAPTER IV
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION
CLAUSES

16. No action of infringement of unregistered layout-design.

7. Rights conferred by registration.

18. Infringement of layout-design.

19. Registration to be prima-facie evidence of validity.
CHAPTER V

# ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSMISSION

20. Power of Registered Proprietor to assign and give receipts.
21. Assignability and transmissibility of registered layout-design.

22. Conditions for assignment otherwise than in connection with the goodwill of a
business.

23, Registration of assignments and transmissions.
CHAPTER VI
USE OF LAYOUT-DESIGN AND REGISTERED USERS
24, Registered users.
25. Registration as registered user.
26. Power of Registrar for cancellation of registration as registered user.

27. Power of Registrar to call for information relating to agreement in respect of
registered users.

28. Right of registered user to take proceedings against infringement.

29. Registered user not to have right of assignment or transmission.

CHAPTER VII
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER
30. Power to rectify the register.

3

. Correction of register.


ii)

CHAPTER VII

APPELLATE BOARD
CLAUSES

32. Establishment of Layout-Design Appellate Board.

33. Composition of Appellate Board.

34, Qualifications for appointment as Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Members.
35. Term of office of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Members.

36. Vice-Chairman or seniormost Member to act as Chairman or discharge his
function in certain circumstances.

37. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and other Members.

38. Resignation and removal.

39. Staff of Appellate Board.

40. Application to the Appellate Board to determine royalty.

41. Power of the Board to cancel registration.

42. Appeal to Appellate Board.

43, Procedure and powers of Appellate Board.

44. Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc.

45. Bar to appear before Appellate Board.

46. Conditions as to making of interim order.

47. Power of Chairman to transfer cases from one Bench to another. हि
48. Procedure for application for rectification, etc., before Appellate Board.
49. Appearance of Registrar in legal proceedings.

50. Registrar to refer certain disputes to the Board.

51. Power of the Board to permit certain uses.

52. Costs of Registrar in proceedings before Appellate Board.

53. Appeal.

54. Powers of High Courts to make rules.


(iv)
CLAUSES
55. Transitional Provisions.
CHAPTER IX
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
56. Penalty for infringement of layout-design.
57. Penalty for falsely representing a layout-design as registered.

58. Penalty for improperly describing a place of business as connected with the
Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Registry.

59, Penalty for falsification of entries in the register.

60. Forfeiture of goods.

61. Exemption of certain persons employed in ordinary course of business.
62. Procedure where invalidity of registration is pleaded by the accused.
63. Offences by companies.

64. Cognizance of certain offences.

65. Costs of defence or prosecution.

66. Information as to commission of offence.

67. Punishment of abetment in India of acts done out of India.

CHAPTER X

MISCELLANEOUS
68. Protection of security in India.
69. Protection of action taken in good faith. °
70. Certain persons to be public servants.
71. Implied warranty on sale of layout-design, etc.
72. Powers of Register.
73. Exercise of discretionary power by Registrar.
74. Evidence before Registrar.
75. Death of party to a proceeding.

76. Extension of time.


()
CLAUSES
77. Abondonment.
78. Preliminary advise by the Registrar.
79. Registered user to be impleaded in certain proceedings.
80. Evidence of entries in register, etc., and things done by the Registrar.
81. Registrar and other officers not compellable to produce register, etc.
82. Certificate of validity.
83. Address for service.
84. Agents.
85, Layout-design registered by an agent or representative without authority.
86. Indexes.
87. Documents open to public inspection.
88. Reports of Registrar to be placed before Parliament.
89. Fees and surcharge.
90. Savings in respect of Chapter [X.

91. Declaration as to ownership of layout-design not registerable under the
Registration Act, 1908.

92. Government to be bound.

93. Convention countries.

94. Provision as to reciprocity.

95. Power of Central Government to remove difficulties.

96. Power to make rules.


AS INTRODUCED IN THE (4४8 SABHA

Bill No. L of 1999

THE SEMICONDUCTOR INTEGRATED CIRCUITS LAYOUT-DESIGN
BILL, 1999

A
BILL

to provide for the protection of the semiconductor integrated circuits layout-designs ”
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

WuerEAS the Final Act embodying the results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral
Trade Negotiations done at Marrakesh on the 15th day of April, 1994 provides for
establishment of the World Trade Organisation;

AND WHEREAS the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights is part of the said Final Act;

AND WHEREAS the Government of India, having ratified the said Final Act, should
inter alia make provisions for giving effect to section 6 Part II of the Agreement on
Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights relating to Layout-design
(Topographies) of Integrated Circuit; .

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—


Short 0 06,
extent and
comm-
encement.

Definitions.

2

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

Aa (7) ans Act may be called the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design
ct, 1999.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for
different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force
of that provision.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(@ “Appellate Board" means the Appellate Board established under section 32;
(6) “assignment” means an assignment in writing by act of the parties concerned:
(c) "Bench" means a Bench of the Appellate Board;

(व) “Chairman" means the chairman of the Appellate Board;

(e) "commercial exploitation", in relation to Semiconductor Integrated Circuits

Layout-Design, means to sale, lease, offer or exhibit for sale or otherwise distribute

such semiconductor integrated circuit for any commercial purpose;

( "convention country" means a country notified as such under sub-section (1)
of section 93.

(g) "Judicial Member" means a Member of the Appellate Board appointed as such
under this Act, and includes Chairman or such Vice-Chairman who possesses any of
the qualifications specified in sub-section (3) of section 34;

(A) “layout-design" means a layout of transistor or other circuitry elements and
includes lead wires connecting such elements”and expressed in any manner in a
semiconductor integrated circuit;

(i) "Member" means a Judicial Member or a Technical Member of the Appellate
Board and includes the Chairman or Vice-Chairman;

0) "notify" means to notify in the Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Journal
published by the Registrar;

(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

() "register" means register of layout-designs referred to in section 6;

(m) "registered" (with its grammatical variations) means registered under this Act;
(n) "registered proprietor", in relation to a layout-design, means the person for the

time being entered in the register as proprietor of the layout-design;

(०) “registered layout-design" means a layout-design which is actually onthe


register;

(p) “registered user" means a person who is for the time being registered as such
under section 25;

(q) “Registrar” means the Registrar of Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-
Design referred to in section 3;

(r) “semiconductor integrated circuit" means a product having transistors or other
circuitry elements which are inseparably formed on a semiconductor material or an
insulating material or inside the semiconductor material and designed to perform an
electronic circuitry function;

(s) "Technical Member" means a Member of the Appellate Board who is not a
Judicial Member and includes the Chairman or such Vice-Chairman who possesses
any of the qualifications specified in sub-section (4) of section 34;

(0 "transmission" means transmission by operation of law, devolution on the
personal representation of a deceased person or any other mode of transfer not being
assignment;

(u) any reference to the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Registry
shall be construed as including a reference to any office of the Semiconductor
Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Registry. ,

CHAPTER II
THE REGISTER AND CONDITIONS OF REGISTRATION

3. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint a person to be known as the Registrar of Semiconductor Integrated
Circuits Layout-Design for the purposes of this Act.

(2) The Central Government may appoint such other officers with such
designation as it thinks fit for the purpose of discharging, under the
superintendence and direction of the Registrar, such functions of the Registrar
under this Act as he may from time to time authorise them to discharge.

4. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (2) of section
3, the Registrar may, by order in writing and for reasons to be recorded therein,
withdraw any matter pending before an officer appointed under the said sub-section (2)
and deal with such matter himself either de novo or from the stage it was so
withdrawn or transfer the same to another officer so appointed who may subject to the
special direction in the order of transfer deal with the matter either de novo or from the
stage it was so transferred.

5. (1) For the purposes of this Act, there shall be established a Registry which shall
be known as the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Registry.

(2) The head office of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Registry
shall be at such place as the Central Government may specify and for the purposes of
facilitating the registration of layout-designs, there may be established, on such places
as the Central Government may think fit, branch offices of the Semiconductor Integrated
Circuits Layout-Designs Registry.

(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, define

Registrar of
Semicon-
ductor
Integrated
Circuits
layout-
design.

Power of
Registrar to
transfer
pending
metters.

Registry.


Register of
Layout-
Designs.

Prohibition
of Regis-
tration of
certain
Layout-
designs.

4

territorial limits within which an office of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-
Designs Registry may exercise its functions.

(4) There shall be seal of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Registry.

6. (1) For the purposes of this Act, a record called Register of Layout-Designs shall
be kept at the head office of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits layout-design
Registry wherein shall be entered all registered layout-designs with the names,
addresses and descriptions of the proprietor and such other matters related to the
registered layout-designs as may be prescribed.

(2) Subject to the superintendence and direction of the Central Government, the
register shall be kept under the control and management of the Registrar.

(3) There shall be kept at each branch Office of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits
Layout-Designs Registry a copy of the register and other documents as the Central
Government may, by notification, in the Official Gazette, direct.

7. (1) A layout-design—
(a) which is not original; or

(6) which has been commercially exploited anywhere in India or in a convention
country; or

(c) which is not inherently distinctive; or

(d) which is not inherently capable of being distinguishable from the other
registered lay-out design,

shall not be registered as a layout-design:

Provided that a layout-design which has been commercially exploited for not more
than two years from the date on which an application for its registration has been filed
either in India or in a convention country shall be treated as not having been
commercially exploited for the purposes of this sub-section,

(2) A layout-design shall be considered to be original if it is the result of its creator's
own intellectual efforts and is not commonly known to the creators of layout-designs
and manufacturers of semiconductor integrated circuits at the time of its creation:

Provided that a layout-design consisting of such combination of elements and
interconnections that are commonly known among creators of layout-designs and
manufacturers of semiconductor integrated circuits shall be considered as original if
such combination taken as a whole is the result of its creator’s own intellectual efforts.

(3) Where an original layout-design has been created in execution of a commission or
a contract of employment, the right of registration to such layout-design under this Act
shall belong, in the absence of any contractual provision to the contrary, to the person
who commissioned the work or to the employer.


5
CHAPTER III
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION

8. (7) Any person claiming to be the creator of a layout-design, who is desirous of
registering it, shall apply in writing to the Registrar in the prescribed manner for the
registration of his layout-design.

(2) Every application under sub-section (/) shall be filed in the office of the
Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Registry within whose territorial limits
the principal place of business in India of. the applicant or in the case of joint
application the principal place of business in India of the applicant whose name is first
mentioned in the application, as having a place of business in India, is situate:

Provided that, where the applicant or any of the joint applicant does not carry on
business in India, the application shall be filed in the office of the Semiconductor
Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Registry within whose territorial limits the place
mentioned in the address for service in India as disclosed in the application is situate.

(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Registrar may refuse the application or
may accept it absolutely or subject to such amendments or modifications, as he may
think fit,

9. Where after the acceptance of an application for registration of layout-design, but
before its registration, the Registrar is satisfied that the layout-design is prohibited of
registration under section 7, the Registrar may, after hearing the applicant if he so
desires, withdraw the acceptance and proceed as if the application had not been
accepted.

10. (7) When an application for registration of a layout-design has been accepted, the
Registrar shall, as soon as may be after acceptance, cause the application as accepted to
be advertised in the prescribed manner.

(2) Where after advertisement of an application—
(a) an error in the application has been corrected;
(b) the application has been permitted to be amended under section 12,

the Registrar may in his discretion cause the application to be advertised again or, in
any case falling under clause (b), may, instead of causing the application to be
advertised again, notify in the prescribed manner the correction or amendment made in
the application.

11. (7) Any person may, within three months from the date of the advertisement or
re-advertisement of an application for registration or within such further period, not
exceeding one month in the aggregate, as the Registrar, on application made to him in
the prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fee, allows, give notice in
writing in the prescribed manner to the Registrar of opposition to the registration.

(2) The Registrar shall serve a copy of the notice on the applicant for registration
and, within two months from the receipt by the applicant of such copy of the notice of
opposition, the applicant shall send to the Registrar in the prescribed manner a counter-
statement of the grounds on which he relies for his application and if he does not do
so, he shall be deemed to have abandoned his application.

Application
for regis-
tration.

Withdrawal
of accep-
tance,

Advertise-
ment of
application.

Opposition
to regis-
tration.


Correction
and

amendment.

Registration.

Jointly
owned lay-
out design.

6

(3) If the applicant sends such counter-statement, the Registrar shall serve a copy
thereof on the person giving notice of opposition.

(4) Any evidence upon which the opponent and the applicant may rely shall be
submitted in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time to the Registrar, the
Registrar shall give an opportunity to them to be heard if they so desire.

(5) The Registrar shall, after hearing the parties, if so required, and considering the
evidence, decide after taking into account any ground of objection whether relied upon
by the opponent or not.

(6) When a person giving notice of opposition or an applicant sending a counter-
statement after receipt of a copy of such notice neither resides nor carries on business
in India, the Registrar may require him to give security for the costs of proceedings
before him and, in default of such security being duly given, may treat the opposition
or application, as the case may, as abandoned.

12, The Registrar may on such terms as he thinks just—

(a) at any time, whether before or after acceptance of an application for
registration under section 8, permit the correction of any error in or in connection
with the application or permit an amendment of the application; or

(b) permit correction of any error in, or an amendment of, a notice of opposition
or a counter-statement under section 11.

13. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 9, when an application for the registration
of the layout-design has been accepted and either—

(a) the application has not been opposed and time for notice of opposition has
expired, or

(b) the application has been opposed and the opposition has been decided in favour
of the applicant,

the Registrar shall register the said layout-design in the register and the layout-design
shall be registered as of the date of the making of the said application and that date
shall be deemed to be the date of registration.

(2) In the registration of the layout-designs, the Registrar shall issue to the applicant
a certificate in the prescribed form of the registration thereof sealed with the seal of the
Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Designs Registry.

(3) Where registration of a layout-design is not completed within twelve months from
the date of the application by reason of default on the part of the applicant, the
Registrar may, after giving notice to the applicant in the prescribed manner, treat the
application as abandoned unless it is completed within the time specified in that behalf
in the notice.

(4) The Registrar may amend the register or a certificate of registration for the
purpose of correcting a clerical error or an obvious mistake.

14. (J) Save as provided in sub-section (2), nothing in this Act shall authorise the
registration of two or more persons who claim to be the creator of a layout-design.

(2) Where the relation between two or more persons claiming to be the creator of
tayout-design are such that—


(a) both of them or all of them have put the combined intellectual effort in
creating such design; or

(0) in relation to the creation of such layout-design both of them or all of them are
connected in such manner that intellectual effort of each of them are not
distinguishable in creation of such layout-design,

those persons may be registered as joint proprietor of the layout design and this Act
shall have effect in relation to any right to the use of the layout-design vested in those
persons as if in those rights vested in a single person.

15. The registration of a layout-design shall be only for a period of ten years counted
from the date of filing an application for registration or from the date of first
commercial exploitation anywhere in any country whichever is earlier.

CHAPTER IV
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION

16. No person shall be entitled to institute any proceeding to prevent, or to recover
damages for, the infringement of an unregistered layout-design.

17. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the registration of a layout-design
shall, if valid, give to the registered proprietor of layout-design the exclusive right to the
use of the layout-design and to obtain relief in respect of infringement in the manner
provided by this Act.

Explanation.—For removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the right conferred by
the registration of a layout-design shall be available to the registered proprietor of that
layout-design irrespective of the fact as to whether the layout design is incorporated in
an article or not.

18. (1) A registered layout-design is infringed by a person who, not being the
registered proprietor of the layout-design or a registered user thereof,—

(a) does any act of reproducing, whether by incorporating in a semiconductor
integrated circuit or otherwise, a registered layout-design in its entirety or any part
thereof, except such act of reproducing any part thereof which is not original within
the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 7;

(b) subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), does any act of importing or
selling or otherwise distributing for commercial purposes a registered layout-design
or a semiconductor integrated circuit incorporating such registered layout-design or
an article incorporating such a semiconductor integrated circuit containing such
registered layout-design for the use of which such person is not entitled under this
Act.

Duration

of regis-
tration.

No action
of infrin-
gement of
unregis-
tered
layout
design.

Rights
conferred
by regis-
tration.

Infringement
of layout-
design.


(2) Notwithstanding any thing contained in section 17, sub-section (/) or sub-section
(5), the performance of the act of reproduction referred to in clause (a) of sub-section
(J), where such act is performed for the purposes of scientific evaluation, analysis,
research or teaching shall not constitute the act of infringement within the meaning of
that clause.

(3) Where a person, on the basis of scientific evaluation or analysis of a registered
layout-design, creates another layout-design which is original within the meaning of
sub-section (2) of section 7, that person shall have the right to incorporate such another
layout-design in a semiconductor integrated circuit or to perform any of the acts referred
to in sub-section (7) or sub-section (5) in respect of such another layout-design and
such incorporation or performance of any act shall not be regarded as infringement
within the meaning of sub-section (J).

(4) Where a layout-design is created by the process of scientific evaluation or analysis
of the registered layout-design as referred to in sub-section (3), the use of such layout-
design by the proprietor of such registered layout-design shall be regarded as
infringement within the meaning of sub-section (/) after the date of registration of such
layout-design under this Act.

(5) Notwithstanding any thing contained in clause (b) of sub-section (J), the
performance of any of the acts referred to in that clause by a person shall not be
regarded as infringement within the meaning of that clause if such act is performed or
directed to be performed in respect of a semiconductor integrated circuit incorporating
a registered layout-design or any article incorporating such a semiconductor integrated
circuit where such person does not possess any knowledge or has no reasonable ground
to know while performing or directing to be performed such act in respect of such
semiconductor integrated circuit or article that it incorporated a registered layout-design
but after the time when such person has received notice of such knowledge, he may
continue to perform or directing to be performed such act in respect of the stock on
hand or ordered before such time and, then, he shall be liable to pay the proprietor of
the registered layout-design a sum by way of royalty to be determined by negotiation
between registered proprietor of the registered layout-design and that person or by the
Appellate Board having regard to the benefit accrued to such person by performing or
directing to be performed such act in respect of such semiconductor integrated circuit or
article, as the case may be.

(6) Where any other person purchases a semiconductor integrated circuit incorporating
a registered layout-design or any article incorporating such a semiconductor integrated
circuit referred to in sub-section (5) from a person referred to in that sub-section, then,
such other person shall be entitled to the immunity from infringment in respect of that
semiconductor integrated circuit or article, as the case may be, to the extent and in the
manner as if the word "person" referred in that sub-section includes the word any other
person referred in this sub-section.

(7) Nothing contained in clause (b) of sub-section (7) shall be construed to constitute
an act of infringement where any person performs any of the acts specified in that
clause with the written consent of the registered proprietor of a registered layout-design
or within the control of the person obtaining such consent, or in respect of a
semiconductor integrated circuit incorporating a registered layout-design or any article
incorporating such a semiconductor integrated circuit, that has been put on the market
by or with the consent of the registered proprietor of such registered layout-design.

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any person by application


9

of independent intellect has created a layout-design which is similar to a registered
layout-design and claim to be so created before the date of registration of the registered
layout-design, then, any act of such person in respect of the layout-design so created
shall not be the infringment of the registered layout-design.

19. (7) In all legal proceedings relating to a layout-design registered under this Act
(including application under section 30), the original registration of the layout-design and
all subsequent assignments and transmissions of layout-design shall be prima facie
evidence of the validity thereof.

(2) In all legal proceedings as aforesaid, a registered layout-design shall not be held
to be invalid on the ground that it was not a registrable layout-design under section 7
except upon evidence of originality and that such evidence was not submitted to the
Registrar before registration.

CHAPTER V
ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSMISSION

20. The person for the time being included in the register as proprietor of a layout-
design shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and to any right appearing from the
register to be vested in any other person, have power to assign the layout-design, and
to give effectual receipts for any consideration for such assignment.

21. Notwithstanding any thing in any other law to the contrary, a registered layout-
design shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, be assignable and transmissible
whether with or without the goodwill of the business concerned.

22. Where an assignment of a registered layout-design is made otherwise than in
connection with the goodwill of business in which such layout-design has been or is
used, the assignment shall not take effect unless the assignee, not later than the
expiration of six months from the date on which the assignment is made or within such
extended period, if any, not exceeding three months in the aggregate, as the Registrar
may allow, apply to the Registrar for directions with respect to the advertisement of the
assignment, and advertises it in such form and manner and within such period as the
Registrar may direct.

23. (1) Where a person becomes entitled by assignment or transmission to a registered
layout-design, he shall apply in the prescribed manner to the Registrar to register his
title, and the Registrar shall, on receipt of the application and on proof of his title to
his satisfaction, register him as the proprietor of the layout-design and shall cause
particulars of the assignment or transmission to be entered on the register:

Registration
to be
prima-facie
evidence of
validity.

Power of
Registered
Proprietor
to assign
and give
receipts.

Assigna-
bility and
transmi-
ssibility
of regis-
tered
layout-
design.

Conditions
for assign-
ment
otherwise
than in
connection
with the
goodwill
ofa
business.

Registration
of assign-
ments and
transmiss-
ions.


Registered
users,

Registra-
tion as
tegistered
user.

10

Provided that where the validity of an assignment or transmission is in dispute
between the parties, the Registrar may refuse to register the assignment or transmission
until the rights of the party have been determined by a competent court.

(2) Except for the purpose of an application before the Registrar under sub-section
(7) or an appeal from an order thereon, or an application under section 30 or an appeal
from an order thereon, a document or instrument in respect of which no entry has been
made in the register in accordance with sub-section (J), shall not be admitted in
evidence by the Registrar or the Appellate Board or any court in proof of title to the
layout-design by assignment or transmission unless the Registrar or the Appellate Board
or the court, as the case may be, otherwise directs.

CHAPTER VI
USE OF LAYOUT-DESIGN AND REGISTERED USERS

24, Subject to the provisions of section 25, a person other than the registered
proprietor of a layout-design may be registered as a registered user thereof.

25. (1) Where it is proposed that a person should be registered as a registered user of
a layout-design, the registered proprietor and the proposed registered user shall jointly
apply in writing to the Registrar in the prescribed manner and every such application
shall be accompanied by—

(a) the agreement in writing or a duly authenticated copy thereof, entered into
between the registered proprietor and the proposed registered user with respect to the
permitted use of the layout-design; and

(b) an affidavit made by the registered proprietor or by some person authorised to
the satisfaction of Registrar to act on his behalf— .

() giving particulars of the relationship, existing or proposed, between the
registered proprietor and the proposed registered user, including particulars showing
the degree of control by the proprietor over the permitted use which the
relationship will confer and whether it is a term of their relationship that the
proposed registered user shall be sole registered user or that there shall be any
other restriction as to persons for whose registration as registered user application
may be made;

(ii) stating the conditions or restrictions, if any, proposed with respect to the
place of permitted use or any other matter; :

(iii) stating whether the permitted use to be for a period or without limit of
period, and, if for a period, the duration thereof; and

(c) such further documents or other evidence as may be required by the Registrar
or as may be prescribed.

(2) Where the requirement of sub-section (/) have been complied with, the Registrar
shall register the proposed registered user.

(3) The Registrar shall issue notice in the prescribed manner of the registration of a
person as a registered user to other registered users of the layout-design, if any.


व

_# The Registrar shall, if so requested by the applicant, take steps of securing that
information given for the purposes of an application under this section (other than
matters entered in the register) is not disclosed to rivals in trade.

26. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 30, the registration of a person
as registered user—

(a) may be cancelled by the Registrar on application in writing in the prescribed
manner of the registered proprietor or of the registered user or of any other registered
user of the layout-design;

(b) may be cancelled by the Registrar on the application in writing in the
prescribed manner of any person on any of the following grounds, namely:—

(i) that the registered user has used the layout-design otherwise than in
accordance with the agreement under clause (a) of sub-section (7) of section 25;

ii) that the proprietor or the registered user misrepresented, or failed to
disclose, some fact material to the application for registration which if accurately
represented or disclosed would not have justified the registration of the registered
user;

(iii) that the circumstances have changed since the date of registration in such
a way that at the date of such application for cancellation they would not have
justified registration of the registered user;

(iv) that the registration ought not to have been effected having regard to right
vested in the applicant by virtue of a contract in the performance of which he is
interested;

(c) may be cancelled by the Registrar on his own motion or on the application in
writing in the prescribed manner by any person on the ground that any stipulation in
the agreement between the registered proprietor and the registered user regarding the
topographical dimensions of the layout-design is either not being enforced or is not
being complied with;

(d) may be cancelled by the Registrar if the layout-design is no longer registered.

(2) The Registrar shall issue notice in the prescribed manner in respect of every
application under this section to the registered proprietor’and each registered user (not
being the applicant) of the layout-design.

(3) The procedure for cancelling a registration shall be such as may be prescribed:

Provided that before cancelling of registration, the registered proprietor shall be given
a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

27. (7) The Registrar may, at any time during the continuance of the registration of
the registered user, by notice in writing, require the registered proprietor to confirm to
him within one month that the agreement filed under clause (a) of sub-section (7) of
section 25 continues to be in force.

(2) If the registered proprietor fails to furnish the confirmation within one month as
required under sub-section (/), the registered user shall cease to be the registered user
on the day immediately after the expiry of said period and the Registrar shall notify
the same.

Power of
Registrar
for cancel-
lation of
registration
as registered
user.

Power of
Registrar
to call for
information
relating to
agreement
in respect
of regis-
tered users.


Right of
registered
user to
take pro-
ceedings
against
infringe-
ment.

Registered
user not to
have right
of assign-
ment or
transmiss-
ion.

Power to
rectify the
register.

Correction

of register.

12

28. Subject to any agreement subsisting between the parties, a registered user may
make complaint before the competent criminal court for the infringement in his own
name as if he were the registered proprietor.

29. Nothing in this Act shall confer on a registered user of a layout-design any
assignable or transmissible right to the use thereof.

Explanation I—The right of a registered user of a layout-design shall not deemed to
have been assigned or transmitted within the meaning of this section in the following
cases, namely:—

(a) where the registered user being an individual enters into a partnership with any
other person for carrying on the business concerned; but in any such case the firm
may use the layout-design, if otherwise in force, only for so long as the registered
user is a member of the firm;

(b) where the registered user being a firm subsequently undergoes a change in its
constitution; but in any such case the reconstituted firm may use the layout-design, if
otherwise in force, only for so long as any partner of the original firm at the time of
its registration as registered user, continues to be a partner of the reconstituted firm.

Explanation I.—For the purposes of Explanation I, ’firm’ has the same meaning as
in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932.

CHAPTER VII
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER

30. (7) Any person aggrieved by the absence or omission from the register of any
entry, or by any entry made in the register without sufficient cause, or by any entry
wrongly remaining on the register, or by any error or defect in any entry in the register,
may apply in the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the Registrar, and the
Appellate Board or the Registrar, as the case may be, may make such order for making,
expunging or varying the entry as it may think fit.

(2) The Appellate Board or the Registrar may in any proceedings under this section
decide any question that may be necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the
rectification of the register.

(3) The Appellate Board or the Registrar, of its own motion, may , after giving notice
in the prescribed manner to the parties concerned and after giving them an opportunity
of being heard, make any order referred to in sub-section (/).

(4) Any order of the Appellate Board rectifying the register shall direct that notice
of the rectification shall be served upon the Registrar in the prescribed manner who
shall upon receipt of such notice rectify the register accordingly.

31. (1) The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed manner by the
registered proprietor —

9 of 1932.


13

(@) correct any error in the name, address or description of the registered proprietor
of a layout-design, or any other entry relating to the layout-design;

(0) enter any change in the name, address or description of the person who is
registered as proprietor of a layout-design;

(c) cancel the entry of a layout-design on the register,

and may make any consequential amendment or alteration in the certificate of
registration, and for that purpose, may require the, certificate of registration to be
produced to him.

(2) The Registrar may, on application made in the- prescribed manner by a registered
user of a layout-design, and after notice to the registered proprietor, correct any error,
or enter any change, in the name, address or description of the registered user.

CHAPTER VIII
APPELLATE BOARD

32. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish an Appellate Board to be known as the Layout-Design Appellate Board
to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this
Act.

33, (7) The Appellate Board shall consist of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and such
other Members as the Central Government may deem fit and, subject to the other
provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Appellate Board may
be exercised by a Bench thereof.

(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist of one Judicial
Member and one Technical Member and shall sit at such place as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Chairman—

(a) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the Judicial Member or
Technical Member of the Bench to which he is appointed, discharge the function of
the Judicial Member or, as the case may be, the Technical Member, of any other
Bench;

(6) may transfer a Member from one Bench to another Bench;

‘oO may authorise Vice-Chairman, the Judicial Member or the Technical Member
appointed to one Bench to discharge also the functions of the Judicial Member or the
Technical Member, as the case may be, of another Bench.

(4) Where any Benches are constituted, the Central Government may, from time to
time, by notification, make provisions as to the distribution of the business of the
Appellate Board amongst the Benches and specify the matters which may be dealt by
each Bench.

Explanation.- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expression
"matter" includes an application or appeal under section 40, or section 42.

Establish-
ment of
Layout-
Design
Appellate
Board.
Composition

of Appellate
Board.


14

(5) If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, they shall state the
point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the Chairman who shall
either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or
points by one or more of the other Members and such point or points shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case
including those who first heard it.

Qualifica- 34. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as Chairman unless he—
tions for

appointment (a) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or

as Chair

man, Vice- (0) is, for at least two years, held the office of a Vice-Chairman.

Chairman,

or other (2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Vice-Chairman, unless he—
Members.

(a) has, for atleast two years, held the office of a Judicial Member or a Technical
Member; or

(b) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade
I of that Service or any higher post for at least five years.

(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial Member unless he—

(a) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held the post in Grade
1 of that Service for atleast three years; or

(9) has, for atleast ten years, held a civil judicial office.

(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member, unless he
possesses a Master’s Degree in Physics or Bachelor’s Degree in Electronics Engineering
or Electrical Engineering or Computer Engineering from an University or Institution
established under law for the time being in force and has held a post equivalent to the
the post of Joint Secretary to the Government of India or any higher post for at least
five years and possesses at least five years’ experience in the area of semiconductors.

(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and
every other Member shall be appointed by the President of India.

(© No appointment of a person as the Chairman shall be made except after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India.

Term of 35, The Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Members shall hold office as such ‘for a
office of term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he
Chairman, attains,—

Vice- .

Chairman (a) in the case of Chairman and Vice-Chairman, the age of sixty-five years; and
and

Members. (b) in the case of Member, the age of sixty-two years,

whichever, is earlier.

36. (1) In the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chaifman by Vice-


Application

15

reasons of his death, resignation or otherwise, the Vice-Chairman and in his absence the
senior-most Member shall act as Chairman until the date on which a new Chairman,
appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon
his office.

(2) When the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing to his absence,
illness or any other cause, the Vice-Chairman and in his absence the senior-most
Member shall discharge the functions of the Chairman until the date on which, the
Chairman resumes his duty.

37, (1) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the Chairman,
Vice-Chairman and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), a person who, immediately
before the date of assuming office as the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member,
was in service of Government shall be deemed to have retired from service on the date
on which he enters upon as the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member.

38. (1) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and any other Member may, by notice in
writing under his hand addressed to the President of India, resign his office:

Provided that the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or any other Member shall, unless he is
permitted by the President of India to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until
a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his
term of office, whichever is earlier.

(2) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman or any other Member shall not be removed from
his office except by an order by the President of India on the ground of proved
misbehaviour or incapacity after an enquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court in
which the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Member has been informed of the charges
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those
charges.

(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the
investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other
Member referred to in sub-section (2).

39, (7) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of the
offices and other employees required to assist the Appellate Board in the discharge
of its functions and provide the Appellate Board with such officers and other
employees as it may think fit.

(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and
other employees of the Appellate Board shall be such as may be prescribed.

13) The officers and other employees of the Appellate Board shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of the Chairman in the manner as may be
prescribed.

40. (7) A registered proprietor of the registered layout-design may make an

Chairman
or senior-
most
Member to
act as
Chairman
or discharge
his function
in certain
circum-
stances.

Salaries,
allowances
and other
terms and
conditions
of service
of Chair-
man, Vice-
‘Chairman
and other
Members.

Resignation
and
removal.

Staff of
Appellate
Board.


to the
Appellate

determine
royalty.

Power of
the Board
to cancel
registration.

Appeal to
Appeliate
Board.

16

application to the Appellate Board for determination of royalty under sub-section (5) of
section 18.

(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and be accompanied
by such affidavits, documents or any other evidence and by such fee in respect of the
filing of such application and by such other fees for the service or execution of
processes as may be prescribed.

(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (/), the Appellate Board shall, after
giving notice to the opposite party to file opposition within the prescribed time and
manner and after giving opportunity of being heard to the applicant and the opposite
party, dispose of the application.

(4) An order or decision made by the Appellate Board in disposing of the application
under sub-section (3) shall be executable by a civil court having local jurisdiction as if
it were a decree made by that court.

41. (1) Any person may make an application, in the prescribed form accompanied
with prescribed fee, to the Appellete Board for cancellation of the registration of a
layout-design registered under this Act or registration of assignment or transmission
relating thereto, as the case may be, on the ground that—

(a) in the case of the registration of a layout-design, the layout-design is prohibited
for being registered under section 7 ; or

(0) in case of the registration of assignment or transmission relating to a registered
layout-design, such assignment or transmission is contrary to any provision of the law
for the time being in force.

(2) The Appellete Board shall, on receipt of an application under sub-section (1), give
notice to the opposite parties in the prescribed manner and after giving them an
opportunity of being heard, make such order as it may deem fit regarding cancellation
of registration:

Provided that where the ground of cancellation has been established with respect only
to a part of a layout-design, the Board shall cancel only such part and the remaining
part of the layout-design if capable of performing as a semiconductor integrated circuit
shall be retained as registered on the register in the name of the registered proprietor of
such layout-design.

(3) Any cancellation of the registration of a layout-design either in whole or in part
under sub-section (2) shall be deemed to be effective on the date from which the period
of ten years referred to in section 15 is countable in respect of that layout-design.

(4) The Appellete Board shall, without delay after making any order of cancellation
under sub-section (2), send a copy of such order to the Registrar who shall correct the
register to give effect to such order.

42. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the Registrar under this Act,
or the rules made thereunder may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Board within three
months from the date on which the order or decision sought to be appealed against is
communicated to such person preferring the appeal.

(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period
specified under sub-section (1): हु हे
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period specified


5 of 1908.

5 of 1908.

43 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

Power of

17

therefor, if the appellant satisfies the Appellate Board that he had sufficient cause for
not preferring the appeal within the specified period.

(3) An appeal to the Appellate Board shall be in the prescribed form and shall be
verified in the prescribed manner and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order or
decision appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.

43. (1) The Appellate Board shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the Procedure
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by principles of natural justice and, and powers
subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Appellate Board of Appellate
shall have powers to regulate its own procedure including the fixing of places and times Board.
of its hearing.

(2) The Appellate Board shall have, for the purpose of discharging its functions under
this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—

(a) receiving evidence;

(6) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses;
(c) requisitioning any public record; and

(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.

(3) Any proceeding before the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section
196 of the Indian Penal Code, and the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a civil
court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.

44, No court or other authority shall have or, be entitled to, exercise any jurisdiction, Bar of
powers or authority in relation to the matters referred to in sub-section (/) of section jurisdic-
40 or sub-section (/) of section 42. tion of
courts, etc,

45. On ceasing to hold office, the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or other Members shall Bar to
not appear before the Appellate Board or the Registrar. appear
before

Appellate
Board.

46. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act or in any Conditions
other law for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of injunction as to
or stay or any other manner) shall be made on, or in any proceedings relating to, an making of

appeal unless— ’ interim
order.
(a) copies of such appeal and of all documents in support of the plea‘for such
interim order are furnished to the party against whom such appeal is made or
proposed to be made; and

(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter.

47. On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the parties, and after


Chairman

to transfer
cases from
one Bench
to another.

Procedure
for appli-
cation for
rectifica-
tion, etc.
before

Appellate
Board.

Appearance
of Registrar
in legal

proceedings.

Registrar
to refer
certain
disputes to
the Board.

Power of
the Board
to permit
certain
uses.

18

hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, or on his own motion without such
notice, the Chairman may transfer any case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to
any other Bench.

48. (7) An application for rectification of the register made to the Appellate Board
under section 30 shall be in such form as may be prescribed.

(2) A certified copy of every order or judgement of the Appellate Board relating to
a registered layout-design under this Act shall be communicated to the Registrar by the
Board and, the Registrar shall give effect to the order of the Board and shall, when so
directed, amend the entries in, or rectify, the register in accordance with such order.

49. (1) The Registrar shall have the right to appear and be heard—

(a) in any legal proceedings before the Appellate Board in which the relief sought
includes alteration or rectification of the register or in which any question relating to
the practice of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Layout-Design Registry is raised;

(b) in any appeal to the Board from an order of the Registrar on an application for
registration of a layout-design—

() which is not opposed, and the application is either refused by the Registrar
or is accepted by him subject to any amendments or modifications, or

(ii) which has been opposed and the Registrar considers that his appearance is
necessary in the public interest,

and the Registrar shall appear in any case if so directed by the Board.

(2) Unless the Appellate Board otherwise directs, the Registrar may, in lieu of
appearing, submit a statement in writing signed by him, giving such particulars as he
thinks proper of the proceedings before him reiating to the matter in issue or of the
grounds of any decision given by him affecting it, or of the practice of the
Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Registry in like cases, or of other
matters relevant to the issues and within his knowledge as Registrar, and such statement
shall be evidence in the proceeding.

50. If any question arises in any proceedings before Registrar, whether a layout-
design has been commercially exploited for more than two years anywhere in a
convention country for the purpose of registration of such layout-design under this Act,
the Registrar shall refer such question to the Appellate Board, and the decision of the
Board thereon shall be final.

51, (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Appellate Board may on
an application made in the prescribed manner before it on behalf of the Government or
by any person authorised by the Government and after giving notice of such application
to the registered proprietor of a layout-design and providing the opportunity of being
heard to the parties concerned permit the use of such registered layout-design by the
Government or by such person so authorised, as the case may be, subject to any or all
of the following conditions as the Board deems fit under the circumstances of such use,
namely:—


19

(a) that the use of the layout-design shall be for non-commercial public purposes
or for the purposes relating to national emergency or of extreme public urgency;

(b) that the duration of the use of the layout-design shall be limited for a period
specified by the Board;

(c) that the use of the layout-design shall be non-assignable and non-transmissible;

(d) that the use of the layout-design shall be to the extent which the Board deems
necessary to remedy the anti-competitive practice ;

(e) that the use of the layout-design shall be predominantly for the supply of
semiconductor integrated circuits or articles incorporating semiconductor integrated
circuits in domestic market of India:

Provided that the Board shall not permit the use of a registered layout-design, by any
such person authorised by the Government, under this sub-section unless the Board is
satisfied that such person so authorised has made efforts to enter into agreement with
the registered proprietor of such layout-design on reasonable commercial terms and
conditions for permitted use of such layout-design and such efforts had not been
successful within the prescribed period:

Provided further that the first proviso shall not be applicable in a case where the
person so authorised produces to the Board a certificate issued by the Government to
the effect that such use is required due to national emergency or any other
circumstances which the Government considers to be of extreme urgency or of public
non-commercial use.

(2) The Appellate Board shall, while granting the permission for the use of a
registered layout-design under sub-section (7), determine the amount of royalty to be
paid by the Government or the person authorised by the Government, as the case may
be, to the registered proprietor of such layout-design for such permitted use.

(3) The Appellate Board may, on the application of the registered proprietor of a
layout-design referred to in sub-section (7), may review the permission granted under
that sub-section and, after giving notice and opportunity of hearing to the parties
concerned in the prescribed manner, cancel or amend such permission if the Board is
satisfied that any of the conditions subject to which the permission was granted has not
been observed or the circumstances which led to the granting of such permission has
ceased to exist or substantially altered.

52. In all proceedings under this Act before the Appellate Board the costs of the

Registrar shall be in the discretion of the Board, but the Registrar shall not be ordered:

to pay the costs of any of the parties.

53, (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate Board under
this Act may, within the prescribed period appeal to the High Court within whose
jurisdiction head office or the branch office of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits
Layout-Design Registry against the decision or order of which the appeal arises is
situated.

(2) Every such appeal shall be preferred by petition in writing and shall be in such
form and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed.

Costs of
Registrar

in procee-
dings before
Appellate
Board,

Appeal.


20

(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall apply to appeals before a High Court under 5 of 1908.

this Act.
Powers of 54. The High Court may make rules consistent with this Act as to the conduct and
High Courts procedure of all proceedings under this Act before 1.
to make
rules.

Transitional 55. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, till the establishment of the
provisions. Appellate Board under section 32, the Intellectual Property Appellate Board
establishment under section 83 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 shall exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on the Appellate Board under this Act
subject to the modification that in any Bench of such Intellectual Property Appellate
Board constituted for the purposes of this section, for the Technical Member referred to
in sub-section (2) of section 84 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, the Technical Member
shall be appointed under this Act and he shall be deemed to be the Technical Member
for constituting the Bench under said sub-section (2) of section 84 for the purposes of

this Act.
CHAPTER IX
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
Penalty for 56. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of section 18 shall be

infringement punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine
of layout- which shall not be less than fifty-thousand rupees but may extends to ten lakhs rupees,
design. or with both.

Penalty for 57. (1) No person shall make any representation with respect to a layout-design not

falsely being a registered layout-design, to the effect that it is a registered layout-design.
representing
a layout- (2) If any person contravenes any of the provision of sub-section (7), he shall be

design as punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
registered. which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both.

(3) For the purposes of this section, the use in India in relation to a layout-design of
the word "registered", or of any other expression referring whether expressly or
impliedly to registration, shall be deemed to import a reference to registration in the
register, except—

(a) where that word or other expression, is used in direct association with other
words delineated in characters at least as large as those in which that word or other
expression is delineated and indicating that the reference is to registration as a layout-
design under the law of a country outside India being a country under the law of
which the registration referred to is in fact in force; or

(b) where that other expression is of itself such as to indicate that the reference is
to such registration as is mentioned in clause (a); or

(c) where that word is used in relation to a layout-design registered as a layout
design under the law of a country outside India and in relation solely to such layout-

design.


21

58. If any person uses on his place of business, or on any document issued by him,
or otherwise, words which would reasonably lead to the belief that his place of business
is, or is officially connected with, the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design
Registry, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extends to six
months, or with fine, or with both.

59. If any person makes, or causes to be made, a false entry in the register, or a
writing falsely purporting to be a copy of an entry in the register, or produces or
tenders, or causes to be produced or tendered, in evidence any such writing, knowing
the entry or writing to be false, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

60. (J) Where a person is convicted of an offence under section 56, the court
convicting him may direct the forfeiture to Government of all goods and things by
means of, or in relation to, which the offence has been committed.

(2) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction and an appeal lies against the
conviction, an appeal shall lie against the forfeiture also.

(3) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction, the court, before whom the person
is convicted, may order any forfeited articles to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of
as the court thinks fit.

61. Where a person accused of an offence under section 56 proves—

(a) that in the case which is the subject of the charge he was so employed that it
relates to the duty of his employment, and was not interested in the profit accruing
from such commission of offence except the duty of his employment; and

(b) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing the offence
charged, he had, at the time of commission of the alleged office, no reason to suspect
the genuineness of the registered layout-design or a semiconductor integrated circuit
in which such layout-design is incorporated; and

(c) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the
information in his power with respect to the commission of such offence,

he shall be acquitted.

62. (1) Where the offence charged under section 56 is in relation to a registered
layout-design and the accused pleads that the registration of the layout-design is invalid,
the following procedure shall be followed:—

(व) if the court is satisfied that such defence is prima facie tenable, it shall not
proceed with the charge but shall adjourn the proceeding for three months from the
date on which the plea of accused is recorded to enable the accused to file an
application before the Appellate Board under this Act, for the rectification of the
register on the ground that the registration is invalid;

Penalty for
improperly
describing
a place of
business as
connected
with the
Semicon-
ductor
Integrated
Circuits
Layout-
Design
Registry.

Penalty for
falsification
of entries in
the register.

Forfeiture
of goods.

Exemption
of certain
persons
employed in
ordinary
course of
business.

Procedure
where
invalidity
of regis-
tration is
pleaded by
the accused.


Offences by
companies.

Cognizance
of certain
offences,

Costs of
defence or
prosecution.

22

(9) if the accused proves to the court that he has made such application within the
time so limited or within such further time as the time court may for sufficient cause
may allow, the further proceedings in the prosecution shall stand stayed till the
disposal of such application for rectification;

(c) if within a period of three months or within such extended time as may be
allowed by the court the accused fails to apply to the Appellate Board for rectification
of the register, the court shall proceed with the case as if the registration were valid.

(2) Where before the institution of a complaint of an offence referred to in sub-
section (I), any application for the rectification of the register concerning the layout-
design in question on the ground of invalidity of the registration thereof has already
been properly made to and is pending before the Appellate Board or the Registrar, the
Court shall stay the further proceedings in the prosecution pending the disposal of the
application aforesaid and shall determine the charge against the accused in conformity
with the result of the application for rectification in so far as the complainant relies
upon the registration of his layout-design.

63. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, the
company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the
conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly;

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable
to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (J), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by'a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section—

(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
or individuals; and

(9) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
64. No court shall take cognizance—

(a) of an offence under section 56 or section 57 except on the complaint in writing
made by the registered proprietor or the registered user of a layout-design in respect
of which the offence has been committed;

(b) of an offence under section 58 or section 59 except on complaint in writing
made by the Registrar or any officer authorised by him in writing.

65. In any prosecution under this Act, the court may order such costs to be paid by
the accused to the complainant, or by the complainant to the accused, as the court
deemed reasonable having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the conduct
of the parties. Costs so awarded shall be recoverable as if they were a fine.


45 of 1860.

23

66. An officer of the Government whose duty it is to take part in the enforcement of
the provisions of this Chapter, shall not be compelled in any court to say whence he
got any information as to the commission of any offence against this Act.

67. If any person, being within India, abets the commission, without India, of any act
which, if committed in India, would, under this Act, be an offence, he may be tried for
such abetment in any place in India in which he may be found, and be punished
therefor with the punishment to which he would be liable if he had himself committed
in that place the act which he abetted.

CHAPTER X

MISCELLANEOUS

68. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Registrar shall—

(a) not discharge any information relating to the registration of a layout-design or
any application relating to the registration of a layout-design under this Act which he
considers prejudicial to the interest of the security of India; and

(b) take action for the cancellation of registration of a layout-design registered
under this Act which the Central Government may, by notification in the Offical
Gazette, specify in the interest of the security of India.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression "security of India”
means any action necessary for the security of India which relates to the use, of a
layout-design or a semiconductor integrated cicuit incorporating a layout-design or an
article incorporating such semiconductor integrated circuit, directly or indirectly for the
purposes of war or military establishment or for the purposes of war or other emergency
in international relations:

69. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person in respect of
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.

70. Every person appointed under this Act and every Member of the Appellate Board
shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.

71, Where a registered layout-design, or a semiconductor integrated circuit in which
a registered layout-design is incorporated, or an article incorporating such a
semiconductor integrated circuit is sold or has been contracted for sale, the seller shall
be deemed to warrant that the registration, of such layout-design or the layout-design so
incorporated is genuine within the meaning of this Act unless the contrary is expressed
in writing signed by or on behalf of the seller and delivered at the time of the sale or
contract to sell of such layout-design, or semiconductor integrated circuit or article, as
the case may be, and accepted by the buyer.

Information
as to
commission
of offence.

Punishment
of abetment
in India of
acts done
out of
India.

Protection
of security
in India.

Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.

Certain
persons to
be public
servants,

Implied
warranty
on sale of
layout-
design,
ete,


Powers of
Registrar.

Exercise of
discretion-
ary power
by
Registrar.

Evidence
before
Registrar.

Death of
party toa
proceeding.

Extension
of time.

Abandon-
ment.

Preliminary
advise by
the
Registrar.

24

72. In all proceedings under this Act before the Registrar,—

(a) the Registrar shall have all the powers of a civil court for the purposes of
receiving evidence, administering oaths, enforcing the attendance of witnesses,
compelling the discovery and production of documents and issuing commissions for
the examination of witnesses;

(b) the Registrar may, subject to any rules in this behalf made under section 96
make such orders as to costs as he considers reasonable, and any such order shall be
executable as a decree of a civil court;

(c) the Registrar may, on an application made in the prescribed manner, review his
own decision.

73. Subject to the provisions of section 76, the Registrar shall not exercise any
discretionary or other power vested in him by this Act or the rules made thereunder
adversely to a person applying for the exercise of that power without (if so required by
that person within the prescribed time) giving to the person an opportunity of being
heard. :

74. In any proceeding under this Act before the Registrar, evidence shall be given by
affidavit:

Provided that the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, take oral evidence in lieu of, or in
addition to, such evidence by affidavit.

75. If a person who is a party to a proceeding under this Act (not being a proceeding
before the Appellate Board or a court) dies pending the proceeding, the Registrar may,
on request, and on proof to his satisfaction of the transmission of the interest of the
deceased person, substitute in the proceeding his successor in interest-in his place, or,
if the Registrar is of opinion that the interest of the deceased person is sufficiently
represented by the surviving parties, permit the proceeding to continue without the
substitution of his successor in interest.

76. (1) If the Registrar is satisfied, on application made to him in the prescribed
manner and accompanied by the prescribed fee, that there is sufficient cause for
extending the time for doing any act (not being a time expressly provided in the Act),
whether the time so specified has expired or not, he may, subject to such conditions as
he may think fit to impose, extend the time and inform the parties accordingly.

(2) Nothing in sub-section (/) shall be deemed to require the Registrar to hear the
parties before disposing of an application for extension of time and no appeal shall lie
from any order of the Registrar under this section.

77, Where, in the opinion of the Registrar, an applicant is in default in the
prosecution of an application filed under this Act, the Registrar may, by notice require
the applicant to remedy the default within a time is specified and after giving him, if
so, desired, an opportunity of being heard, treat the application as abandoned, unless
the default is remedied within the time specified in the notice.

78. (1) The Registrar may, on application made to him in the prescribed manner by
any person who proposes to apply for the registration of a layout-design, give advice as
to whether the layout-design appears to him prima facie to be original.


25

(2) If, on an application for the registration of a layout-design as to which the
Registrar has given advice as aforesaid in the affirmative made within three months
after the advice was given, the Registrar, after further investigation or consideration,
gives notice, to the applicant of objection on the ground that the layout-design is not
original, the applicant shall be entitled, on giving notice of withdrawal of the application
within the prescribed period, to have repaid to him any fee paid on the filing of the
application.

79. (1) In every proceeding under Chapter VII or under section 42, every registered
user of a layout-design, who is not himself an applicant in respect of any proceeding
under that Chapter or section shall be made a party to the proceeding.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a registered user so made
a party to the proceeding shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an
appearance and takes part in the proceeding.

80. (J) A copy of any entry in the register or of any document referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 87 purporting to be certified by the Registrar and sealed with the
seal of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Layout-Design Registry shall be admitted
in evidence in all courts and in all proceedings without further proof or production of
the original.

(2) A certificate purporting to be under the hand of the Registrar as to any entry,
matter or thing that he is authorised by this Act or the rules to make or do shall ७६
prima facie evidence of the entry having been made, and of the contents thereof, or of
the matter or things having been done or not done.

81. The Registrar or any other officer of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits
Layout-Design Registry shall not, in any legal proceedings to which he is not a party,
be compellable to produce the register or any other document in his custody, the
contents of which can be proved by the production of a certified copy issued under this
Act or to appear as a witness to prove the matters therein recorded unless by order of
the court made for special cause.

82. If in any legal proceeding for rectification of the register before the Appellate
Board a decision is on contest given in favour of the registered proprietor of the layout-
design on the issue as to the validity of the registration of the layout-design, the
Appellate Board may grant a certificate to that effect, and if such a certificate is
granted, then, in any subsequent legal proceedings in which the said validity comes into
question, the said proprietor on obtaining a final order or judgment in his favour
affirming validity of the registration of the layout-design shall, unless the said final
order or judgment for sufficient reason directs otherwise, be entitled to his full cost,
charges and expenses as between legal practitioner and client.

83. An address for service stated in an application or notice of opposition shall, for
the purposes of the application or notice of opposition, be deemed to be the address of
the applicant or opponent, as the case may be, and all documents in relation to the
application or notice of opposition may be served by leaving them at or sending them
by post to the address for service of the applicant or opponent, as the case may be.

84. Where, by or under this Act, any act, other than the making of an affidavit, is
required to be done before the Registrar by any person, the act may, subject to the rules
made in this behalf, be done, instead of by that person himself, by a person duly
authorised in the prescribed manner, who is—

(a) a legal practitioner, or

Registered
user to be
impleaded
in certain
procee-
dings.

Evidence of
entries in
register,
etc., and
things done
by the
Registrar.

Registrar
and other
officers not
compellable
to produce
register, etc,

Certificate
of validity.

Address for
service,

Agents.


Layout-
design
registered
by an agent
or represen-
tative
without
authority.

Indexes.

Documents
open to
public
inspection.

Reports of
Registrar
to be
placed
before
Parliament.

Fees and

surcharge.

26
(b) a person registered in the prescribed manner as a layout-design agent, or
(c) a person in the sole and regular employment of the principal.

85. If an agent or a representative of the proprietor of a registered layout-design,
without authority uses or attempts to register or registers the layout-design in his own
name, the proprietor shall be entitled to oppose the registration applied for or secure its
cancellation or rectification of the register so as to bring him as the registered proprietor
of the said layout-design by assignment in his favour:

Provided that such action shall be taken within three years of the registered proprietor
of the layout-design becoming aware of the conduct of the agent or representative.

86. There shall be kept under the direction and supervision of the Registrar—

(@) an index of registered layout-designs,

(8) an index of layout-designs in respect of which applications for registration are
pending,

(c) an index of the names of the proprietors of registered layout-designs, and

(d) an index of the names of registered users.
87. (J) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (4) of section 25,—

(a) the register and any document upon which any entry in the register is based;

(b) every notice of opposition to the registration of a layout-design application for
rectification before the Registrar, counter-statement thereto, and any affidavit or
document filed by the parties in any proceedings before the Registrar;

(c) the indexes mentioned in section 86 and such other documents as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify;

shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be open to public inspection at
the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Registry.

(2) Any person may, on an application to the Registrar and on payment of such fees
as may be prescribed, obtain a certified copy of any entry in the register or any
document referred to in sub-section (J).

88. The Central Government shall cause to be placed before both Houses of
Parliament once a year a report respecting the execution by or under the Registrar of
this Act. .

89. (J) There shall be paid in respect of applications and registration and other
matters under this Act such fees and surcharge as may be prescribed by the Central
Government. .

(2) Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by the Registrar, the
Registrar shall not do that act until the fee has been paid.


16 of 1908.

27

(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document at the
Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Registry, the document shall be
deemed not to have been filed at the registry until the fee has been paid.

90. Nothing in Chapter IX shall be construed so as to render liable to any prosecution
or punishment any servant of a master resident in India who in good faith acts in
obedience to the instructions of such master, and, on demand made by or on behalf of
prosecutor, has given full information as to-his master and as to the instructions which
he has received from his master.

91. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Registration Act, 1908, no document
declaring or purporting to declare the ownership or title of a person to a layout-design
other than a registered layout-design shall be registered under that Act.

92. The provisions of this Act shall be binding on the Government.

93, With a view to the fulfilment of a treaty, convention or arrangement with any
country outside India which affords to citizens of India similar privileges as granted to
its own citizens, the Central Government may,,by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify such country to be a convention country for providing the citizens of such
convention country the similar privileges as granted to the citizens of India under this
Act.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section "couatry" includes any group of
countries or union of countries or inter-governmental organisation and the expression
“convention country" shall be construed accordingly.

94, Where any country specified by the Central Government in this behalf by
notification in the Official Gazette under section 93 does not accord to citizens of India
the same rights in respect of registration and protection of layout-design as it accords
to its own nationals, no national of such country shall be entitled, either solely or jointly
with any other person,—

(a) to apply for the registration of, or be registered as the proprietor of, a layout-
design;
(b) to be registered as the assignee of the proprietor of a registered layout-design; or

(c) to apply for registration or be registered as a registered user of a layout-design
under section 25.

95. (J) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be
necessary for removing the difficulty:

Savings in
respect of
Chapter IX,

Convention
countries.

as to
reciprocity.

Power of
Central
Government
to remove
difficulties.


Power to
make rules,

28

Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of five years
from the commencement of this Act.

(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made,
be laid before each House of Parliament.

96. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
tules to carry out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(a) the other matters relating to the registered layout-designs to be entered in the
register under sub-section (1) of section 6;

(b) the manner of applying to the Registrar for registration under sub-section 91)
of section 8;

(c) the manner of advertising the application under sub-section (1) of section 10;

(d) the manner of notifying the correction or amendment in application under sub-
section (2) of section 10;

(e) the manner of making application, the fee to be paid and the manner of giving
notice under sub-section (7) of section 11;

(f) the manner of sending counter statement under sub-section (/) of section 11;
(g) the manner of submitting evidence under sub-section (4) of section 11;

(h) the form of issuing certificate under sub-section (2) of section 13;

(i) the manner of giving notice under sub-section (3) of section 13;

(j) the manner to apply to register the title under sub-section (1) of section 23;
(k) the manner of applying to Registrar under sub-section (1) of section 25;

(I) the document to be prescribed under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 25;
(m) the manner of issuing notice under sub-section (3) of section 25;

(n) the manner of application under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(०) the manner of application under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(p) the manner of application under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(q) the manner of issuing notice under sub-section (2) of section 26;

(1) the procedure of cancelling registration under sub-section (3) of section 26;

(s) the manner of applying to the Appellate Board under sub-section (1) of section
30;

(0) the manner of giving notice under sub-section (3) of section 30; 7


29
(u) the manner of serving notice under sub-section (4) of section 30;
(v) the manner of making application under sub-section (1) of section 31;
(w) the manner of making application under sub-section (2) of section 31;
(x) the salaries and allowances payable and other terms and conditions of service
9 the Chairman, Vice-Chairmen and other Members under sub-section (1) of section

(y) the procedure for investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairman,
Vice-Chairman and other Members under sub-section (3) of section 38;

(z) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officer and
other employees of the Appellate Board under sub-section (2) of section 39;

(za) the manner of general superintendence by the Chairman under sub-section (3)
of section 39;

(zb) the form of application, the affidavit documents, other evidence, fee in respect
of the filing of such application and other fees for the services or execution of
process to be accompanied therewith under sub-section (2) of section 40;

(zc) the time limit for filing the opposition under sub-section (3) of section 40;

(zd) the form of making application and the fee to be accompanied therewith under
sub-section (1) of section 41;

(ze) the manner of giving notice under sub-section (2) of section 41;

(zf) the form of appeal, the manner of such verification ef such appeal and the fee
to be accompanied therewith under sub-section (3) of section 42;

(zg) any other matter to be prescribed under clause (d) of sub-section (2) of
section 43;

(zh) the form of application under sub-section (1) of section 48;
(zi) the manner of making application under sub-section (1) of section 51;

(zj) the period to be prescribed under first proviso to sub-section (1) of section
51;

(zk) the manner of giving notice and opportunities of hearing to the parties hearing
under sub-section (3) of section 51;

(zl) the period to be prescribed under sub-section (1) of section 53;

(zm) the form of petition and particular to be contained therein under sub-section
(2) of section 53;

(zn) the time to be prescribed under section 73;

(zo) the manner of making application and the fee to be accompanied therewith
under sub-section (1) section 76;

(zp) the manner of making application under sub-section (1) section 78;


30
(zq) the period to be prescribed under sub-section (2) section 78;
(zr) the manner of authorising a person under section 84;

(zs) the manner of registering a person as a layout-design under clause (d) of
under section 84;

(zt) the conditions to be prescribed under sub-section (1) of section 87;
(zu) the fee payable under sub-section (2) of section 87;
(2५) the fees and the surcharge to be paid under sub-section (1) of section 89;

(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of any thing previously done under that rule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Electronics and Information Technology 1s one of the fastest growing sectors that has
played a significant role in world economy Thus is primarily due to the advancements in the
field of electronics, computers and telecommunication Microelectrorucs- which pnmarily
tefers to Integrated Circuits (103) ranging trom Small Scale Integration (SSI) to Very Large
Scale Integration (VLSI) on a sermconductor chip — has nghtly been recognized as a core,
strategic technology world-over, especially for Information Technology (IT) based society
Design of ICs requires considerable expertise and several hundreds of man years of effort
depending on the complexity Such efforts culminate into the lay-outs for ICs which are used
for fabricating the ICs in the fabncation plants To encourage continued mvestments in
R & D to result in technological advancements ॥ the field of microelectronics, protection of
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) embedded in the layout designs 1s of utmost umportance

2 The existing practices of providing protection through the methods of Copy
Right, Patents do not appropnately accommodate the requirements of Intellectual Property
Rights Protection for the Layout-Designs of Integrated Cucuits This 1s because in the
context of Layout Designs the concept of “ongunality” 1s of utmost significance, whether tt 1s
a “novelty or not” While the Patent Law requues that the idea should be onginal as well as
novel, the copynght law 1s too general to accommodate the onginal ideas of scientific
creation of Layout-Designs of Integrated Circuits Hence the requirement of this Bill The
necessity for providing protection for Layout-Designs of Integrated Circutts arises to reward
and encourage an adequate level of investment of human. financial and technological
Tesources

3 The majonty of the countnes that attach significance to protection of
Intellectual Property Rights im the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits provides for a sur
generss (of its kind, unique) protection of Layout-Designs of Integrated Curcusts which is
usually contamed in a separate Act. The World Trade Organisation (WTO) agreement which
was rabfied by India has_ provisions for Trade Related Intellectual Property Rughts (TRIPS)
with regard to setting up of standards concermng availability, scope and use of Intellectual
Property Rights. Geographical Indications. Layout-Design of Integrated Circuits etc
Developing nations have a transition penod of 5 years with effect from 1-1-1995 to align
theu laws in accordance with the provisions of TRIPS Agreement As one of the signatories
of WTO, India 1s also expected to align its laws in accordance with the TRIPS Agreement
and formulate suitable legislation.

4 The Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Layout-Design Bill provides, inter-alia,
for protection of Semiconductor Integrated Cucutts Layout-Designs by process of
registration, mechanism for distngwshing Layout-Designs which can be protected, rules to
prolubit registration of Layout-Designs which are not onginal and/or which have been
commercially exploited, period for protection, provision with regard to infringement,
payment of royalty for registered Layout-Design, provisions for dealing with willful
infimgement by way of pushment, appointing a Registrar for registering the layout designs
and mechamusin of Appellate Board

5 The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives

PRAMOD MAHAJAN,

New Dethi;
The 15" December, 1999

31


32
Notes on clauses

Clause 1.—This clause provides for appointment of different dates for commencement
for different provisions of the Act because some of the provisions like setting up of
Appellate Board and necessary mechanism will have to be provided and therefore
necessary steps will have to be taken for administering these provisions,which may take
some time. Necessary provision is, therefore, proposed to be added to sub-clause (3)
for this purpose.

Clause 2.— This clause contains definitions and interpretations. These include
Appellate Board, Commercial Exploitation, Layout-Design, Semiconductor Integrated
Circuit, Registered Layout-Design, Bench, Chairman, Judicial Member, Member,
Registered Proprietor, Register, Registrar etc.

Clause 3.—.This clause provides for the appointment of the Registrar and other
Officers.

Clause 4.— This clause seeks to empower the Registrar to withdraw any matter
pending before an officer and deal with such matter himself or transfer the same to
another officer for reasons to be recorded therein. The purpose of this is to ensure
better management of the work in Semiconductor Integrated Layout-Design Registry and
in the administration of the Act.

Clause 5.— This clause deals with the establishment of the Semiconductor Integrated
Layout-Design Registry and branch offices.

Clause 6.— This clause contains provisions regarding maintenance of a single Register
of Layout-Designs. At Head Office wherein particulars of the Layout-Designs with the
names, addresses and description of the proprietor and other prescribed shall be
recorded. A copy of the register is to be kept at each branch office.

Clause 7.— Sub-clause (1) stipulates what constitutes absolute grounds for prohibition
of registration of Layout-Designs. It is proposed to explicitly stipulate that Layout-
Designs which are not original or which have been commercially exploited for more
than two years or which are not inherently distinctive or which are not inherently
capable of being distinguished from the registered Layout-Design shall not be registered
under the Act. Sub-Clause (2) defines an original Layout-Design which can be
registered under the Act. Sub Clause (3) provides that in case the original Layout-
Design is created as a result of a commission or employment the right shall, in the
absence of any contractual provisions to the contrary, belong to the person who
commissioned the work or the employer.

Clause 8.—

Sub-clause (1) deals with the procedure for making an application for Registration
of a Layout-Design.

Sub-clause (2) provides for the place where application for registration of a
Layout-Design is to be filed.

Sub-clause (3) provides the provisions to the Registrar to refuse the application or
accept it absolutely or subject to amendments or modifications.

Clause 9.— This clause provides for withdrawal of acceptance of an application,
before its registration, when the acceptance of Layout-Design is in error etc., after


33
hearing the applicant.

Clause 10.— This clause provides for advertisement of an application, either after
acceptance or before acceptance, so as to afford the public an opportunity to oppose the
registration of Layout-Design.

Clause 11.-- This clause deals with the procedure for opposition to registration to
registration of a Layout-Design, Sub-clause (6) provides for payment of security for
costs in the case of persons who do not reside or carry on business in India.

Clause 12.— This clause provides for correction any error in or in connection with
the application or amendment of the application either before or after acceptance of the
application.

Clause 13.— This clause makes it mandatory on the Registrar to register the Layout-
Design where the procedure for registration of the Layout-Design has been completed
viz. the application has been accepted and either the application has not been opposed
or the opposition has been dismissed.

Clause 14.— This clause provides for registration of jointly owned Layout-Designs.

Clause 15.— The duration of registration of a Layout-Design shall be for a period of
Ten years counted from the date of application for registration or from the date of first
commercial exploitation.

Clause 16.— This clause provides that no infringement action will lie in respect of
an unregistered Layout-Design.

Clause 17.— This clause deals with the exclusive rights conferred by registration of
a Layout-Design whether or not the Layout-Design is incorporated in an article or not.

Clause 18.— This clause deals with the infringement of Layout-Design and explicitly
states as to various acts which constitute infringement.

Sub-clause (1) provides that any act of reproducing a registered Layout-Design partly
or entirely in a integrated circuit, act of importing ar selling or otherwise distributing
for commercial purposes an integrated circuit or an article incorporating such an
integrated circuit.

Sub-clause (2) provides that the acts contained in Sub-clause (1) and (5) will not be
infringement if these acts are performed for the purpose of scientific evaluation,
analysis, research or teaching.

Sub-clause (3) provides that it will not be a infringement if a person on the basis of

scientific evaluation or analysis of a registered Layout-Design creates another Layout-

. Design which is original and performs any of the acts contained in Sub-clause (1) and
(5) on this so created Layout-Design.

Sub-clause (4) prevents the proprietor of a registered design to use a Layout-Design
which is created by another person on the basis of scientific evaluation or analysis of
a registered Layout-Design referred to in Sub-clause 3.

Sub-clause (5) provides that it will be not an infringement to perform or directing to
be performed any of the acts referred to in Sub-clause (1) if the person does not know
or has no reasonable ground to know that the integrated circuit or an article
incorporated a registered Layout-Design. But after the time when such person has
received notice of such knowledge, he may continue to perform or directing to be


34

performed acts referred to in sub-clause (1) on the stock on hand or ordered before
such time by paying royalty to the registered proprietor determined by negotiations
between the registered proprietor and the person or by the Appellate Board based on the
benefit accrued by the person.

Sub-clause (6) provides for the immunity from infringement referred to in Sub-clause
(5) to a person who purchases an integrated circuit incorporating a registered Layout-
Design or an article incorporating such an integrated circuit.

Sub-clause (7) provides that acts referred to in sub-clause (b) of (1) shall not be
infringement if they are performed with the written consent of the proprietor of a
registered Layout-Design or within the control of the person obtaining such consent.

Sub-Clause (8) provides that if a person by the application of independent intellect
creates a Layout-Design which is similar to the Registered Layout-Design and claims
that the Layout-Design so created was before the date of registration of the registered
layout-Design then any act of this person in respect of the Layout-Design shall not be
the infringement of the Registered Layout-Design.

Clause 19.— This clause states that registration including subsequent assignment and
transmission, is prima facie evidence of validity.

Clause 20.— This clause recognises the right of registered proprietor to assign the
Layout-Design for any consideration and give receipts.

Clause 21.— This clause deals with the assignability and transmissibility of a
registered Layout-Design whether with or without the good will of the business.

Clause 22.— This clause seeks to stipulate conditions for assignment of a Layout-
Design without goodwill of business. Such an assignment will not take effect unless
the assignor obtains directions of the Registrar and advertises the assignment as per the
Registrar’s directions and as per the procedure to be prescribed. The purpose of this
advertisement is to notice of the assignment without goodwill of the business to the
public.

Clause 23.— This clause deals with the procedure for registration of assignment and
transmission. Where the validity of an assignment is in dispute between the parties, the
Registrar may refuse to register such transmission unless the rights of the parties are
determined by the Competent Court. पु

Clause 24.— This clause deals with the registretion of registered users.

Clause 25.— This clause provides for registration as a registered user. The clause
sets out the procedure for making application and such registration, on completion of
which the Registrar may register the proposed user.

Clause 26.— This clause deals with the power of the Registrar to cancel registration
as registered user. Registration of registered user may be cancelled on the ground that
the registered user has used the Layout-Design not in atcordance with the agreement or
the proprietor/user has failed to disclose any material facts for such registration or that
the circumstances have changed since the date of registration etc. Notice and
opportunity of hearing is provided before cancellation of the registration.

Clause 27.— It is necessary to keep the Register of the Layout-Designs up-to-date.
Accordingly, to ascertain whether the registered user agreement is in force, the Registrar
is, proposed to be empowered to require the proprietor to confirm, at any time whether
the agreement, on the basis of which registered user was registered is still in force, and


35

if such confirmation is not received within the prescribed time the registrar shall remove
the entry thereof from the Register in the prescribed manner.

Clause 28.— This clause recognises the right of registered user to take proceeding
against infringement.

Clause 29.— This clause provides that a registered user will not have a right of
assignment or transmission. It is clarified that where the individual registered user
enters into partnership or remaining in a reconstituted firm, the use of the Layout-
Design by the firm would not amount to assignment or transmission.

Clause 30.— Sub-clause (1) enable a person aggrieved by the absence or omission
of any entry from the register or entry wrongly remaining or without sufficient cause to
the Appellate Board or Registrar. Sub-clause (2) empowers the Appellate Board or
Registrar to decide any question as may be necessary in connection with the
rectification. Sub-clause (3) empowers the Appellate Board or the Registrar to rectify
the register on the grounds specified above on its own motion after giving an
opportunity of being heard to the parties concerned. Sub-clause (4) enables Registrar
to rectify the Register pursuant to an order of the Board to rectify the register.

Clause 31.— Sub-clause (1) empowers the Registrar to correct the Register in respect
of the errors relating to particulars of the registered proprietor or the entries relating to
the registered Layout-Design and also to make consequential amendments, and
alterations in the certificate of registration. Sub-clause (2) empowers the Registrar to
rectify the Register to correct any error or change of name etc. on an application by
the registered user after giving notice to the registered proprietor.

Clause 32.— This clause provides for the constitution of the Appellate Board to hear
appeals against the decisions of the Registrar.

Clause 33.— This clause deals with the composition of the Appellate Board. The
Board will consist of a Chairman, Vice Chairman and such other members the Central
Government deem fit. The place where the Board may sit will be notified by the
Central Government.

Clause 34.— This clause deals with the requisite qualifications for appointments as
Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Members of the Board.

Clause 35.— This clause deals wih the term of office of the Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and other Members of th. 3vard and their conditions of Service.

Clause 36.— This clause sets out the circumstances where the Vice Chairman or the
senior most Member will act as Chairman and discharge his function.

Clause 37.— This clause enables the Central Government to prescribe the salaries
and allowances of the Chairman, Vice Chairman and other Members and other terms
and conditions of their service viz. pension, gratuity, retirement benefits etc.

Clause 38.— This clause makes provision for the resignation of the Chairman, Vice
Chairman or any other Members of the Board and various grounds for their removal
from office.

Clause 39.— This clause provides for the appointment and functioning of the staff
of the Appellate Board, terms and conditions of service and the administrative powers
of the Chairman over them.


36

Clause 40.— This clause provides for determination of royalty by the Appellate
Board by submitting an application in the prescribed form. The Appellate Board shall
dispose of the application after giving opportunities to the applicant and the opposing
party. Decision of the Appellate Board shall be executable by a Civil court.

Clause 41.— This clause empowers Board to cancel the registration of the registered
Layout-Design or registration of assignment or transmission related to the registered
Layout-Design on receipt of an application and after giving the opportunity to the
opposite party of being heard. Cancellation of the registered Layout-Design either in
whole or in part shall be deemed to be effective on the date from which the period of
ten years -------- पु

Clause 42,.--_ This clause makes provision for appeals to the Appellate Board from
the decisions of the Registrar and the period within which they are to be preferred.

Clause 43— This clause empowers the Appellate Board to regulate its own
procedure. The Appellate Board will have the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the matters set out in the clause.
To facilitate speed disposal of cases, the clause lays down that the Board shall not be
bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but be guided
by the principles of natural justice.

Clause 44 This clause bars any court or other authority from exercising
jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to the appeals.

Clause 45.— This clause prohibits the Chairman, Vice Chairman or other Members
of the Board from appearing before the Appellate Board or the Registrar after they
cease to hold office.

Clause 46.— This clause provides that no interim order shall be made in any
proceeding relating to an application unless copies of the appeal are furnished to the
party against whom the appeal is made and an opportunity of hearing is given to such
parties.

Clause 47— The clause seeks to empower the Chairman to transfer any cases
pending before one bench for disposal to any other Bench either on his own motion or
‘on the application made by any of the parties. The purpose of this is to secure proper
management of work.

Clause 48.— This clause deals with the procedure for application for rectification
made to the Appellate Board. This also provides that certified copy of the order or
judgement of the Board will be communicated to the Registrar for taking appropriate
action, including amending entries in the register accordingly.

Clause 49.— This clause empowers the Registrar to appear before the Appellate
Board in certain cases or in lieu of appearance, to file the statement in writing which
shall constitute evidence of the proceeding.

Clause 50.— This clause empowers registrar to refer disputes to the Appellate Board
whether the Layout-Design has been commercially exploited for more than two years
and the decision of the Board shall be final.

Clause 51.—This clause empowers the Appellate Board to permit the use of
Registered layout-design by the Government or the person authorised by the
Government subject to any or all of the conditions enumerated in items (a) to (e) of
sub-clause (1) of that clause. These conditions are inter alia relates to the non-
commercial pubic purposes, extreme public urgency and anti competitive practise. The


37

Appellate Board also empower to determine royalty in lieu of such use and to review
the permission granted under this clause.

Clause 52.—In all proceedings before Appellate Board, the Registrar will not be
ordered to pay the costs to any party, but the costs of the Registrar shall be in
discretion of the Appellate Board.

Clause 53.—This clause makes provisions for appeals to the High Court from the
decision or order of the Appellate Board and the period within which they are to be
preferred. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that such appeal shall be preferred by
petition in writing and sub-clause (3) applies the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 to such appeals.

Clause 54.—This clause empowers the High Court to make rules which are consistent
with this Act. This is required to conduct and proceed of all proceedings under this
Act.

Clause 55.— This clause makes transitional provisions conferring powers on the
Intellectual Property Appellate Board established under the Trade Marks Act, 1999 to
act as Appellate Board under the proposed legislation till the Appellate Board is
constituted under that legislation.

Clause 56.— This clause provides for the infringement of layout-design which may
extend to three years imprisonment or with fine which shall not be less than fifty
thousand rupees but may extend to ten lakhs rupees or with both.

Clause 57.—This clause makes flase representation of a layout-design as registered as
an offence. The punishment for the offence is imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with
both. It is also cerify that where the layout-design in question is registered under the
law of the country outside India, the use of word or other expression to denote such
registration in foreign country is permissible.

Clause 58.— The use of any words which would lead to the belief that a person’s
place of business is officially connected with the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits
Layout-Design Registry is made a punishable offence with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months or fine or with both.

Clause 59.— This clause contains provisions for penalty for falsification of entries in
the register. The offence is punishable wish imprisonment extending to two years or
fine or with both.

Clause 60.— This clause empowers the court to direct the forfeiture to Government
of all the goods relating to which an offence has been committed. The court may
either order the forfieted goods to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of. Where an
appeal against conviction lies, the appeal will also lie against the forfeiture.

Clause 61.—This clause contains provision for exemption of certain persons employed
in ordinary course of business from liability. If the person accused of an offence
proofs, inter alia that he had at the time of commission alleged offence no reason of
suspect the genuineness of the registered layout-design, he shall not be liable.

Clause 62.— This clause prescribes the procedure where invalidity of registration is
pleaded by the accused, and makes provisions for stay of proceeding in certain
circustances. If the court is satisfied with the defence of invalidity of the registration,
it may adjourn the proceedings for three months to enable an application for
rectification of the register to be filed before the Appellate Board. If the accused


38

proves that he has made such applications, further procceings shall stand stayed till the
disposal of rectification application. On the other hand if within the period allowed by
the court, the accused fails to apply for the rectification before the Appellate Board, the
court is bound to proceed with the case as if registration is valid.

Clause 63.— The clause contains provisions for the offences by companies. This
provision seeks to provide that where a person commits an offence as a company, every
person responsible in the company for the conduct of its will be liable. Where a
person accused proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge he will
not be liable. However, where it is proved that an offence has been committed with
the consent or connivance or is attributed to the neglect of any Director, Manager,
Secretary or any other officer of the company, he shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence.

Clause 64.— This clause provides that court shall take cognizance of an offence
under clause 56 or clause 57 only on the written complaint of the registered proprietor
or registered ‘user. The-clause also provides that court shall take cognizance of an
offence under clause 58 or 59 only on the complaint by the registrar or any officer
officer authorised by the registrar.

Clause 65.— This clause empowers the court to order payment of reasonable costs
by the accused to the complainant or by the complainant to the accused.

Clause 66.— This clause provides that an officer of the Government who is required
to enforce the provisions of this chapter should not be compelledd to say as to when
and where he got any information in respect of the alleged offence.

Clause 67.— This clause provides that any person in India abetting the commission
of any offence which, if committed in India would be an offence kshall be tried for
such abetment and shall be punished.

Clause 68.—This clause prohitbits the Registrar to disclose any information relating
to registration of व layout-design or any application relating to such a registration in
the interest of security of India. This clause also empowers the Registrar to take action
for the cancellation of the registration of the layout-design in the interest of the security
of India.

Clause 69.— The clause seeks to protect anything done or intended to be done by
any person in persuance of this Act in good faith.

Clause 70.—This clause is states that every persons appoint under the proposed
legislation and every member of the Appellate Board shall be public servant.

Clause 71.—This clause provides that where a registered layout-design, or a
semiconductor integrated circuit in which a registered layout-design is incorporated, or
an article incorporating such a semiconductor integrated circuit is sold or has been
contracted for sale, there is implied warranty that the registration of the layout-design
is genuine.

Clause 72.— This clause seeks to empower the Registrar with the power of a civil
court, including award of reasonable costs, subject to rules to be made to this behalf.

Clause 73.— This clause provides that the Registrar has to give an opportunity of
being heard to the person/persons before exercising his discretionary powers adverse to
him.


39

Clause 74.— This clause says that evidence before the registrar should be normally
in form of affidavit only and in addition or in lieu thereof the Registrar may take oral
evidence.

Clause 75.— This clause provides that in case of death of a party to a proceeding
during the course of proceedings, the Registrar, on proof to his satisfaction may allow
substitution of his successor or may allow the proceeding to continue with the surviving
parties.

Clause 76.— This clause empowers the Registrar to extend the time for doing any
act, not being a time expressly provided in the Act.

Clause 77.— If the Registrar is of the opinion that the applicant has defaulted in the
prosecution of his application, he may by a notice required him to remedy the default
after giving him an opportunity to be heard. He may treat the application as abandoned
unless the defaulot is remedied within the time specified by him.

Clause 78.—This clause states that any person proposing to apply for registration of
a Layout-Design may request the Registrar to obtain preliminary advice as to the
distinctiveness of the Layout-Design.

Clause 79.—This clause provides that in every proceeding the registered user shall
be made party to the same.

Clause 80.—This clause states that certificate issued by the Registrar shall be Prima
facie evidence without further proof or production of the original.

Clause 81.—This clause states that Registrar and other officers shall not be compelled
to produce the Registrar and other documents if the contents can be proved by
psroduction of a certified copy. They shall not be compelled to appear as witness to
prove the matter therein unless for spcial cause it is ordered-by the Court.

Clause 82.—This clause states that whre in any legal proceeding for rectification of
Registrar a decision is given in favour of the registered proprietor the Appellate Board
may grant a certificate of validity.

Clause 83.—This clause deals with address for service given by the applicant or
popponent by stating that this address shall be deemed to be address of the applcant or
opponent and all correspondence shall be sent to them on this address only.

Clause 84.—This clause deals with agents and provides that if any act is required to
be done before the Registrar by any person, this may be done by him or a legal
practiner, a Layout-Design agent by his employee if he is duly authorised by him.

Clause 85.—This clasue seeks to protect the rights of the proprietor of a registered
Layout-Design. If his agent or representative to register or registers the Layour-Design
in his own name, without authority, the proprietor is entitledto oppsoe the application
or to apply forrectification so as to being him as the registered proprietor. The time
within which such action has to be taken is three years from the date he is aware of
the conduct of the agent.

Clause 86.—This clause provides for keeping indexes at the Layout-Design registry,
viz indexes of registered and pending Layout-Designs, registered proprietor’s index and
index of registered users.

Clause 87.—This clause provides for the inspection of the documents by the public.
Any number of public may inspect these documents on payment of the fees to be


40
prescribed and also obtina certifed copy of the entry from the Registrar.

Clause 88.—This clause provides for placement before the Parliament by the Registrar
annual reports on the execution of this Act.

Clause 89.— This clause provides for prescribing fees for various acts to be done
under this Act.

Clause 90.— Tis clause provides for protecting the person in respect of offences in
Chapter IX.

Clause 91.—This clause deals with the declarartion of ownership of Layout-Design
(other than a registered Layout-Design) not registerable under the Registration Act,
1908.

Clause 92.— This clause states that the provisons of this Act shall be binding on the
Governemnt.

Clause 93.—This clause empowers the Cental Government, by notification in the
Official Gazette, to specify convention countries for providing the citizens of those
countries the similar privileges as granted to the citizens of India under the proposed
legislation.

Clause 94.—This clause contains provisons as to reciprocity. If any contry does not
accord to citizens of India the same rights as to registration and protection of Layout-
Design as it accords to its own national, no national of that country is entitled to apply
for registration of a Layout-Design, to apply for registration as a registered user of a
Layout-Design or to be registered as the assignee of the registered proprietor of a
Layout-Design in India.

Clause 95.—This clause empowers the Central Government for removing difficulties
which may arise in giving effect to the provisons of the Act. Every order of the
Central Government under this clause is to be laid before House of: Palriament. This
power is exercisable only for five years from the commencement of the new Act.

Clause 96.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry
out the purposes of the new Act on the various matters specified therein.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 96 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out
the pravisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of that clause enumerates the
matters with respect to which rules may be made under this clause. These matters
relate to, inter alia, the manner of making of applications and fee payable for such
applications under this Bill; the manner of advertising of application for registration;
form of certificate of registration; manner of making an application for assignment or
transmission of a registered of layout-design; the manner of authorising any person to
act and to registered him as a layout-design agent; form and manner of making appeal
to the Appellate Board and salaries and allowances payable and the other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members, officers and
other employees of the Appellate Board. .

2. The aforesaid matters relate to procedure and administrative details and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power
is, therefore, of a normal character.

41


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 32 of the Bill relates to the establishment of Layout-Design Appellate Board
and clause 39 relates to the Salaries and Allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of service of officers and other employees to assist the Board. Clause 3 of
the Bill relates to the establishment of the Office of Registrar of Semiconductor
Integrated Circuits Layout-Design.

It is estimated that the Bill, when enacted will involve a non-recurring expenditure of

tupees fifty lakhs and recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred seventy five lakhs
during every financial year.

42


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the protection of the semiconductor integrated circuits layout-designs and for
mat‘crs connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Pramod Mahajan, Minister of Information Technology)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2899RS—18.12.1999,