Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
THE PREVENTION OF REGIONALISM BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to prohibit the spreading of regionalism and to promote nationalism in the country and
to provide relief and rehabilitation to the victims of regionalism and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Regionalism Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Organization" means any organization or outfit promoting regionalism in any
manner including political outfits.
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by  rules made under this Act.
(c) "Regionalism" means any action in any part or State of the country, by any person
Bill No. I of 2009
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE  RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD JULY, 2009
5
Definitions.5

2
or organization, including political party leading to intimidation, beating, forced exodus, by
any means, of persons belonging to other region or State.
(d) "State" means Govt. of India, Govt.  of  States and  all local and other authorities
under the control of Central Government.
3. The State shall strive to  promote and protect the ideals of nationalism in the
country.
4. It shall be the duty of the State to protect its citizens from any act of regionalism
5. No person or organization shall abet or indulge in any act of spreading regionalism.
6. The State shall not incur any expenditure on the security of any person who or
whose organization has been prima facie accused of spreading regionalism by a competent
court.
7.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
any political party whose leaders or workers are prima facie accused of spreading regionalism
by the competent authority shall be banned and all the elected representatives of such party
in Parliament or State Legislatures shall stand disqualified from the date of coming into force
of the Act.
8. Notwithstanding the provisions of the IPC, whoever violates the provisions of—
(i) section 5 shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and shall also be  liable to
fine which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees.
(ii) section 6 shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years
and shall also be liable to with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees:
Provided that if the contravention of section 5 of this Act has been done by the
workers of a political party then the President or the head of that political party shall be liable
to be prosecuted under this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government shall, within one month of the commencement of this
Act, frame a scheme for providing relief and rehabilitation of victims of regionalism and
shall also provide funds for its implementation.
(2) without prejudice to the generality of the provision of sub-section (1) the scheme
shall inter-alia provide for,—
(i) compensation for the loss incurred by the victims during the violence of
regionalism  including the ex-gratia payment;
(ii) reimbursement of medical expenses incurred by victims  injured during the
violence;  and
(iii) employment to victims who have lost their means of livelihood:
Provided that till the time a gainful employment is provided to the victim, he shall be
provided with subsistence allowance at such rate as may be prescribed.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
State to
promote
nationalism.
State to
protect
against
regionalism.
Prohibition
from
abetment and
indulgence in
regionalism.
State not to
give security
to person
indulged in
regionalism.
Ban on
political
party prima
facie accused
of
regionalism.
Penalty.
Scheme for
relief and
rehabilitation.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
45 of 1860
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force on the subject and save
aforesaid the provisions of the Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time in force.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Act to has
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 1 of the Constitution provides that India i.e. Bharat shall be a Union of States.
Clause (e) of article 19(e) gives a fundamental right to all its citizens to reside and settle in
any part of the territory of India. The intention of the founding fathers of the Constitution
behind incorporating these articles in the Constitution was that India is one country and all
its citizens have right to move, live and settle in any part of it. Of late, repeated attacks in
Maharashtra, particularly, in Mumbai on persons of northern parts of the country were not
only unfortunate, but also an attempt to negate the principles enshrined in our Constitution.
Every now and then a political outfit is spreading regional and linguistic venom in the society
leading to intimidation and forceful eviction of the poor people, who are living there for more
than half century. In these attacks, some innocent lives have been lost and many poor and
hapless people who earn their  livelihood by doing all sorts of menial jobs were beaten in full
public view and were asked to leave Maharashtra. Many families have been uprooted and
lost their shelters. They have nothing to feed themselves and their children. Still those who
are living in Maharashtra are in a state of constant fear of loosing their life and livelihood
any time. The violence and disturbance in the financial capital of the country is not only a
national loss, but a jolt to the social fabric of the country. It is unthinkable, if the same kind
of  regional fervor starts in every State then what would be the fate of the country. In the
form of our preamble to the Constitution, we have adopted the principles of fraternity
assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the nation. We are
known for our unity in diversity. Therefore, any such incident is a blot on our society.
Persons with narrow and petty political gains should not be allowed to run amok in the
society and should be dealt with severely for destroying the peace. It is high time that a law
for preventing the spreading of regionalism in the society is framed and any such act should
be severely punished.
Hence this Bill.
MAHENDRA  MOHAN
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall frame a scheme for
providing relief and rehabilitation to the victims of regionalism and provide funds for its
implementation. In view of this it is sure that some recurring expenditure would be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India. The amount of recurring expenditure that would be
involved annually would depend upon the number of incidents and victims in suit incidents.
Therefore,  it is difficult to estimate the amount that would be required from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
No. Non recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.
The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of legislative power is
therefore of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit the spreading of regionalism and to promote nationalism in the country and to
provide relief and rehabilitation to the victims of regionalism and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2546RS(S5)—03-07-2009.