AS INTRODUCED IN RASYA SABHA

‘a

Bill No. I of 2000
—_

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty First of the Republic of India as
follows: है

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000

2. In article 58 of the Constitution, in clause (1) sub-clause (a), for the word "citizen"
5 of India, the words "citizen" of India by birth shall be substituted.

3. In article 66 of the Constitution, in clause (3), sub-clause (a), for the word "citizen"
the words "natural born citizen" shall be substituted.

4. Inarticle 75 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following proviso shall be added.
at the end, namely: —

10 “Provided that no person shall be eligible to hold the office of the Prime Minister
unless he is a citizen of India by birth".

Short title.

Amendment of
article 58.

Amendment of
article 66.

Amendment of
article 75.


Amendment of
asticle 93.

Amendment of
article 124

Amendment of
article 216

2

5. In article 93 of the Constitution the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:—

"Provided that no person shall be eligible to hold office of the Speaker unless
he is a citizen of India by birth".

6. In articl®*124 of the Constitution after sub-clause (1) the following proviso shall be
added, namely:—

“Provided that no person shall be eligible to hold the office of Chief Justice or Judge
of the Supreme Court unless he is a natural born citizen of India."

7. In article 216 of the Constitution the following proviso shall be added, namely:—

"Provided that no person shall be eligible to hold office of Chief Justice or Judge of a
High Court unless he is a natural born citizen of India by bth"


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

A strong need is being felt to bar persons of foreign origin from holding High
Constitutional posts.

A person of foreign origin may acquire Indian citizenship by registration for various
reasons. Such as marriage to an Indian citizen, or development of business, political or
cultural interest in India. Such persons are welcome to live in this country but the power to
shape the destiny of India cannot be placed in the hands of those who have recently acquired
citizenship.

A foreign born person may have voluntarily or reluctantly acquired Indian citizenship,
but such person cannot be given several sensitive posts. A person who has just acquired
citizenship by Registration cannot be given sensitive. Constitutional offices such as President,
Vice President, Prime Minister, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Chief Justice of India, Judges of
the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of High Courts, Judges of High Court which should be
held by natural born Indian citizens.

This Bill therefore seeks to amend the Constitution to make only natural born citizens
of India eligible to be the President, Vice President, Prime Minister, Speaker of Lok Sabha,
Chief Justice of India, Chief Justices of High Courts, Judges of the Supreme Court and
High Courts.

AMAR SINGH.


Qualification
for election as
President.

Election of the
Vice President.

Other Provi-
sions.

The Speaker
and Deputy
Speaker of
the House of

People.

Establishment
and constitu-
tion of Supreme
Court.

Constitution of
High Court.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * *
58. (I) No person shall be eligible for election as President unless he—

(a) is a citizen of India
66. (1) * * * *

(3) No person shall be eligible for election as Vice President unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India.

* * * *

75.1) The Prime Minister shalt be appointed by the President and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister.

* * * *

93. The House of the People shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the
House to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof.

* * * *

124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India
and until Parliament by law.....

* * * *

216. Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such other Judges as the
President may from time to time deem it necessary.



RAJYA- SABHA

A
BILL

Further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri Amar Singh, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3434RS—7.2.2000