1
Bill No. I of  2013
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 22ND MARCH, 2013
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE COMPULSORY REGISTRATION OF CALLERS USING
PUBLIC TELEPHONE BOOTHS BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory registration of callers using public telephone booths for making
calls in the interest of national security and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Registration of Callers using Public
Telephone Booths Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Public Call Office (PCO)" means a telephone facility located in a public place
through manned or coin operated payphone;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Definitions.
5

2
(c) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Information Technology
Act, 2000 shall have the same meaning as is respectively assigned to them in those
Acts.
3. (1) It shall be the duty of every PCO owner or his representative to obtain a copy of
a valid identity proof from every caller using their services and to maintain a record of callers
and numbers called upon by them in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the expression "valid identity proof"
includes—
(i) valid passport; or
(ii) voter identity card; or
(iii) any photo identify card issued by the State Governments or the Central
Government or State or Public Sector Undertakings or Banks.
(2) Every owner of a PCO or the service provider as the case may be shall depute a
person to maintain record of callers using coin operated payphone in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) Every owner or his representative or the service provider of a PCO shall furnish the
records of the callers, as mentioned in sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 3, to Government
security or intelligence agencies or the police department on demand.
4. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 of this Act shall be punished
with fine which may extend to rupees ten thousand for the first violation and upto rupees
twenty thousand for second and subsequent violation.
5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law, for the time being in force regulating public call office.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
45 of 1860.
13 of 1885.
21 of 2000.
Registration
of callers
using PCOs.
Penalty.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Act not to be
in derogation
of any other
law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There has been a sharp increase in number of fake or hoax calls made from Public Call
Office (PCO) for spreading false information related to militancy and for threatening, abusing
and sexual harassment, etc. It is a very serious security concern for our nation. This is
adversely affecting the activities of police force and disrupting public services.
Several people call from PCOs, some, however, misuse the service for making false or
hoax calls. When such fake calls are made from PCOs, police swings in action to locate such
PCOs, but it takes some time for them to locate and reach there and anti-social elements find
enough time to escape from the site of PCO, leaving police forces helpless for want of callers'
details.
In order to curb false or hoax  calls, it is felt that is should be made compulsory for all
PCO owners to maintain a record of callers with sufficient proof of identification along with
the details of number called.
Hence this Bill.
PARSHOTTAM KHODABHAI RUPALA

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory registration of callers using public telephone booths for making
calls in the interest of national security and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—6015RS(S4)—22.03.2013.