Bill No.  I  of  2016
THE YOUTH (DEVELOPMENT AND WELFARE) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive policy for the overall development of the youths in the
country and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Youth (Development and Welfare) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government”  means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “youth” means all persons aged between eighteen to thirty-five years; and
(c) “youth organisation” means an organisation of youth that provides for
universal membership to youths without any discrimination on the basis of race, caste,
religion, language, creed or sex and its constitution provides for a democratic
functioning in the concerned States and Union Territories, as the case may be; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH MARCH, 2016
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
15

2
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall formulate comprehensive policy for the
development and welfare of youths, which shall inter-alia provide for:—
(a) compulsory and free education including technical education;
(b) books, stationery, uniform etc., free of cost;
(c) free hostel facilities;
(d) scholarship to meritorious students;
(e) free transport facilities;
(f) pocket allowance, as may be prescribed;
(g) recreation facilities free of cost;
(h) free access to all libraries;
(i) training in sports to every eligible youth and facilities to participate in
sports activities;
(j) representation of youth organisations in sports associations; and
(k) such other facilities, as may be prescribed, for the overall welfare of these
youths, who have represented the country in sports.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide,—
(i) free nutritious meals to all students in schools, colleges, universities, hostels
and technical institutions; and
(ii) free medical and health care facilties to youths.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall appoint an expert committee consisting of
eminent educationists, psychologists and such other members as may be prescribed in
every district.
(2) Expert committee shall recommend such education or vocational training to be
imparted to the youths of the districts after qualifying the tenth class examination, as may
be prescribed.
6. The appropriate Government shall provide,—
(a) employment to the youth after completion of their education or training; or
(b) unemployment allowance at such rate, as may be prescribed, till they are
provided with gainful employment.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Free
nutritious
meals,
medical and
health care
facilities.
Appointment
of Expert
Committee.
Power to make
rules.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
employment
or
unemployment
allowance to
youths.
Formulation
of compre-
hensive
policies for
youths.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Even after more than six decades of Independence, the country has yet to evolve a
clear-cut policy for the overall welfare of youths of the country. The education should be the
right of every youth and not a privilege of a few and employment should be guaranteed to
them. The youth should be directly linked to production process. The disparities between
the rural and urban youths should be eliminated gradually. The youth today is facing serious
health problems, absolute inadequacy of sports and cultural facilities, etc. A considerable
chunk of youth population is still reeling under poverty. A proper policy is required to be put
in place for comprehensive and overall development of the youths and proper utilization of
their energies. A comprehensive youth policy for all-round development is, therefore,
absolutely necessary.
Hence  this Bill.
DR. T.  SUBBARAMI  REDDY
3

FINANCIAL   MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for compulsory and free education and also supply of
materials like books, stationery and uniform free of cost and pocket allowance to all the
youths. It also provides for free hostel and transport facilities and scholarships to youths.
Clause 4 provides for nutritious diet free of cost to all the students in schools, colleges,
universities and hostels and medical and healthcare facilities to all the youths. Clause 5
provides for appointment of an expert committee to recommend the type of education that is
to be imparted to the youths besides imparting training in modern apprenticeship trades and
vocations. Clause 6 provides for employment or unemployment allowance to the youths.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India in respect of the Union Territories. The State Governments will incur the expenditure
from their respective consolidated fund. An annual recurring expenditure of about rupees
five hundred crore is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. A
non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seven hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislation power is of a normal character.
5

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive policy for the overall development of the
youths in the country and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5042RS(S3/F)—11.03.2016.