1
Short title and
commencement.
INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment)  Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Indian Penal Code, 1860, section 309 shall be omitted. Omission of
section 309.
45 of 1860.
Bill No. I of  2012
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 9TH AUGUST, 2012
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 309 of IPC provides for imprisonment and/or fine for those who have
attempted to commit suicide. This section has been considered to be in violation of
article 21 of the Constitution and not in adherence with the modern day view of the
State providing care to its citizens.
The Law Commission of India recommended its repeal as early as 1971 and,
once again in, 2008. In the recent report, the Law Commission says: "It is
unreasonable to inflict punishment upon a person who, on account of family discord,
destitution, loss of a dear relation or other cause of a like nature, overcomes the
interest of self-preservation and decides to take his own life. In such a case, the
unfortunate person deserves sympathy, counselling and appropriate treatment, and
certainly not prison." This proposal of the Law Commission has met with approval
from twenty five State Governments, thereby underlining the overwhelming support
for repealing this inhumane provision.
This inhumane provision is a form of double punishment and today remains
as a crime only in a few countries such as Singapore, Pakistan, Bangladesh and
Malaysia, besides India. The counterview that decriminalising the attempt to suicide
will encourage people to take their own lives has no basis. As the International
Association for Suicide Prevention has pointed out, there is nothing to show that
suicide rates have increased following its decriminalisation. This view is also
supported by the World Health Organization and the Indian Psychiatric Society.
In the past also, the Indian  Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1972 was introduced
and passed by the Rajya Sabha omitting section 309 but it lapsed in the Lok Sabha
consequent upon the dissolution of Sixth Lok Sabha in July, 1979. The Law
Commission and the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs have
consistently advocated the need to reform and rationalise the criminal law of the
country. In view of providing necessary medical care and not harassment to those
who are distressed enough to attempt to take their own lives, it is necessary to
repeal section 309 in the Indian Penal Code.
Hence, this Bill.
KANIMOZHI
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
*** *** *** ***
Section 309. Attempt to commit suicide
Whoever attempts to commit suicide and does any act towards the
commission of such offence, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year or with fine, or with both.
*** *** *** *** ***
3

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shrimati Kanimozhi, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2084RS(S3)—09-08-2012.