Bill No. I of 2006
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 17TH FEBRUARY, 2006
THE NEGLECTED AND SUFFERING WIDOWS (PROTECTION
 AND WELFARE) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of the needy, suffering, abandoned, destitute, old or infirm
widows of the society by initiating welfare measures for such widows by the Central
and State Governments and for the establishment of an Authority for that purpose and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Neglected and Suffering Widows (Protection and
Welfare) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
55 5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government.
(b) “Authority” means the Widows Welfare Authority established under
section 4;
(c) “neglected or destitute” in relation to a widow means a widow who has been
disowned and neglected by her relatives or a widow who has no relative or kinsman to
support her or a widow having no source of income with or without dependent minor
children;
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “Suffering” in relation to a widow means a widow stricken with infirmity due
to old age, physical deformity, sickness or disease, mental illness and who lives uncared
for;
(f ) “widow” means a woman whose husband has died after her legal marriage.
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, after the commencement of this
Act and in consultation with the Government of the States, formulate a national policy for the
welfare and rehabilitation of neglected, abandoned, destitute and suffering widows of the
country for being uniformally implemented throughout the country.
4.  (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Widows Welfare Authority with its headquarters at Bhopal in the State of Madhya Pradesh.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The Authority may establish its branches in the States and Union Territories in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Authority may appoint such number of officers and employees as may be
necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority and carrying out the purposes of
this Act with such terms and conditions of service and in such manner as may be prescribed.
5.  (1) The Authority shall consist of,—
(a) Union Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment the ex-officio Chairperson
of the Authority;
(b) a Vice-Chairperson preferably a widow to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(c) three women Members of Parliament of whom two shall be from the Lok
Sabha and one from the Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective presiding
officers of each House;
(d) two members representing the Department of Women and Child Development
of the Union Ministry of Human Resource Development to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(e) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Governments of the States by rotation in alphabetical order to
represent the Governments of the States;
(f ) two members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
Non-Governmental Organizations working for the welfare of the widows.
(2) The term of office of the Vice-Chairperson and every other member shall be four
years.
Definitions.
National
Policy for the
Welfare of
Widows.
Establishment
of Widows
Welfare
Authority.
Composition
of the
Authority.

3
(3) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings including the quorum, as
may be prescribed.
6. (1)  The Authority shall promote and provide, by such measures, as it may think fit,
the appropriate rehabilitation and welfare of destitute, neglected and suffering widows with
or without dependent children.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the Authority
shall,—
(a) maintain district, block and village-wise register of widows in such categories
as may be prescribed;
(b) collect and get verified the antecedents of every widow for the purpose of
giving subsistence allowance and other facilities under this Act;
(c) give wide publicity through the print and electronic media about the welfare
measures being taken by the Authority;
(d) take such other measures as it may deem necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
7.  Any widow, —
(i) who is destitute and neglected;
(ii) who is suffering;
(iii) who has no son;
(iv) who has a son but the son  has not attained the age of twenty-one years or has
attained the age of twenty-one years but is incapable of earning his livelihood due to
his physical or mental disability or who has remained unemployed despite his best
efforts.
shall be eligible for subsistence allowance of an amount not exceeding two thousand
rupees per month from the Authority and the Authority shall pay the subsistence
allowance to such widows registered under this Act on an application prescribed for
the purpose.
8. The Authority shall provide to the neglected and suffering widows registered
under this Act the following facilities, namely:—
(a) residential or hostel accommodation free of cost to every widow having no
such accommodation;
(b) free education including vocational and technical education to dependent
children of such widows;
(c) gainful employment as per their calibre, qualifications and abilities;
(d) free vocational education and training wherever necessary;
(e) such financial assistance or facilities as may be necessary for the
rehabilitation, welfare, development and maintaining a respectable life in the society:
Provided that if a widow covered under this Act gets gainful employment or re-
marries the facilities provided to her under this Act shall be withdrawn from the date
the gets employment or remarries, as the case may be.
9. The Authority shall have a Welfare Fund for the Widow known as Widows Welfare
Fund to which shall be credited all receipts from the Central Government, State Governments,
other Institutions, Organizations, Body Corporate both public and private and the  individual
persons for the welfare and rehabilitation of neglected and suffering widows and the fund
shall be administered by the Authority in such manner as may be prescribed.
Subsistence
allowance for
the widows.
Other
facilities to
the widows.
Widows
Welfare Fund.
Functions of
the Authority.

4
10. The Authority shall prepare once in every calendar year, in such form and at such
time as may be prescribed an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities
during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government
and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
11.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, a widow shall have the following rights, namely:—
 (a) right to reside with her in-laws;
(b) right to reside in the property acquired or leased or rented by her son or sons;
(c) right to adequate health care and maintenance allowance for a decent life
from her son or sons.
(2) In case a widow is forced to reside separately by her major son or sons she shall be
entitled to such amount of maintenance allowance from her son or sons every month as may
be prescribed.
(3) The amount of maintenance allowance payable under sub-section ( 2) shall be
determined after taking into account the son's income, standard of living, any immovable
property and the standard of living which the widow enjoyed before the husband's death.
12. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to enforce the provisions
contained in section 11 of  this Act.
13. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 11 shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but may extend to five years
and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
14.  The Central Government shall, from time to time after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Authority for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
15. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to the widows.
16. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the Purposes of this Act.
Annual
Report.
Rights of
widows.
Appropriate
Government
to enforce the
rights of the
widows.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country there are more than three crore widows and more than fifty per cent of
them are old widows. Majority of the widows belong to lower and middle-income groups
who become destitute after the death of their husbands. Quite a large number of old widows
can be seen languishing in the bhajan ashrams of Mathura, Vrindavan, Varansi chanting
bhajans and leading miserable life. After the death of their husbands most of the widows,
particularly those whose husbands were not Government servants or affluent ones, do not
have enough means to support them. The situation becomes more precarious if they have
dependent children to support. In order to survive, they work in the households and do all
sorts of other works but many of them are unable to even work because of infirmity due to old
age, illness and mental disorder or physical deformity. Such widows have no alternative but
to beg  for survival. Many young widows, when disowned by their inlaws are forced into
prostitution by unscrupulous elements. The position is more disgraceful in rural and semiurban
areas where they are seen as bad women and are ignored on wedding and other auspicious
occasions. Because of illiteracy and helplessness they remain an exploited lot.
The widows are also a part and parcel of our society and in a welfare state like ours it
is the duty of the State to rehabilitate the needy, neglected and suffering widows and implement
welfare measures for the hapless widows by preparing a National Policy for their welfare and
rehabilitation. This can be done by establishing and independent Authority which will
exclusively look after the needy, neglected and suffering widows so that they are not forced
into begging or prostitution. Instead, they should live a happy and respectable life in the
society with their dependent children.
Hence this Bill.
MAYA  SINGH
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Widows Welfare Authority.
Clause 7 provides for payment of subsistence allowance and clause 8 for other facilities to
the widows. Clause 14 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide adequate
funds to the Authority. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees ten thousand crore may involve as
recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees five thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 16 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of the needy, suffering, abandoned, destitute, old or infirm
widows of the society by initiating welfare measures for such widows by the Central and
State Governments and for the establishment of an Authority for that purpose and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Maya Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5388RS(S-1)—17.02.2006.MG