Bill No. I of 2020
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
RAJASTHAN  BILL, 2020
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of  persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and Other Backward Classes in the state and for the development, exploitation
and proper utilization of its resources.
B
E it enacted by  Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the the Special Financial Assistance to the State of
Rajasthan Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7
TH
  FEBRUARY, 2020

2
2.   There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward Classes in the state and for the development, proper utilization and
exploitation of the resources in the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law to be made by parliament or for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Rajasthan.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Rajasthan is socially and economically backward. Problems of poverty,
unemployment, illiteracy as well as measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of
weaker sections in the region are required to be addressed urgently by initiating new
development schemes in a time-bound manner. Being a border state, Rajasthan is strategically
located and it is in the nation's interest that its development needs are addressed. The State
of Rajasthan is also facing problem arising out of natural calamities like floods and droughts.
There is also a need to improve the standard of life of the people, sex-ratio and to incentivize
the persons living below poverty line in the State of  Rajasthan.
Hence this Bill.
DR.  KIRODI  LAL  MEENA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan. As the
sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Rajasthan as special financial assistance
by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to
be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are
identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of  persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and Other Backward Classes in the state and for the development,
exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
————
(Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5267RS(S3)—07.02.2020.