AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2026 
Bill No. I of 2026 
THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2026 
A  
BILL 
to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:― 
 
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (Amendment) Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Insertion of new 
section 24A. 
 
Enhanced 
punishment for 
specific offences 
committed 
under voluntary 
intoxication. 
2. After section 24 of the Bharatiya  Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“24A. Whoever commits any offence punishable under sections 
100, 101, 103, 104, 105, 109, 110, 111, 113, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 124, 
140 or 143 of this Sanhita while in a state of voluntary intoxication, shall 
be punished as follows, namely: 
(a) where the offence is punishable with death or
imprisonment for life, shall also be liable to a fine which shall not 
be less than five lakh rupees; 
(b) where the offence is punishable with imprisonment for 
life, such imprisonment shall mean imprisonment for the 
remainder of    the natural life of the offender, and the offender 
shall also be liable to a fine which shall not be less than three lakh 
rupees; and 
(c) in all other case, with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one and one -half times the maximum term of 
imprisonment provided for that offence, and shall also be liable to 
a fine which may extend to twice the maximum amount of fine 
provided for that offence. 
Explanation. – For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the enhanced 
punishment provided under this section shall be in addition to, and not in 
derogation of, any other provision of this Sanhita providing for punishment for 
the specific offence.” 
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
2
0 
45 of 2023. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Alcohol and drug abuse significan tly contribute s to criminal activities and 
violence by lowering inhibitions, impairing judgment and increasing aggression . 
Crimes like rash driving, domestic violence and abuse of children and the elderly are 
often linked to substance consumption, with around 40 per cent of violent offenders 
being under the influence of alcohol at the time of their crime. According to the 
Ministry of Social Ju stice and Empowerment's recently  released report on the 
"National Survey on Extent and Pattern of Substance Use in India" (2019), 16 crore 
people (14.6 per cent.) in India between the age of 10 and 75 years are current users 
of alcohol, and out of them, 5.2 per cent  are alcohol dependents. About 3.1 crore 
individuals (2.8 per cent) are cannabis users, and 72 lakh (0.66 per cent) people suffer 
from cannabis problems. It is estimated that about 8.5 lakh people are injecting drugs 
(PWID - people who inject drugs). 
Furthermore, the relationship between the defence of intoxication and the 
offences where intoxication is an  element of the offences must be carefully 
considered.  Many times, far from providing a defence, the intoxication of th e 
accused is an element of the offence. Where intoxication is self-induced or voluntary, 
in general, it is not an excuse for criminal misconduct. But, where it is, self-induced 
intoxication as a defence p resents certain unique problems for criminal law. At one 
extreme, there is a stance that no person should be convicted of an offence requiring 
mens rea if the accused didn't have the required intent for the offence. At the other 
extreme, there lies a stance that posits that where a person lacks the requisite state of 
mind because of vo luntary or self-induced intoxication, that person should gain no 
benefit. Somewhere between these two extremes lies the stance that even while a 
person may be acqu itted of the principal offence, they should  nevertheless be 
convicted on the basis that the act of becoming intoxicated, in itself, accounts for the 
crime or fault element of the offence. 
With drug menace occurring at the previously mentioned scale in India, cases 
of hein ous crimes committed under the influence of intoxicatio n are sure to  rise.  
Additionally, research shows a strong correlation between alcoholism an d rising 
criminal behavior among Indians. This highlights the need for effective legal 
interventions. It is crucial for Indian criminal law to achieve the following twin 
objectives when it comes to h einous crimes committed under the influence of 
voluntary intoxication  -  (a ) to deter youth  and other citizens from consuming 
intoxicating substances, especially drugs, and (b) to prevent errors of judgment when 
it comes to the minutiae of the relationsh ip between the defence of intoxication and 
the heinous offences where intoxication is an element of the offences.  These twin 
objectives can be sought to  be achieved by enh ancing the quantu m and severity of 
punishments for heinous offences committed under the influence of in toxication 
which is voluntary or self-induced.  
This Bill seeks to effectuate t he same through amendments in the Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.  
JE
BI MATHER HISHAM. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_____________ 
A 
BILL 
 to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
_____________ 
(Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—147—16.03.2026. 