1
Bill No. I of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. For article 168 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
"168 For every State, there shall be a Legislature which shall consist of the Governor
and two Houses to be known respectively as the Legislative Council and the Legislative
Assembly."
3. Article 169 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH FEBRUARY, 2022
Substitution of
new article for
article 168.
Constitution of
Legislatures in
States.
Omission of
article 169.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Parliament, as an institution, occupies a very central role in our democracy. It has
three primary roles. Firstly, it is responsible for legislation. Secondly, it must ensure
accountability of governments to the people. Lastly, it should engage in discourse and
debate on issues that concern the nation and its citizens. In order to effectively perform these
functions, a bicameral legislature is instituted in the Parliament to provide an institutional
opportunity to deliberate and engage in fruitful discourse. It also acts as a chamber of checks
and balances and prevents majoritarian governments from passing legislation without much
debate.
At the State level, the existance of Legislative Councils in a few states and its absence
in other States, acts an impediment to our vibrant democracy; it produces disproportionate
legislative processes in some states and acts as a barrier to effective and meaningful discourse.
A constitutional mandate for establishing Legislative Councils in every State will bring down
these barriers.
Hence this Bill.
DR.  FAUZIA  KHAN
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  INDIA
* * * * *
168. (1) For every State there shall be a Legislature which shall consist of the Governor,
and—
(a) in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh, two Houses;
(b) in other States, one House.
(2) Where there are two Houses of the Legislature of a State, one shall be known as the
Legislative Council and the other as the Legislative Assembly, and where there is only one
House, it shall be known as the Legislative Assembly.
169. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 168, Parliament may by law provide for
the abolition of the Legislative Council of a State having such a Council or for the creation
of such a Council in a State having no such Council, if the Legislative Assembly of the State
passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total membership of the Assembly and
by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of the Assembly present and voting.
(2) Any law referred to in clause (1) shall contain such provisions for the amendment
of this Constitution as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law and may
also contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions as Parliament may
deem necessary.
(3) No such law as aforesaid shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution
for the purposes of article 368.
* * * * *
Constitution of
Legislatures in
States.
Abolition or
creation of
Legislative
Councils in
States.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2024RS(S3)—07-02-2022.