1
THE TWO CHILD NORM BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for population control through promotion of voluntary sterilization among
eligible couples having two living children and measures for promoting two child
norm and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Two Child Norm Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires “appropriate Government” means
in the case of a State, the Government of that state and in all other cases, the Central
Government.
3. It shall be the duty of the Central Govenment to encourage, promote and motivate
couples to adopt two child norm with a view to ensuring decline in birth rate and control; the
rising population in the country.
4. One family shall consist of husband and wife and shall have two living children.
5. The provisions of this Act shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of
ten years from the commencement of this Act.
Short titles, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.
Definitions.
Bill No.  I of  2010
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010
Central Govt.
to Promote
two Child
Norm.
Families.
Period of expi-
ration of the
Act.
5
10

2
6. If either the husband or the wife having only one living child on the date
commencement of this act, voluntarily undergoes sterilization, the appropriate Govt. Shall
provide the couple with the following benefits, namely:—
(a) free education including higher education to such child;
(b) suitable employment to such child after he completes his education; and
(c) such other benefits as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
7. (1) Any person who is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union or of State
or in any undertaking or organization under the control of the Government as the case may
be, and who has only two children or who has not procreated any child or who is unmarried
on the date of commencement of this Act, shall give an undertaking that he shall not procreate
more than two children.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall be subject to such
disciplinary action as may be determined by the appropriate Government.
8. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 4 shall be punished with
simple imprisonment for not less than five years and with fine, which shall not be less than
twenty thousand rupees.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in any other law for the time being in force.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette make rules to
give effect to provisions of this Act.
Appropriation
Govt. to pro-
vide benefits to
couple having
one child who
undergo sterili-
zation.
Person to
working under
the Govt. to
give undertak-
ing.
Penalty.
Over-riding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
makes rules.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Rapid increase in the population has given birth to many socio-economic problems
like poverty, scarcity of food and housing, unemployment and environmental degradation,
etc. We are the second highest populous country after China. China has controlled the rapid
growth in its population. Our population has crossed the figure of one hundred crore. If the
present trend continues, it will not be possible to recover from socio-economic problems
occurring due to increase in population.
It is, therefore, imperative that certain effective steps be taken to check this menace.
Since our resources are limited, despite the existence of various birth control measures and
various family planning programmes to motivate the people to accept these birth control
methods, the problem of population explosion still remains.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for two child in a family and promote small family
norms in future generation. There is also a provision that this Act shall remain for a period of
10 years from the date of its commencement and shall be amended or reviewed as per
requirements at that time.
Hence this Bill.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for certain benefits to be given to those who undergo
sterilization voluntarily. The Central Government shall have to incur some expenditure for
implementing the provisions of this Bill in respect of Union Government and the Government
of Union Territories. The State Governments will incur expenditure in respect of their State
out of their respective consolidated funds. The Bill, therefore, will involve an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees fifty crore every year from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules, to be made, relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—2330RS(S5)—03-05-2010.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for population control through promotion of voluntary sterilization among
eligible couples having two living children and measures for promoting two child norm
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P .)