THE DIVORCEE WOMEN WELFARE BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for maintenance and welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the
divorcee women or separated women and for matters connected therewith or  incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Divorcee Women Welfare Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 16TH MARCH, 2007
Bill NO. I of 2007
Short title
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘advisory committee" means the Divorcee Women Welfare Advisory
Committee constituted under section 4.
(b) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government.
(c) ‘‘divorcee woman" means a woman whose marriage has been dissolved under
section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 or under sections 27 and 28 of the Special
Marriage Act, 1954 or under section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 or under
Muslim  Personal Law or on any other ground she has been separated from her husband
and who has no relative to support her or who has no independent source of livelihood
including her minor children dependent on her.
(d) "fund" means the Divorcee Women Welfare Fund created under section 3.
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. There shall be formed a fund to be called the Divorcee Women Welfare Fund
after due appropriation made by Parliament in this behalf for the purpose of
undertaking welfare measures and providing facilities to divorcee women.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a Divorcee Women Welfare
Advisory Committee in each district within its jurisdiction for the purposes of
performing functions assigned under this Act.
(2) The District Collector shall be the Ex-Officio Chairperson of the advisory
committee and other members shall be nominated by the appropriate Government in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Each Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of members as may
be prescribed which shall also include the representatives of the organisations which
are working for upliftment of destitute and helpless women of the society.
5. It shall be the duty of the Advisory Committee to:—
(i) promote the welfare measures for the divorcee women.
(ii) examine the eligibility of the divorcee woman and recommend to the
appropriate Government to provide facilities to her under this Act.
(iii) give wide publicity through the electronic and print media about the welfare
measures provided under this Act.
(iv) perform such other functions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act
as may be assigned to it by the appropriate Government from time to time.
6. The appropriate Government shall on the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee provide the women covered under this Act, the following facilities, namely:—
(a) monthly allowance to lead a minimum standard of living;
(b) residential accommodation free of cost;
(c) free education including technical education to dependent children;
(d) free medical aid;
(e) gainful employment;
(f) free vocational education wherever necessary;
(g)  such other facilities, as may be necessary for her rehabilitation, proper
development and for maintaining a respectable life in the society:
25 of 1955
43 of 1954
4 of 1869
Formation of
Divorcee
Women
Welfare Fund.
Functions of
Advisory
Committee.
Definitions.
Constitution of
the Advisory
Committee.
Facilities to the
Divorcee
Women.

3
Provided that if any woman covered under this Act either gets gainful employment
or remarries, all the facilities provided to her and to her dependent children in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall be withdrawn from the date she gets
the gainful employment or remarries as the case may be.
7. The Central  Government and the State Governments shall contribute adequate
funds to the Divorcee Women Welfare Fund from time to time in such proportions  as
may be prescribed for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
8. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purpose of the Act.
Government to
provide Fund.
Power to make
rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country there is great disparity between the economic ramifications of divorce
between men and women. Men remain relatively unaffected while women, especially those
with children, face difficulty in "providing food, clothing and shelter for themselves and
their children". Often a women is not able to rely on her family for support because many
parents feel they have discharged their obligations to a daughter by arranging her marriage
and providing dowry. Dowries are not return after divorce. Also, due to the social stigma of
divorce, women find it difficult to remarry and usually attempt to establish an independent
household.
While one should have the right to divorce, it is still a highly stigmatizing action.
Women are looked upon more harshly than men in this regard. There continue to be segments
of Indian society that feel divorce is never an option, regardless of how abusive or adulterous
the husband may be which adds to the greater disapproval for women. A divorced woman
often will return to her parents family, but may not be whole heartedly welcomed. She puts,
especially if she has children, an economic burden on her family and is often given lowly
household tasks to perform. There is also the risk that a divorced woman's presence would
ward off possible marriages for other daughters within the household. Unavoidably, the
overall status of the family and household are lowered by having a divorcee living with
them. A woman's class and caste are a major factor in her acceptance back into society.
Women from higher classes tend to have an easier time than middle or lower class women in
returning to the social order after a divorce. An exception to this model is the extreme bottom
of the society who have experienced little rebuff from peers after a divorce. This results
from their already a typical status in society.
As is well known among the poor who form the majority of the population—families
are in no position to support even unmarried daughters or sisters. Exposures of questionable
'marriages' of young girls to foriegn tourists, by poor families, of continued 'sale' of young
women of different communities, and the high incidence of suicides, and destitution among
poor women after divorce, provide substantial evidence of the inability of their parents or
other relatives to provides maintenance.
More impracticable, unrealistic and unjust is the expectation that a divorced woman
will sue her parents/other relatives to obtain maintenance. It is an unfortunate fact of life that
the inheritance right of daughters to their fathers' property generally remain unimplemented
because most women find it inadvisable to sue their brothers. Field research provides ample
evidence that widowed, divorced or deserted women dependent on their parental families
find their lives unbearable, particularly after the death of the parents. Also social research
among poor women of all communities, has already identified growing irresponsibility of
husbands and fathers as a serious problem. The question also needs to be asked—why should
the brother shoulder the responsibility, while the husbands, responsible (in the majority of
cases) for the act of divorce are absolved of all responsibility? Moreover the position of a
divorcee woman is more aweful in rural area because of being illiterate due to the conservative
attitude of villagers, they are exploited to the extent possible.
Ours being a welfare State, it is expedient to liberate the divorcee women from
exploitation by providing them financial assistance and other necessary facilities so that
they live honorably in the society. For this purpose Divorcee Woman Welfare Fund should
be created to ensure that life of no divorcee woman will become so miserable due to poverty
which may enable the unscrupulous elements of the society to exploit the situation and make
their lives disgraceful in the society.
Hence this Bill.
PRAMILA BOHIDAR
4
SER 5 \BILL-2004\RAJYA SABHA\189RS\189RS

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for creation of the Divorcee Women Welfare Fund.
Clause 4 provides for the constitution of Divorcee Women Welfare Advisory Committee.
Clause 6 provides for various facilities to the divorcee women. Clause 7 provides that the
Central Government shall contribute to the Divorcee Women Welfare Fund.
The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees fifty crore may involve as recurring expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.
5
SER 5 \BILL-2004\RAJYA SABHA\189RS\189RS

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purpose of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6
SER 5 \BILL-2004\RAJYA SABHA\189RS\189RS

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
Bill
to provide for maintenance and welfare measure to be undertaken by the State for the
divorcee women or separated women and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Ms. Pramila Bohidar, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1209RS(S5)—16.03.2007.