1
Short title.
Bill  No.  I  of  2008
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2008.
2.  In article 73 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after the existing proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely,—
“Provided further that the executive power of the Union referred to in sub-clause (b)
shall not be exercised before such treaty or agreement has been ratified by Parliament”.
Amendment of
article 73.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

STATEMENTS OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the largest democracy in the world where people are supreme and the power
and authority ultimately remain with them. After a heroic and prolonged struggle and
sacrifices India attained independence in 1947 and a Republican Constitution was adopted,
Through the vast experience of the freedom struggle, an independent foreign policy was
evolved by our forefathers, which was acceptable to all sections of the people. It has
enhanced the prestige of the country and its people.
In the present world situation where there are attempts to impose  unilateralism and
unipolarity, the need for a clear independent foreign policy to protect national interest is
essential. Since many international treaties and agreements have a long life extending beyond
tenure of a Government, it is necessary to ensure a stronger sanction for such treaties
through ratification by Parliament.
Hence, this Bill.
BRINDA KARAT
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
73. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the executive power of the
Union shall extend—
(a) to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws;
and
(b) to the exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are exercisable
by the Government of India by virtue of any treaty or agreement.
Provided that the executive power referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not, save as
expressly provided in this Cosntitution or in any law made by Parliament, extend in any
State to matters with respect to which the Legislature of the State has also power to make
laws.
(2) Until otherwise provided by Parliament, a State and any Officer or authority of
a State may, notwithstanding anything in this article, continue to exercise in matters with
respect to which Parliament has power to make laws for that State such executive power
or functions as the State or officer or authority thereof could exercise immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution.
* * * * * *
Extent of
executive
power of the
Union.
3

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shrimati Brinda Karat, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4736RS(S5)—29-12-2008.