AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. I of 2025 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
 further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
Short title and 
commencement. 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2)  It shall come into force immediately.
2. In article 293 of the Constitution, for clause (4), the following shall be 
substituted, namely:—   
“(4) A consent under clause (3) may be granted subject to such 
conditions, if any, as the Government of India may think fit to impose: 
Amendment of 
article 293. 

2 
Provided that the Government of India while imposing any condition 
under this clause shall ensure that —  
(i) restrictions are reasonable and do not unduly hamper a State’s
ability to manage its finances effecti vely in view of the financial
autonomy given to States;
(ii) there is well defined consultation process with State Governments
before prescribing any conditions on borrowing;
(iii) there is equitable treatment so that the borrowing terms and
restrictions are applied uniformly for all States; and
(iv) transparency is maintained in decision -making thereby ensuring
that the procedures and standards for accepting or rejecting
governmental borrowings are transparent to the public.”
5 
10 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Part XII of the Constitution deals with the borrowing powers of the Centre 
and States.   Article  292  speaks  about the  borrowing  power of the  Central 
Government which  entitles the Central  Government to  borrow  loans  upon the 
security of the Consolidated Fund of India.  Article 293(1) empowers the State 
Government to  borrow within  the  territory  of India  upon the  security  of the 
Consolidated Fund of the  State.  In  both cases, the extent of borrowing may be 
fixed from time to time by a law enacted by Parliament and the State legislature, 
respectively.  As per  Article 293(2), the Central Government may grant loans to 
any State subject to conditions laid down by any law made by Parliament  up to 
the limits fixed under Article 292. Article 293(3) imposes a restriction on 
the State Government borrowings if the repayment of loans or a guarantee which 
has been given by the Government of India is still outstanding.  In this case, 
the consent of the Central Government is essential to raise such a loan.  The 
Central Government under article 293(4) has been given wide discretion over 
consent by specifying that permission to raise such loan be granted subject to any 
conditions as the Central Government deems appropriate. 
In view  of the  
transforming economic, political,  and fiscal  landscape  in 
India, it is time  to revisit  Article 293 of the  Constitution.  Article 293 emanates 
from Section 163(4) of the Government of India Act, 1935.  Section 163(4) of the 
Government of India Act, 1935 warns the unnecessary  refusal or delaying  or the 
imposing of conditions in granting loans by the Centre. 
Therefore, there is a need  to amend Article 293 of the Constitution  in the 
manner to ensure that there must  be proper norms which  are to be followed  to 
when the Centre exercises the wide powers  granted under Article 293(4) of the 
Indian Constitution which is crucial in maintaining a balanced fiscal framework 
between the Centre and the States, and which enhances cooperative federalism. In 
such absence, there could be decision-making that may disrupt fiscal discipline, 
leading to either  unchecked  borrowing  or overly  restrictive conditions.   While 
exercising the  wide  powers granted  under  Article  293(4),  the  Centre  should 
adhere to ensuring  consultative  process with States;  equitable  treatment  in 
applying borrowing terms and imposing restrictions; transparency in procedures 
and standards for accepting or rejecting governmental borrowings and financial 
autonomy of the  State. Adhering  to  these norms can ensure that the Centre’s 
powers under Article 293(4) are exercised  fairly, transparently and in a manner 
that supports balanced fiscal management and cooperative federalism. 
 Hence, this Bill. 
A. D. SINGH

4 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
Borrowing by States 293    (1)  *   *          *       *     * 
(4) A consent under clause (3) may be granted subject to such conditions, if any, as 
the Government of India may think fit to impose.
 *       *           *   *        *

RAJYA SABHA 
_____________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
_____________ 
(Shri A. D. Singh, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E) – 081 – 10.02.2025 