AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
2ND FEBRUARY, 2024
Bill  No.  I of 2024
THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT WORKPLACE 
(PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 2024
A
BILL
 further to amend the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition 
and Redressal) Act, 2013.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention,
Prohibition and Redressal) Amendment Act, 2024.
 (2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement.

2. In the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and
Redressal) Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 9:–
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “within a period of three months from the date of
incident” and “within a period of three months from the date of last incident”, the words 
“within a period of one year from the date of incident” and “within a period of one year from 
the date of last incident” respectively, shall be substituted; and
(b) in the second proviso to sub-section (1), the words “not exceeding three months”
shall be omitted.
3. In the principal Act, section 10 shall be omitted.   Omission of 
section 10.
5
14 of 2013 Amendment of 
section 9

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal) Act, 2013 represents a significant step towards protection of women against 
sexual harassment at the workplace. However, considering the lived experiences of the 
women workforce and the realities of the modern workplace, the Act needs to address two 
important issues
Pensions  Section 9 stipulates a limitation period of three months for filing 
complaints, further extendable by three months, provided that the Internal Committee or 
Local Committee (as the case may be) is satisfied that the circumstances were such which 
prevented the woman from filing a complaint within the said period. This limitation period 
is inapposite since in cases involving sexual harassment, women may be so traumatised 
as to render filing of the complaint impossible until such time they have recouped their 
strength. Placing a maximum limit of six months on such complaints does great injustice to 
the aggrieved woman. 
Section 10 provides the aggrieved woman with the option of settling the complaint 
through conciliation. This provision is highly problematic since it fails to take into account 
the possibility of influencing, coercing, pressuring or intimidating the complainant to arrive 
at a settlement. While there are certain areas (such as contractual matters) where conciliation 
may be fruitful, an attempt to reach a compromise in matters of sexual harassment of women 
greatly undermines the dignity of women. 
This Bill intends to remedy these problems by amending the Sexual Harassment of 
Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013. It provides that the 
basic limitation period for filing complaints shall be fixed at one year, which shall be further 
extendable, without any upper limit, by the Internal Committee or Local Committee (as the 
case may be), upon satisfaction that the circumstances prevented the woman from filing the 
complaint within the limitation period. Additionally, it proposes the deletion of the provision 
for conciliation in its entirety. 
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
 SASMIT PATRA

ANNEXURE
 * *  * *  * 
9. (1) Any aggrieved woman may make, in writing, a complaint of sexual harassment
at workplace to the Internal Committee if so constituted, or the Local Committee, in case it 
is not so constituted, within a period of three months from the date of incident and in case 
of a series of incidents, within a period of three months from the date of last incident:  
      Provided that where such complaint cannot be made in writing, the Presiding Officer 
or any Member of the Internal Committee or the Chairperson or any Member of the Local 
Committee, as the case may be, shall render all reasonable assistance to the woman for 
making the complaint in writing:
Provided further that the Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local 
Committee may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the time limit not exceeding 
three months, if it is satisfied that the circumstances were such which prevented the woman 
from filing a complaint within the said period.
 * *  * *  * *  * 
10. (1)   The Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local Committee, may,
before initiating an inquiry under section 11 and at the request of the aggrieved woman take 
steps to settle the matter between her and the respondent through conciliation:, 
Provided that no monetary settlement shall be made as a basis of conciliation.
(2) Where settlement has been arrived at under sub-section (1), the Internal
Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall record the settlement so arrived 
and forward the same to the employer or the District Officer to take action as specified in the 
recommendation.
(3) The Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall
provide the copies of the settlement as recorded under sub-section (2) to  the aggrieved 
woman and the respondent.
(4) Where a settlement is arrived at under sub-section (1), n o further inquiry shall be
conducted by the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be.
 *  *     *  *         *   *          * 
Complaint of 
sexual harassment
Conciliation.
THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT WORKPLACE  (PREVENTION, 
PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL) ACT, 2013
(14 OF 2023)
*

RAJYA SABHA  
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition 
and Redressal) Act, 2013.
————
(Dr. Sasmit Patra, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–052–06.02.2024.