CLAUSES.

As INTRODUCED in THE Ratya SABHA ¥

But. No. LI oF 1999

THE MIZORAM UNIVERSITY BILL. 1999

ARRANGEMENT OL CLAUSES.

Short title and commencement

Definitions,

Establishment of the University.

Objects of the University

Powers of the University,

Transfer of properties of North-Eastern Hill University,
Jurisdiction.

University open to all classes, castes and creed.
The Visitor.

Officers of the University

The Vice-Chancellor...

The Pro-Vice-Chancellor.

The Deans of Schools.

The Registrar.

The Finance Officer.

The Librarian.

Other officers.

Authorities.

The Court.

The Executive Council.

The Academic Council.
The College Development Council.

The Boards of Studies.

The Finance Committee.


CLAUSES

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44,
45.
46.

47.

ii)

Other authorities of the University.

Power to make Statutes.

Statutes how to be made.

Power to make Ordinances.

Regulations.

Annual report.

Annual accounts,

Returns and information.

Transfer of services of certain employees of the North-Eastern Hill University.
Conditions of service of employees.

Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.
Right to appeal.

Provident and pension funds.

Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies,

Filling of casual vacancy.

Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.
Protection of action taken in good faith.

Mode of proof of University record.

Power to remove difficulties.

Transitional provisions.

Completion of courses of studies in Colleges or Institutions affiliated to the University.

Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before
Parliament.

Amendment of Act 24 of 1973.

THE SCHEDULE.


AS INTRODUCED IN THE RasyA SABHA

Bill No. LI of 1999

THE MIZORAM UNIVERSITY BILL, 1999
A

BILL

to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating University in the State of Mizoram
and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Mizoram University Act, 1999. Short title and
commence-
ment.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by

5 notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.


Definitions 2. In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise
requires, —

(a) “Academic Council” means the Academic Council of the University;

(b) “academic staff” means such categories of staff as are designated as
academic staff by the Ordinances; 5

(0) “Board of Studies” means the Board of Studies of the University;

(d) “College Development Council” means the College Development Council
of the University;

(०) “College” means a College maintained by, or admitted to the privileges of,
the University; 10

(f) “Court” means the Court of the University;

(g) “Department” means a Department of Studies; and includes a Centre of
Studies;

(h) “distance education system” means the system of imparting education
through any means of communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, 15
correspondence courses, seminars, contact programmes or the combination of any
two or more such means;

(i) “employee” means any person appointed by the University and includes
teachers and other staff of the University;

(j) “Executive Council” means the Executive Council of the University; 20

(k) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the
University, or of a College or an Institution, maintained by the University;

(1) “Institution” means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained
by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University;

(m) “North-Eastern Hill University” means the University established under 25
section 3 of the North-Eastern Hill University Act, 1973; 24 of 1973.

(n) “Principal” means the Head of a College or an Institution maintained by
the University and includes, where there is no Principal, the person for the time
being duly appointed to act as Principal, and in the absence of the Principal, or the
acting Principal, a Vice-Principal duly appointed as such; 30

(o) “recognised Institution” means an institution of higher learning recognised
by the University with in the State of Mizoram;

(p) “tecognised teachers” means such persons as may be recognised by the
University for the purpose of imparting instructions in a College or an Institution
admitted to the privileges of the University; 35

(q) “Regulations” means the Regulations made by any authority of the
University under this Act for the time being in force;

(r) “School” means a School of Studies of the University;

(s) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” means, respectively, the Statutes and the
Ordinanances of the University for the time being in force; 40
(t) “teachers of the University” means Professors, Readers, Lecturérs and such
other persons as may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research
in the University or in any College or Institution maintained by the University and

are designated as teachers by the Ordinances;

(u) “University” means the Mizoram University established and incorporated 45
as a university under this Act.

(v}"Vice-Chancellor” and “Pro-Vice-Chancellor” mean, respectively, the Vice-
Chancellor and Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the University;


3

3. (1) There shall be established a University by the name of “Mizoram Establishment
University”. of the Univer-

sity.
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Aizawl.

(3) The first Vice-Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the Executive
Council, the Acadmic Council and all persons who, may hereafter become such officers
or members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, are hereby
constituted a body corporate by the name of “Mizoram University”.

(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a commén seal and shall
sue and be sued by the said name.

4. The objects of the University shall be to disseminate and advance knowledge by Objects of the
providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem —_ University.
fit; to make provisions for integrated courses in humanities, natural and physical sciences,
social sciences, forestry and other allied disciplines in the educational programmes of the
University; and to take appropriate measures for promoting innovations in teaching-learning
process, inter-disciplinary studies and research; to educate and train manpower for the
development of the State of Mizoram; and to pay special attention to the improvement of
the social and economic conditions and welfare of the people of that State, their intellectual,
academic and cultural development.

5. The University shall have the following powers, namely:— “Powers of the
(i) to provide for instructions in such branches of learning as the University University.
may, from time to time, determine and to make provisions for research and for the
advancement and dissemination of knowledge;

(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine,
diplomas or certificates to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the
basis of examinations, evaluation or any other method of testing, on persons, and to
withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic distinctions
for good and sufficient cause;

(iii) to organise and to undertake extramural studies, training and extension
services;

(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed
by the Statutes;

1

(v) to provide facilities through the distance educaiton system to such persons
as it may determine;

(vi) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and
other teaching or academic positions, required by the University and to appoint
persons to such Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships or other
teaching or academic positions;

(vii) to recognise an institution of higher learning for such purposes as the
University may determine and to withdraw such recognition;

(viii) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in any College or
Institution admitted to the privileges of the University;

(ix) to appoint persons working in any other University or organisation as
teachers of the University for a specified period;

(x) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make
appointments thereto;

(xi) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or
authority or institution of higher learning in such manner and for such purposes as
the University may determine;


4

(xii) to establish with the prior approval of the such Centres and specialised
laboratories or other units for research and instruction as are, in the opinion of the
University necessary for the furtherance of its objects Central Goverment;

(xiii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals
and prizes;

(xiv) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and Halls;

(xv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose
to enter Mto such arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other
organisations, as the University may deem necessary;

(xvi) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other
programmes for teachers, evaluators and other academic staff;

(xvii) to admit to its privileges colleges and institutions within the State of
Mizoram not maintained by the University; to withdraw all or any of those privileges
in accordance with such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes; to recognise,
guide, supervise, and control Halls not maintained by the University and other
accommodation for students, and to withdraw any such recognition;

(xviii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus
Professors, Consultants, Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to the
advancement of the objects of the University;

(xix) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a
Department, as the case may be, in accordance with the Statutes;

(xx) to determine standards of admission to the University, which may include
examination, evaluation or any other methods of testing;

(xxi) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;

(xxii) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make
arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare;

(xxiii) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees,
including their code of conduct;

(xxiv) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees,
and to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the
University to be necessary;

(xxv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of
the employees;

(xxvi) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage
and dispose of any property, movable or immovable, including trust and endowment
properties for the purposes of the University;

(xxvii) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security
of the property to the University, money for the purposes of the University;

(xxviii) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or
conducive to the attainment of all or any of its objects.

‘Transfer of 6. On and from the commencement of this Act, all properties of the North-Eastern

properties of Hill University in the State of Mizoram shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the University

North-Eastem and shall be applied to the objects for which the University is established.

Hill University.

Jurisdiction. 7. (1) The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of the State of
Mizoram.

20

25

30

35

45


20

25

30

35

40

45

5

(2) On and from the commencement of this Act, all Colleges, Institutions, Schools
and Departments affiliated to, or admitted to the privileges of, or maintained by, the
North-Eastern Hill University shall stand affiliated to, or admitted to the privileges of, or
maintained by, the University.

(3) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, the North-Eastern Hill
University shall cease to exercise its jurisdiction in the State of Mizoram.

8 The University shall be open to persons of either sex and of whatever caste,
creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose on any
person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted
as a student in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege
thereof:

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from
making special provisions for the employment or admission of women, physically
handicapped or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular,
of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

9. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.

(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the
work and progress of the University, including Colleges and Institutions managed by it,
and to submit a report thereon; and upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after
obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon through the Vice-Chancellor, take
such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in respect of any of the
matters dealt with in the report and the University shall be bound to comply with such
directions. 5

(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person
or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, laboratories and equipment,
and of any College or Institution maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges;
and also of the examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by the University
and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with
the administration or finances of the University, Colleges or Institutions.

(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub-section (2), give notice of his
intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made,—

(a) to the University, if such inspection or inquiry is to be made in respect of
the University or any College or Institution maintained by it, or

(b) to the management of the College or Institution, if the inspection or inquiry
is to be made in respect of College or Institution admitted to the privileges of the
University,

and the University or the management, as the case may be, shall have the right to make
such representations to the Visitor, as it may consider necessary.

(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University or the
management, as the case may be, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or
inquiry as is referred to in sub-section (3).

(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the
University or the management shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have
the right to be present and be heard at such inspection or inquiry.

(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University
or any College or Institution maintained by it, address the Vice-Chancellor with reference
to the result of such inspection or inquiry together with such views and advice with regard
to the action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of

University
open to all
classes, castes
and creed.

The Visitor.


Officers of the
University.

The Vice-
Chancellor.

6

address made by the Visitor, the Vice-Chancellor shall communicate, to the Executive
Council, the views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer upon the action
to be taken thereon.

(8) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of any College
or Institution admitted to the privileges of the University, address the management
concerned through the Vice-Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or
inquiry, his views thereon and such advice as he may be pleased to offer upon the action
to be taken thereon.

(9) The Executive Council or the management; as the case may be, shall
communicate, through the Vice-Chancellor to the Visitor such action, if any, as it proposes
to take or has been taken upon the result of such inspection or inquiry.

(10) Where, the Executive Council or the management, does not, within a reasonable
time, take action to the satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any
explanation furnished or representation made by the Executive Council or the management,
issue such directions as he may think fit and the Executive Council or the management, as
the case may be, shall comply with such directions.

(77) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may,
by order in writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity
with the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances:

Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the Registrar to
show cause why such an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a
reasonable time, he shall consider the same.

(12) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
10. The following shall be the officers of the University: —

(J) the Vice-Chancellor;

(2) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor;

(3) the Deans of Schools;

(4) the Registrar;

(5) the Finance Officer;

(6) the Librarian; and

(7) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the
University.

11. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner and
on such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of
the University and shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the
University and give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.

(3) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary
on any matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or
under this Act and shall report to such authority the action taken by him on such matter:

15

20

25

30

35

40


20

25

30

35

45

7

Provided further that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought
not to have been taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall
be final:

Provided also that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by
the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under this sub-section shall have the right to
appeal against such action to the Executive Council within three months from the date on
which decision on such action is communicated to him and thereupon the Executive Council
may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor.

(4) The Vice-Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of
the University is beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this
Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the
University, may ask the authority concerned to review its decision within sixty days of
such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision either in whole or in part
or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall be
referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.

(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.

12. The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

13. Every Dean of a School shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

14. (7) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed by
the Statutes.

(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreement, sign documents and
authenticate records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

15. The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such
powers-and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

16. The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such powers
and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

17. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.

18. The following shal] be the authorities of the University: —
(J) the Court;
(2) the Executive Council;
(3) the Academic Council;
(4) the College Development Council;
(5) the Board of Studies;
(6) the Finance Committee; and

(7) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities
of the University.

The Pro-Vice-
Chancellor.

The Deans of
Schools.

The Registrar.

‘The Finance
Officer.

The Librarian.

Other officers.

Authorities of
the University.


The Court,

The Executive
Council

The Academic
Council

The College
Development
Council

The Boards of
Studies

The Finance
Committee

Other
authonties of
the University

Powers to
make Statutes

8

19. (1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following powers
and functions, namely:—

(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the
University and to suggest measures for the improvement and development of the
University;

(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual accounts
of the University and the audit report on such accounts;

(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it
for advice; and

(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
20. (7) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the University.

(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and
its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.

21. (1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the University
and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances,
co-ordinate and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University.

(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members and
its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.

22. (1) The College Development Council shall be responsible for admitting Colleges
to the privileges of the University.

(2) The constitution of the College Development Council, the term of office of its
members and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.

23. The constitution, powers and functions of the Boards of Studies shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.

24, The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.

25. The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities, as may be declared
by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed by the Statutes.

26. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:—

(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities and other bodies of
the University, as may be constituted from time to time;

(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said
authorities and bodies, the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters
relating to those authorities and other bodies for which it may be necessary or
desirable to provide;

(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and
their emoluments;

(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the
University, their emoluments and conditions of service;

(e) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working in any other University
or organisation for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;

20

25

30

35


15

20

25

30

35

40

45

9

(0 the conditions of serivce of employees including provisions pension,
insurance and provident fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary
action relating to employees of the University;

(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the
University;

(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or
students and the University;

(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or
student against the action of any officer or authority of the University;

(j) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a
Department;

(00 the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Centres, Halls,
Colleges and Institutions;

(9 the conferment of honorary degrees;

(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic
distinctions;

(n) the conditions under which Colleges and Institutions may be admitted to
the privileges of the University and the withdrawal of such privileges;

(0) the management of Colleges and Institutions established by the University;

(p) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the
University;
(4) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students;

(r) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the
statutes.

27. (1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.

(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes
or may amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-section (/):

Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes
affecting the status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such
authority has been given an opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed
changes, and any opinion so expressed shall be considered by the Executive Council.

(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a
Statute shall require the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or
remit to the Executive Council for re-consideration.

(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have
no validity unless it has been assented to by the Visitor.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sections, the Visitor
may make new or additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-
section (1), during the period of three years immediately after the commencement of this
Act:

Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make,
within one year from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he may consider
necessary and such detailed Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-section, the Visitor
may direct the University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter
specified by him and if the Executive Council is unable to implement such direction
within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, after considering the reasons, if any,
communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to comply with such direction,
make or amend the Statutes suitably.

Statutes how to
be made.


Power to make

Ordinances.

Regulations.

Annual report.

10

28. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :—

(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;

(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates
of the University;

(c) the medium of instruction and examination;

(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions,
the qualifications for same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and
obtaining of the same;

(०) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission
to the examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;

(0 the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals
and prizes;

(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of
appointment and the duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;

(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;

(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence,
discipline and teaching of women students and the prescribing of special courses of
studies for them;

() the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Specialised
Laboratories and other Committees;

(k) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other Universities,
institutions and other agencies including learned bodies or associations;

(7 the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is
considered necessary for improving the academic life of the University;

(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;

(n) the supervision of manageient of Colleges and Institutions admitted to
the privileges of the University;

(०) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees;
and

(p) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, or to be or may be
provided for by the Ordinances.

(2) The first Ordinance shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor with the previous
approval of the Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed
or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.

29, The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the
Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the
Ordinances, in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.

30. (J) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of
the Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the
University towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or
after such date as may be prescribed by the Statutes and the Court shall consider the report
वा its annual meeting.

(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments,
if any.

(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-section (7), shall also be
submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to
be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

15

20

25

30

35

40

45


10

15

20

25

30

35

26 of 1996. 40

45

50

11

31. (1) The annual accounts and balance-sheet of the University shall be prepared
under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at
intervals of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or by such persons as he may authorise in this behalf.

(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be
submitted to the Court and the Visitor along with the observations of the Executive Council.

(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to
the notice of the Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered
by the Executive Council, be submitted to the Visitor.

(4) Acopy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the
Visitor, shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may
be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of
Parliament shal! be published in the Gazette of India.

32. The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other
information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from
time to time, require.

33. (1) Every person who, immediately before the commencement of this Act, is
holding of discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs of the
North-Eastern Hill University in any area which on that date falls within the State of
Mizoram shall be deemed to have been transferred to the services of the Mizoram University
on the same terms and conditions and to the same rights and privileges as to pension,
gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have been had under the North-
Eastern Hill University Act, 1973.

(2) Any dispute arising out between a person referred to in sub-section (/) at the
request of such person, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub-
section (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 34 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made
under this sub-section.

34, (1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a written contract,
which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished to the
employee concerned.

(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee
shall, at the request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of
one member appointed by the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee
concerned and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.

(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court
in respect of the matters decided by the Tribunal.

(4) Every request made by the employee under sub-section (2), shall be deemed to
be a submission to arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.

(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the
Statutes.

35. (1) Any student or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed
from the rolls of the University by the orders or resolution of the Vice-Chancellor, Discipline
Committee or Examination Committee, as the case may be, and who has been debarred
from appearing at the examinations of the University for more than one year, may, within
ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, appeal to
the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the
decision of the Vice-Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.

(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against
a student shall, at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and
the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 34 shall, as far as may be,
apply to a reference made under this sub-section.

Annual
accounts,

Returns and
information.

Conditions of
service of

employees,

Procedure of
appeal and
arbitration in
disciplinary
cases against
students.


Right to
appeal.

Provident and
pension funds.

Disputes as to
constitution of
University
authorities and
bodies.

Filling of
casual
vacancies.

Proceedings of
University
authorities or
bodies not
invalidated by
vacancies.

Protection of
action taken in
good faith.

Mode of proof
of University
record,

Power to
remove
difficulties.

‘Transtitional
provisions.

12

36. Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution
maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges shall, notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the
Statutes, to the Executive Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the
University or of the Principal or the management of any College or an Institution, as the
case may be, and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the
decision appealed against.

37. (1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its employees such provident
or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such manner
and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central
Government may declare that the provision of the Provident Funds Act, 1925, shall apply
to such fund, as if it were a Government provident fund.

38. If any question arises as to whether any person has been duly elected or appointed
as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body of the University, the
matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.

39, All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio members) of any
authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person
or body who appoints, elects or co-opts the member whose place has become vacant and
person appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such
authority or body for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills
would have been a member.

40. No act or proceedings of any authority or other body of the University
shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies among
its members.

41. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer or other employee
of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances,

42. A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution of any
authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in possession of the University,
or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if certified by the Registrar,
shall be received as prima facie evidence of such receipt, application, notice, order,
proceeding, resolution, or documents or the existance of entry in the register and shall be
admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof

would, if produced, have been admissible in evidence, notwithstanding anything contained:

in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or in any other law for the time being in force.

43. (J) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the commencement of this Act.

(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.

44, Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes,

(a) the first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner
and on such conditions as may be deemed fit and each of the said officer shall hold
office for such term, not exceeding five years as may be specified by the visitor;

5

10

28 of 1925.

15

20

25

30

35
1 of 1872.

45


13

(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the
Visitor and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;

(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more
than thirty members and eleven members, respectively, who shall be nominated by
5 the Visitor and shall hold office for a term of three years;

(व) the first College Development Council shall consist of not more than ten
members, who shall be nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a
term of three years;

(e) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty-one
10 members, who shall be nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a
term of three years:

Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same
shall be filled by appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the
person so appointed or nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in

15 whose place he is appointed or nominated would have held office, if such vacancy had not
occurred.

45. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or in the Statutes or the
Ordinances, any student of a College, Institution, School or Department, who, immediately
before the admission of such College, Institution, School or Department, to the privileges

20 of the University, was studying for a degree, diploma or certificate of the North-Eastern
Hill University, shall be permitted by the University, to complete his course for that degree,
diploma or certificate, as the case may be, and the Mizoram University and such College,
Institution, School or Department, shall provide for the instructions and examination of
such student in accordance with the syllabus of studies of the North- Eastern Hill University.

25 46. () Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published
in the Official Gazette.

(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as

soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for'

a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more

30 successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the

session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification

in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, Ordinance

or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter

have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,

35 that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.

(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power
to give retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this
Act, to the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no restrospective effect

40 shall be given to any Statute, Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the
interests of any person to whom such Statute, Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.

47. In the North-Eastern Hill University Act, 1973,—

(i in section 1, in sub-section (2), for the words “Union territories of Arunachal

Pradesh and Mizoram”, the words “State of Arunachal Pradesh” shall be substituted;

45 Gi) in section 2, in clause (J) for the words “Union territories of Arunachal
Pradesh and Mizoram”, the words “State of Arunachal Pradesh” shall be substituted;

(iii) in section 6, in sub-section (/), for the words “Union territories of Arunachal

_ Pradesh and Mizoram”, the words “State of Arunachal Pradesh” shall be substituted.

‘Completion of
courses of
studies in
Colleges or
Institutions
affiliated to the
University.

Statutes,
Ordinances and
Regulations to
be published in
the Official
Gazette and to
be laid before
Parliament,

Amendment of
Act 24 of 1973.


THE SCHEDULE
(See section 27)
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY
The Vice-Chancellor

1, (7) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less
than three nersons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause
(2):

Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included in the
panel, he may call for a fresh panel.

(2) The Committee referred to in clause (7) shall consist of three persons, none of
whom shall be an employee of the University or an institution associated with the
University, or a member of the Executive Council or Academic Council or of any other
authority of the University. Out of the three persons, two shall be nominated by the
Executive Council and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor shall be the
convenor of the Committee.

(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the University.

(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on
which he enters upon his’ office, or until he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever
is earlier, and he shall not be eligible for re-appointment:

Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office:

Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice-Chancellor after his term has
expired, to continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as
may be specified by him or till his successor is appointed and enter upon his office,
whichever is earlier.

(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor shall be
as follows:—

(i) The Vice-Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances other
than the house rent allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from
time to time and he shall be entitled, without payment of rent, to use a furnished
residence throughout his term of office and no charge shall fall on the Vice-Chancellor
in respect of the maintenance of such residence.

(ii) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and
allowances as may be fixed by the Executive Council with the approval of the
Visitor from time to time:

Provided that where an employee of the University or a College or an Institution
maintained by or affiliated to it, or of any other University or any Institution
maintained by or affiliated to such other University, is appointed as the Vice-
Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provident fund of
which he is a member and the University shall contribute to the account of such
person in that provident fund at the same rate at which the person had been
contributing immediately before his appointment as the Vice-Chancellor:

14

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40


15

Provided further that where such employee had been member of any pension
scheme, the University shall make the necessary contribution to such scheme.

(iii) The Vice-Chancellor shail be entitled to travelling allowance at such rates
as may be fixed by the Executive Council.

5 (iv) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of
thirty days in a calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance
in two half-yearly instalments of fifteen days each on the Ist day of January and
July every year:

Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor asumes or relinquishes charge of the
10 office of the Vice-Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be
credited proportionately at the rate of two and-a-half days for each completed

month of service.

(v) In addition to the leave referred to in sub-clause (iv), the Vice-Chancellor
shall also be entitled to half pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed
15 year of service. This half pay leave may also availed of as commuted leave on full
pay on medical certificate. When commuted leave is availed, twice the amount of
half pay leave shall be debited against half pay leave due.

(6) If the office of the Vice-Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or
otherwise, or if he is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any other cause, the
20 Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor:

Provided that if the Pro-Vice-Chancellor is not available, the senior most professor
shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor untill a new Vice-Chancellor assumes
office or untill the existing Vice-Chancellor attends to the duties of his office, as the case
may be.

25 Powers and duties of the Vice-Chancellor

2. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be ex officio Chairman of the Executive Council,
the Academic Council, the Planning Board and the Finance Committee and shall, in the
absence of the Chancellor, preside at the convocations held for conferring degrees.

(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting
30 of any authority or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat
unless he is a member of such authority or body.

(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the
Ordinances and the Regulations are duly observed and he shall have all the powers necesary
to ensure such observance.

35 (4) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and
shall give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.

(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper
maintenance of discipline in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such
person or persons as he deems fit.

40 (6) The Vice-Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened
the meeting of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee.

Pro-Vice-Chancellor

3. (1) Every Pro-Vice-Chancelfor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on
the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor:

45 Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor is not accepted by
the Executive Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint


16

the person recommended by the Vice-Chancellor or ask the Vice-Chancellor to recommend
another person to the Executive Council:

Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the
Vice-Chancellor, appoint a professor to discharge the duties of a Pro-Vice-Chancellor in
addition to his own duties as a Professor.

(2) The term of office of a Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by
the Executive Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration
of the term of office of the Vice-Chancellor, whichever is earlier:

Provided that a Pro- Vice-Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be eligible
for re-appointment:

Provided further that, in any case, a Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall retire on attaining
the age of sixty-five years:

Provided also that the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties of the
Vice-Chancellor under clause (6) of Statute 2, continue in office notwithstanding the
expiration of his term of office as Pro-Vice-Chancellor , until a new Vice-Chancellor or
the Vice-Chancellor, as the case may be, assumes office:

Provided also that when the office of the Vice-Chancellor becomes vacant and there
is not Pro-Vice- Chancellor to perform the functions of the Vice-Chancellor, the Executive
Council may appoint a Pro-Vice-Chancellor and the Pro-Vice-Chancellor so appointed
shall cease to hold office as such as soon as a Vice-Chancellor is appointed and enters
upon his office.

(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of srvice of a Pro- Vice-Chancellor
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time.

(4) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall assist the Vice-Chancellor in respect of such matters
as may be specified by the Vice-Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and shall
also exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him
by the Vice-Chancellor.

Registrar
4, (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the

recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a
whole-time salaried officer of the University.

(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for
re-appointment.

(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall
be such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time.

Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years:

Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty
years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until
the expiry of a period of one year, whichever is ealrier.

(4 When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of
the officer shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the
purpose.

(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the
employees, excluding teachers and academic staff, as may be specified in the order of the
Executive Council and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them
or to impose on them the penalty of censure or the withholding of increment:

10

20

30

35

45


17

Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person has been given a
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard
to him.

(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice-Chancellor against any order of the Registrar
5 imposing any of the penalties specified in sub-clause (a).

(c) In a cause where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the
Registrar is called for, the Registrar shall, upon concluding of the inquiry, make a report
to the Vice-Chancellor along with his recommendations:

Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the
10 Vice-Chancellor imposing any penalty.

(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio Secretary of the Executive Council, the Academic
Council and the College Development Council, but shall not be deemed to be a member
of any of these authorities and he shall be ex officio Member-Secretary of the Court.

(7) It shall be the duty of the Registrar—

15 (a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property
of the University as the Executive Council shall commit to his charges;

(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council,
the Academic Council, the College Development Council, and of any Committees
appointed by those authorities;

20 (c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council,
the Academic Council, the College Development Council and of any Committees
appointed by those authorities;

(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council,
the Academic Council and the College Development Council;

25 (e) to arrange for and superintend the examinations of the University in
accordance with the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;

(Pf) to supply to the Visitor copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities
of the University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;

(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the
30 University, sign powers of attorney and verify pleading or depute his representative
for the purpose; and

(A) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the
Ordinances or the Regulations or as may be required from time to time by the
Executive Council or the Vice-Chancellor.

35 The Finance Officer

5. (1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the
recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a
whole-time salaried officer of the University.

(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re-
40 appointment.

(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time.

Provided that a Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years:


18

Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the
age of sixty years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his
office or until the expiry of a period of one year, whichever is earlier.

(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is,
by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office,
the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may
appoint for the purpose.

(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio Secretary of the Finance Committee, but
shall not be deemed to be a member of such Committee.

(6) The Finance Officer shall—

(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall
advise it as regards its financial policy; and

(0) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the
Executive Council or as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.

(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the Finance Officer shall—

(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including
trust and endowed property;

(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and
non-recurring expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are
expended on the purpose for which they are granted or allotted;

(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the
University and for their presentation to the Executive Council;

(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on
the state of investments;

(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods
of collection employed;

(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are
maintained up-to-date and that stock-checking is conducted, of equipment and other
consumable materials in all offices, Special Centres, Specialised Laboratories,
Colleges and Institutions maintained by the University;

(g) bring to the notice of the Vice-Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and

other financial irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault;
and

(h) call for from any office, Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution
maintained by the University any information or returns that he may consider
necessary for the performance of his duties.

(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised
in this behalf by the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be
sufficient discharge for payment of such money.

Deans of Schools of Studies

6. (7) Every Dean of a School of Studies shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor
from among the Professors in the School for a period of three years and he shall be eligible
for reappointment:

Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty years shall cease to hold office as
such:

15

20

25

30

35

40

45


19

Provided further that if at any time there is no Dean in a School, the Vice-Chancellor,
Pro-Vice-Chancellor or a Dean authorised by the Vice-Chancellor in this behalf, shall
exercise the powers of the Dean of the School.

(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness,
5 absence or any other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office
shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.

(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School and shall be responsible for the conduct
and maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the School and shall have
such other functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.

10 (4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the
Boards of Studies or Committees of the School, as the case may be, but shall not have the
right to vote thereat unless he is a member thereof.

Heads of Departments

7, (1) In the case of Departments which have more than one professor the head of
15 the Department shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of
the Vice-Chancellor from among the Professors.

(2) In the case of Departments where there is no Professor or there is only one
Professor, the Executive Council shall have the option to appoint, on the recommendation
of the Vice-Chancellor, either the Professor or a Reader as the Head of the Department.

20 Provided that it shall be open to a Professor or Reader to decline the officer of
appointment as the Head of the Department.

(3) A professor appointed as the Head of the Department shall hold office as such
for a period of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment.

(4) A Head of a Department may resign his office at any time during his tenure of
25 office.

(5) A Head of a Department shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by
the Ordinances.

Proctors

8. (1) Every Proctor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the
30 recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor and shall exercise such powers and perform such
duties as may be assigned to him by the Vice-Chancellor.

(2) The Proctor shall hold office for a term of two years and shall be eligible for
reappointment.

Librarian

35 9. (1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be
a whole-time officer of the University.

(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be
assigned to him by the Executive Council.
40 Meetings of the Court

10, (1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed’by the
Executive Council unless some other date has been fixed by the Court in respect of any
year.


20

(2) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working of the University
during the previous year, together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the
balance-sheet as audited, and the financial estimates for the next year shall be presented.

(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the balance-sheet and the
financial estimates referred to in clause (2) shall be sent to every member of the Court at
least seven days before the date of the annual meeting.

(4) Twelve members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.

(5) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the
Vice-Chancellor or if there is no Vice-Chancellor, Pro-Vice-Chancellor or if there is no
Pro-Vice-Chancellor, by the Registrar.

Quorum for meetings of the Executive Council

11. Five members of the Executive Council shall form a quorum for a meeting of
the Executive Council.

Powers and functions of the Executive Council

12. (1) The Executive Council shall have the power of management and
administration of the revenue and property of the University and the conduct of all
administrative affairs of the University not otherewise provided for.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive
Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers,
namely:—

(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and
emoluments of such posts and to define the duties and conditions of service of
Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff and Principals of Colleges
and Institutions maintained by the University:

Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of
the number, qualification and the emoluments of teachers and academic staff
otherwise than after consideration of the recommendations of the Academic Council;

(ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff,
as may be ncessary, and Principals of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the
University on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted for the
purpose and to fill up temporary vacancies therein;

(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make
appointments thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;

(iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the
Chancellor and the Vice- Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the
discharge of the functions of such officer during his absence;

(v) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with
the Statutes and the Ordinances;

(vi) to fhanage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property,
business and all other administrative affairs of the University is and for that purpose
to appoint such agents as it may think fit;

(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non-recurring expenditure
for a year on the recommendations of the Finance Committee;

(viii) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied
income, in such stocks, funds, share or securities, from time to time as it may think

20

25

30

35

40

45


21

fit or in the purchase of immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying
such investment from time to time;

(ix) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on
behalf of the University;

5 (x) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means
needed for carrying on the work of the University;

(xi) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;

(xii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances
of the employees and students of the University who may, for any reason, feel

10 aggrieved;

(xiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them,
and to fix their fees, emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting
the Academic Council;

(xiv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody

15 and use of such seal;

(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence
and discipline of women students;

(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice-Chancellor, the Pro-Vice-
Chancellor, the Deans, the Registrar or the Finance Officer or such other employee
20 or authority of the University or to a committee appointed by it as it may deem fit;

(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;
and
(xviii) to provide for inviting:
Writers-in-Residence and determined the terms and conditions or such
25 invitations;

(xix) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors;
Consultants and Scholars and determine the terms and conditions of such
appointments; and

(xx) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be
30 conferred or imposed on it by the Act, or the Statutes.

Quorum for meetings of the Academic Council

13. Nine members of the Academic Council shall form a quorum for a meeting of
the Academic Council.

Powers and Functions of the Academic Council

35 14. Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall,
in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely:—

(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University
and to give directions regarding methods of instructions, co-ordinating teaching
among the Colleges and the Institutions, evaluation of research or improvement in

40 academic standards;

(b) to bring about inter-School co-ordination, to establish or appoint committees
or boards, for taking up projects on an inter-School basis;

(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative

or on a reference by a School or the Executive Council and to take appropriate
45 action thereon; and


22

(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the
Ordinances regarding the academic functioning of the University, discipline,
residences, admissions, award of fellowship and studentships, fees, concessions,
corporate life and attendance.

Schools of Studies and Departments 5

15. (1) The Unversity shall have such Schools of Studies as may be specified in the
Statutes.

(2) Every School shall have as school Board and the members of the first School
Board shall be nominated by the Executive Council and shall hold office for a period of
three years. 10

(3) The powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by the
Ordinances.

(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required for such
meetings shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.

(5) (@) Each School shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by 15
the Ordinances;

Provided that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic
Council, establish Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the
University as the Executive Council may consider necessary.

(c) Each Department shall consist of the foliowing members, namely:— 20
(i) Teachers of the Department;
(ii) Persons conducting research in the Department;
(iii) Dean of the School;
(iv) Honourary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and

(v) Such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance 25
with the provisions of the Ordinances.

Board of Studies
16. (1) Each Department shall have a Board of Studies.

(2) The constitution of the Board of Studies and the term of office of its members
shall be prescribed by the Ordinances. 30

(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic Council, the
functions of a Board of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees
and other requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the concerned School
Board in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances—

(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding 35
research degrees;

(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research:

Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during the period of
three years immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the 40
Department.


23
Finance Committee
17. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(i the Vice-Chancellor;
(ii) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor;

5 (iii) three persons nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least
one shall be a member of the Executive Council; and

(iv) three persons nominated by the Visitor.

(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of
the Finance Committee.

10 (3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio members, shall
hold office for a term of three years.

(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of
dissent if he does not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.

(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the
15 accounts and to scrutinise proposals for expenditure.

(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been
included in the Budget, should be examined by the Finance Committee before they are
considered by the Executive Council.

(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by
20 the Finance Officer shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and
comments and thereafter submitted to the Executive Council for approval.

(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure
and the total non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of
the University (which, in the case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).

25 Selection Committees

18. (J) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations to the
Executive Council for appointment to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Registrar,
Finance Officer, Librarian and Principals of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the
University.

30 (2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of
the Table below shall consist of the Vice-Chancellor, Pro-Vice-Chancellor, a nominee of
the Visitor and the persons specified in the corresponding entry in column 2 of the said
Table:-—

TABLE

35 1 2

Professor (i) The Head of the Department concerned if he is a
Professor.

(ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice-
Chancellor.

40 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the University,
nominated by the Executive Council, out of a panel of
names recommended by the Academic Council for
their special knowledge of, or interest in, the subject
with which the Professor will be concerned.


24

1 2

Reader/Lecturer (i) The Head of the Department concerned.

(ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice-
Chancellor.

(iii) Two persons not in the service of the University,
nominated by the Executive Council, out of a panel
of names recommended by the Academic Council for
their special knowledge of, or interest in, the subject
with which the Reader or a Lecturer will be concerned.

Registrar/Finance Officer (i) Two members of the Executive Council nominated
by it; and
(ii) One person not in the service of the University,
nominated by the Executive Council.

Librarian (i) Two persons not in the service of the University,
who have special knowledge of the subject of the
Library Science/Library Administration to, be
nominated by the Executive Council.

(ii) One person not in the service of the University,
nominated by the Executive Council.

Principal of College or Institution Three persons not in the service of the University of

maintained by the University whom two shall be nominated by the Executive
Council and one by the Academic Council for their
special knowledge of, or interest in, a subject in which
instruction is being provided by the College or
Institution.

NOTE; 1, Where the appointment is being made for an inter-disciplinary project, the
head of the project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.

2. The Professor to be nominated shall be Professor concerned with the speciality
for which the selection is being made and that the Vice-Chancellor shall consult the
Head of the Department and the Dean of School before nominating the Professor.

(3) The Vice-Chancellor, or in his absence, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall preside
at the meetings of a Selection Committee:

Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior
consultation with, and subject to the convenience of Visitor's nominee and the persons
nominated by the Executive Council under clause (2):

Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committee shall not be valid
unless,—

(a) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons Rominated by the
Executive Council is four in all, at least three of them attend the meeting; and

(b) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the
Executive Council is three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting. *

(4) The meeting of a Selection Committee shall be convened by the Vice-Chancellor
or in his absence by the Pro-Vice-Chancellor.

(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in making
recommendations shall be laid down in the Ordinances.

20

25

30

35

AS


25

(6) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by a
Selection Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for
final orders.

(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated below: —

5 (i If the temporary vacancy is for a duration longer than one academic session,
it shall be filled on the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the
procedure indicated in the foregoing clauses:

Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work

it is necessary to fill the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely

10 temporary basis by a local Selection Committee referred to in sub-clause (ii) for a
period not execeeding six months,

(0 If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment
to such vacancy shall be made on the recommendation of a local Selection
Committee consisting of the Dean of the School concerned, the Head of the

15 Department and a nominee of the Vice Chancellor:

Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head
of the Department, the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the
Vice-Chancellor:

Provided further that in the case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts
20 caused by death or any other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head
of the Department concerned, make a temporary appointment for a month and

report to the Vice-Chancellor and the Registrar about such appointment.

(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a

regular Selection Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in

25 service on such temporary employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a

local Selection Committee of a regular Selection Committee, for a temporary or
permanent appointment, as the case may be.

Special mode of appointment
19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the Executive Council
30 may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to accept
a post of Professor or Reader or any other academic post in the University, as the case
may be, on such terms and conditions as it deems fit, and on the person agreeing to do so
appoint him to the post,

(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working
35 in any other University or organisation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with
the manner laid down in the Ordinances.

Appointment for a fixed tenure

20. The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in accordance with the
procedure laid down in Statute 18 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it
40 deems fit.

Recognised teachers

21. (1) The qualifications of recognised teacher shall be such as may be prescribed
by the Ordinances.

(2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as
45 may be laid down in the Ordinances.

(3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the recommendation of a
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose in the manner laid down in the Ordinances.


26

(4) The period of registration of a teacher shall be determined by the Ordinances
made in that behalf.

(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not
less than two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw recognition from a
teacher:

Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has been
given to the person concerned calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may
be specified in the notice, why such resolution should not be passed and until his objections,
if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of them have been considered by the
Academic Council.

(6) Any person aggrieved by an order of withdrawal under clause (5) may, within
three months from the date of communication to him of such order, appeal to the Executive
Council which may pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit.

Committees

22. (1) Any Authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special
Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are
not members of such authority.

(2) Any such Committee appointed under clause (/) may deal with any subject
delegated to it subject to subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing.

Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, etc.

23. (7) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the
absence of any agreement to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of
service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the
Regulations.

(2) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall be
appointed on a written contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.

(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause (2) shall be deposited with the
Registrar.

Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees

24. All the employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic
staff of the University, shall, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be governed
by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes,
the Ordinances and the Regulations.

Seniority list

25. (1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office
or be a member of an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such
seniority shall be determined according to the length of continuous service of such person
in his grade, and, in accordance with such other principles as the Executive Council may,
from time to time, prescribe.

(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each
class of persons to whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up-to-
date seniority list in accordance with the provisions of clause (/).

(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular
grade or the relative seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar
may, on his own motion and shall, at the request of any such person, submit the matter to
the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall be final.

15

20

25

30

35

45


15

20

25

30

35

45

27
Removal of employees of the University

26. (1) Where there 1s an allegation of misconduct against a téacher, a member of
the academic staff or other employee of the University, the Vice-Chancellor, in the case
of the teacher or member of the academic staff, and the authority competent to appoint
(hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) in the case of other employee may,
by order in writing, place such teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee,
as the case may be, under suspension and shall forthwith report to the Executive Council
the circumstances in which the order was made:

Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that the
circumstances of the case do not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of
the academic staff, revoke such order.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment
or of any other terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Executive Council
in respect of teachers and other academic staff, and the appointing authority, in respect
of other employees, shall have the power to remove a teacher or a member of the academic
staff, or as the case may be, other employee on grounds of misconduct.

(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be, the appointing
authority, shall not be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or
other employee except for a good cause and after giving three months’ notice or on
payment of three months' salary in lieu thereof.

(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed
under clause (2) or clause (3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing
cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.

(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee
shall take effect from the date on which the order of removal is made.

Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee
is under suspension at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the
date on which he was placed under suspension.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute,
a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee may resign,—

(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months’ notice in
writing to the Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or
by paying three months’ salary in lieu thereof;

(9) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month’s notice in
writing to the Executive Council or, as the case, may be, the appointing authority
or by paying one month’s salary in lieu thereof:

Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the
resignation is accepted by the Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case
may be.

Honorary degrees

27. (1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council
and by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members
present and voting, make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:

Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own motion,
make such proposals.

(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less

than two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction
of the Visitor, any honorary degree conferred by the University.


28

Withdrawal of degrees, etc.

28. The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not
less than two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic
distinction conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the
University for goods and sufficient cause:

Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been
given to that person calling upon to him to show cause within such time as may be
specified in the notice why such a resolution should not be passed and until his objections,
if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of them, have been considered by the
Executive Council.

Maintenance of discipline among students of the University

29. (1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students
of the University shall vest in the Vice-Chancellor.

(2) The Vice-Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper
to a proctor and to such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.

(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of
discipline and taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of
discipline, the Vice-Chancellor may, in exercise of his powers, by order, direct that any
student or students be expelled, or rusticated, for a specified period, or be not admitted to
a course or courses of study in a College, Institution or Department or a School of the
University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for an amount to be specified in
the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the
University, College, Institution or Department or a School for one or more years, or that
the results of the student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in
which he or they have appeared be cancelled.

(4) The principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads
of teaching Departments in the University shall have the authority to exercise all such
disciplinary powers over the students in their respective Colleges, Institutions, Schools
and teaching Departments in the University as may be necessary for the proper conduct
of such Colleges, Institutions, Schools and teaching Departments.

(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice-Chancellor, the Principal and other
persons specified in clause (4), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be
made by the University. The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of
Studies and Heads of teaching Departments in the University may also make the
supplementary rules as they deem necessary for the aforesaid purposes.

(6) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to
the effect that he submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice-Chancellor
and other authorities of the University.

Maintenance of discipline among Students of College, etc.

30. All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students
of a College or an Institution, not maintained by the University, shall vest in the Principal
of the College or Institution, as the ‘case may be, in accordance with the procedure
prescribed by the Ordinances.

Admission of Colleges, etc., to the privileges of the University

31. (7) Colleges and other Institutions situated within the jurisdiction of the
University may be admitted to such privileges of the University as the Executive Council
and the College Development Council may decide on the following conditions, namely:—

(i) Every such College or Institution shall have a regularly constituted
Governing Body, consisting of not more than fifteen persons approved by the
Executive Council and including among others, two teachers of the University to

20

25

30

35

40

45

50


10

15

20

25

30

35

45

29

be nominated by the Executive Council and three representatives of the teaching
staff of whom the Principal of the College or’ Institution shall be one. The procedure
for appointment of members of the Governing Body and other matters affecting
the management of a College or an Institution shall be prescribed by the Ordinances:

Provided that the said condition shall not apply in the case of Colleges and
Institutions maintained by Government which shall, however, have an Advisory
Committee consisting of not more than fifteen persons which shall consist of
among others, three teachers including the principal of the College or Institution,
and two teachers of the University nominated by the Executive Council

(ii) Every such College or Institution shall satisfy the Executive Council and
the College Development Council on the following matters, namely:—

(a) the suitability and adequacy of its accommodation and equipment
for teaching;

(b) the qualifications and adequacy of its teaching staff and the
conditions of their service;

(c) the arrangements for the residence, welfare, discipline and
supervision of students;

(d) the adequacy of financial provision made for the continued
maintenance of the College or Institution; and

(e) such other matters as are essential for the maintenance of the
standards of University education.

(iii) No College or Institution shall be admitted to any privileges of the
University except on the recommendation of the Academic Council made after
considering the report of a Committee of Inspection appointed for the purpose by
the Academic Council.

(iv) Colleges and Institutions desirous of admission to any privileges of the
University shall be required to intimate their intention to do so in writing so as to
reach the Registrar not later than the 15th August, preceding the year from which
permission applied for is to have effect.

(v) A College or an Institution shall not, without the previous permission of
the Executive Council College Development Council and the Academic Council,
suspend instruction in any subject or course of study which it is authorised to teach
and teaches.

(2) Appointment to the teaching staff and Principals of Colleges or Institutions
admitted to the privileges of the University shall be made in the manner prescribed by
the Ordinances:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to Colleges and Institutions
maintained by Government.

(3) The service conditions of the administrative and other non-academic staff of
every College or Institution referred to in clause (2) shall be such as may be laid down in
the Ordinances:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to Colleges and Institutions
maintained by Government.

(4) Every College or Institution admitted to the privileges of the University shall
be inspected at least once in every two academic years by a Committee appointed by the
Academic Council, and the report of the Committee shall be submitted to the Academic
Council, which shall forward the same to the College Development Council and Executive
Council with such recommendations as it may deem fit to make.


30

(5) The College Development Council and the Executive Council, after considering
the report and the recommendations, if any, of the Academic Council, shall forward a

copy of the report to the Governing Body of the College or Institution with such remarks, °

if any, as they may deem fit for suitable action.

(6) The Executive Council may, after consulting the College Development Council
and Academic Council, withdraw any privileges granted to a College or an Institution, at
any time it considers that the College or Institution does not satisfy any of the conditions
on the fulfilment of which the College or Institution was admitted to such privileges:

Provided that before any privileges are so withdrawn, the Governing Body of the
College or Institution concerned shall be given an opportunity to represent to the Executive
Council why such action should not be taken.

(7) Subject to the conditions set forth in clause (/), the Ordinances may prescribe—
(i) such other conditions as may be considered necessary;

(ii) the procedure for the admission of Colleges and Institutions to the
privileges of the University and for the withdrawal of those privileges.

Convocations

32. Convocation of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other purposes
shall be held in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.

Acting Chairman of meetings

33. Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to preside over a
meeting of any authority of the University or any committee of such authority or when
the President or Chairman so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one
from among themselves to preside at such meeting.

Resignation

३4, Any member, other than an ex officio member of the Court, the Executive
Council, the Academic Council or any other authority of the University or any Committee
of such authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall
take effect as soon as such letter is received by the Registrar.

Disqualification

35. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member
of any of the authorities of the University,—

(i) if he is of unsound mind;
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent;

(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral
turpitude and sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six
months.

(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of
the disqualifications mentioned in clause (/), the question shall be referred to the Visitor
and his decision shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court
against such decision.

Residence condition for membership and office

36. Notwithstanding anything contained in the statutes, a person who is not
ordinarily resident in India shall not be eligible to be an office of the University or a
member of any authority of the university.

10

20

25

30

35

40


10

20

30

35

45

31
Membership of authorities by vartue of membership of other bodies

37. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any
post in the University or is a member of any authority or body of the University in his
capacity as a member of a particular authority or body or as the holder of a particular
appointment shall hold such office or membership only for so long as he continues to be
a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that particular appointment,
as the case may be.

Alumni Association
38. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.

(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed
by the Ordinances.

(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for
election unless he has been a member of the Association for at least one year prior to the
date of the election and is a degree holder of the University of at least five years standing:

Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one year's membership
shall not apply in the case of the first election.

Students' Council

39. (1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Students' Council for every
academic year, consisting of:

(i) the Deam of Students’ Welfare who shall be the Chairman of the Students’
Council;

(ii) all students who have won prizes in the previous academic year in the
fields of studies, fine arts, sports and extension work;

(iii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis
of merit in studies, sports, activities and all-round development of personality:

Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any
matter concerning the University before the Students' Council if so permitted by the
Chairman, and he shall have the right to participate in the discussions at any meeting
when the matter is taken up for consideration.

(2) The functions of the Students' Council shall be to make suggestions to the
appropriate authorities of the University in regard to the programmes of studies, students’
welfare and other matters of importance, in regard to the working of the University in
general and such suggestions shall be made on the basis of consensus of opinion.

(3) The Students’ Council shall meet at least gnee in an academic year preferably
in the beginning of that year.

Ordinances how made

40. (1) The first Ordinances made under sub-section (2) of section 28 may be
amended, repealed or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner
specified below.

(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in section 28, other than
those enumerated in clause (n) of sub-section (7) thereof, shall be made by the Executive
Council unless a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed by the Academic Council.

(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance
proposed by the Academic Council under clause (2), but may reject the proposal or
return the draft to the Academic Council for re-consideration, either in whole or in part,
together with any amendment which the Executive Council may suggest.


32

(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance
roposed by the Academic Council, the Academic Council may consider the question
fresh and in case the original draft is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two-thirds
f the members present and voting and more than half the total number of members of
36 Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Executive Council which shall
ither adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.

(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect
nmediately. .

(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the
‘isitor within two weeks from the date of its adoption. The Visitor shall have the power
) direct the University within four weeks of the receipt of the Ordinance to suspend the
peration of any such Ordinance and he shall, as soon as possible, inform the Executive
‘ouncil about his objection to the proposed Ordinance. The Visitor may, after receiving
36 comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending the Ordinance or
isallow the Ordinance, and his decision shall be final.

Regulations

41. (1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with
1e Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the following matters, namely:—

(# laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number
of members required to form a quorum;

(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or
the Ordinance to be prescribed by Regulations;

(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or
committees appointed by them and not provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the
Ordinances.

(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the
iving of notice to the members of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the
usiness to be considered at meetings and for the keeping of a record of the proceedings
f meetings.

(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may
pecify of any Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such
egulation.

Delegation of Powers

42. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority of
36 University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person
nder his or its respective control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility
or the exercise of the powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority
elegating such powers.

10

15

20

25

30

35


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The need to have a separate University for the State of Mizoram has been felt ever
since the State was formed in pursuance to the Mizo Accord, 1986. The higher education
needs of the State of Mizoram are presently being served by the North-Eastern Hill Uni-
versity which has jurisdiction over the State. However, this arrangement has not been
able to meet the expectations of the people of Mizoram. The State Government has been
continuously pressing for a separate University. A decision was taken, in principle, in
June 1997 to establish a Central University in the State of Mizoram to meet the special
needs of the State.

2. The Mizoram University will be a teaching-cum-affiliating University with juris-
diction over the entire State with headquarters at Aizawl. In addition to offering under-
graduate and post-graduate programmes in Humanities and Sciences, the University would
focus its attention on subjects related to the development and manpower requirements of
the State.

3. With the establishment of the Mizoram University, the jurisdiction of the North-
Eastern Hill University shall cease over the State of Mizoram.

4. It is hoped that the establishment of a Central University in Mizoram would meet
the aspirations and needs of the people of the State.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New DELHI; MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI.
The 17th December, 1999.

33


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Central University at Aizawal
in Mizoram. The estimated non-recurring expenditure on the establishment of the Univer-
sity shall be Rs. 70 crores during the Ninth and Tenth Plan periods. The recurring expendi-
ture shall be Rs. 5 to Rs. 6 crores per annum after the University becomes functional.

2. The said expenditure shall be met by the University Grants Commission from its
plan allocation,


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 27 of the Bill provides that the first Statutes are those set out in the Sched-
uled to the Bill. It also empowers the Executive Council of the University to make new or
additional Statutes or to amend or repeal the Statues of the University subject to the
assent of the Visitor. Sub-clause (5) of the aforesaid clause empowers the Visitor also to
make new or additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes of the University during
the period of three years immediately after the commencement of the Act. Sub-clause (6)
further empowers the Visitor to direct the University to make provisions in the Statutes in
respect of any matter specified by him and if the Executive Council is unable to imple-
ment such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, after considering the
reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its inability fo comply with
such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably. The matters in respect of which the
Executive Council and the Visitor may make, amend or repeal Statues include the consti-
tution, powers and functions of other authorities and other bodies of the University, the
appointment of officers and teachers of the University, the conditions of service of the
employees of the University and other such matters.

2. Sub-clause (2) of Clause 28 of the Bill empowers the Vice-Chancellor of the
University to make the first Ordinance of the University with the previous approval of the
Central Government and provides that the Ordinances so made may be amended,
repealed or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by
the Statutes. The matters in respect of which erdinances may be made, or as the case may
be, amended, repealed or added to relate to admission of students, courses of study,
medium of instruction and examination, the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards
of Studies, Special Centres, Specialised Laboratories and the manner of co-operation and
collaboration with other Universities and authorities, the management of Colleges and
Institutions admitted to the privileges of the University and other such matters.

3. Clause 29 of the Bill enables the authorities of the University to make Regula-
tions, consistent with the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their
own business and that of the Committees appointed by them.

4. The matters for which Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations may be made pertain
to matters of procedure or detail and it is hardly possible to provide for them in the Bill.
The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.

35


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE NORTH-EASTERN HILL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1973
(24 OF 1973)
* * * * *
1) * * * * *

(2) It extends to the States of Meghalaya and Nagaland and the Union territories of
Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram.

* * * * *

2, In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise
requires,—

* * * * *

(J) "North-Eastern region" means the North-Eastern region of India
comprising the States of Meghalaya and Nagaland and the Union territories of
Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram;

* * * * *

6. (7) The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the States of Meghalaya and
Nagaland and the Union territories of Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram.

* * * * *

36

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.

Jurisdiction.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating University in the State of
Mizoram and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi, Minister of Human Resource Development)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2902RS—18.12.1999.