1
THE  CRIMINAL  LAWS  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH FEBRUARY, 2022
Bill No. II of 2022
5

2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
2. In Chapter II of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as
the Penal Code), after section 52A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"52 B. The words "Social boycott" refer to any action or gesture, oral or written, by a
member of a community or a caste panchayat, such as those mentioned, but not restricted to,
in the descriptions hereinafter following, namely:
First.—The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or obstruct any person
from partaking or observing any social, religious or traditional custom or usage or ceremony
or from taking part in any social, religious or community functions, procession, assembly or
meeting;
Second.—The refusal or denial or attempt to refuse or deny any person the right to
perform marriage, funeral or any other religious or customary rites and ceremonies as the
persons of his community ordinarily perform;
Third.—The act or attempt to commit or cause social ostracism on any grounds;
Fourth.—The refusal or purposeful exclusion of any person from engaging in the
society by hampering social or commercial ties of such person with his community, thereby
affecting his right to life and personal liberty;
Fifth.—The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or obstruct any person
from accessing any place ordinarily used or intended to be used for any religious, charitable
or public purpose that is either established or maintained wholly or partly by the person's
own community, for and on behalf of the community using the funds contributed by such
community and is normally available for use to or by any other person of his community;
Sixth.—The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or obstruct any person
from accessing any school, educational institution, medical institution, cemetery, burial ground
or any other place used by, or intended to be used by, or for the benefit of his community;
Seventh.—The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or obstruct any person
from enjoying any benefit under a charitable trust or waqf created for the benefit of his
community;
Eighth.—The act of inciting or provoking or encouraging any person, directly or
indirectly to sever social, religious, professional or business relations with other persons of
his community;
Ninth.—The prevention or obstruction, or attempt to prevent or obstruct any person
of belonging to his community from enjoying human rights;
Tenth.—The discrimination or act of discriminating against a person by his community
on the basis of morality, political inclination, sexuality, gender expression or any other basis;
Eleventh.—The expulsion, directly or indirectly, of any person from his community;
Twelfth.—Any other similar acts."
3. After section 298 of the Penal Code, the following Chapter, shall be inserted, namely:—
CHAPTER XV A
O
FFENCES RELATING TO SOCIAL BOYCOTT
298A. Whoever imposes, or causes to impose any kind of social boycott on a person,
shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years, but which
may extend to seven years, or with fine which may extend to five lakhs rupees, or with both.
Insertion of
new section
52 B.
Social
boycott.
45 of 1860
Insertion of
new sections
298 A and B.
Imposing
social boycott
on a person or
group of
persons.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
298B. Whoever gatheres, congregates, assembles, or participates in a meeting of a
caste panchayat, at any time and at any place, with the view or intent to deliberate on the
issue of imposing social boycott on any person, shall, on conviction be punished with
imprisonment for not less than three years, but which may extend to seven years or with fine
which may extend to five lakhs rupees, or with both.
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENTS TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
4. In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, under the heading
"1.-OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE", after entries related to section 298,
the following entries shall be inserted, namely:—
12 3 4 5 6
CHAPTER XV A.—OFFENCES RELATING TO SOCIAL BOYCOTT
"298A Imposing Imprisonment for not less Cognizable  Bailable Magistrate of
social than three years, but which the first class.
boycott on a may extend to seven years,
person or  or with fine which may extend
group of to five lakhs rupees, or with
persons both.
298 B Deliberating Imprisonment for not less Ditto  Ditto Ditto
on the issue than three years, but which
of imposing may extend to seven years,
social or with fine which may extend
boycott to five lakhs rupees, or with
both.
Deliberating
on the issue of
imposing
social boycott.
2 of 1974 Amendment
of First
Schedule.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 21 of the Constitution guarantees the life and personal liberty to all persons.
It also guarantees the right to such persons to live a dignified life. The bare text of the article
reads as, "No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to
a procedure established by law". Despite a constitutional obligation on the state to protect
the fundamental rights of its citizens, India witnesses a parallel system; one that imposes
harsh socio-economic extrajudicial punishments on persons and communities that in their
orthodox and conservative views, transgress certain social mores or diktats.
2. Social boycotts imposed by "caste panchayats" result in deprivation of basic
human rights and ostracisation of those who are boycotted. This is done through planned
and systematic social exclusion from not just religious ceremonies and gatherings, but also
by placing restrictions on physical and social mobility, imposition of physical and social
segregation and isolation, denial of employment, and even goes to the extent of halting sale
of necessities of life, such as food and water. In a free and fair society, there must be no space
or opportunity given for such extrajudicial actions that hamper an individual, or a community's
right to life and personal liberty. The existence of social boycotts to this very day, has led to
psychological, physiological and economic impact and trauma on marginalised communities.
It is necessary to criminalize such actions that go against the spirit of our Constitution.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. FAUZIA  KHAN
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Dr. Fauzia Khan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2026RS(S3)—07-02-2022.