1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill  No.  II of  2008
THE DWELLERS OF SLUMS AND JHUGGI CLUSTERS
(WELFARE AND BASIC AMENITIES) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures to be undertaken by the State and for the basic amenities
like sanitation, potable water , electricity, healthcare, toilets and garbage
management etc. to the poverty stricken dwellers of slums and jhuggi clusters to be
provided by the appropriate Government and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty- ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Dwellers of Slums and Jhuggi Clusters (Welfare and
Basic Amenities) Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Jhuggi clusters" means an area consisting of Jhuggies which are generally
built with mud, metal or wood having thatched roof or tin shed or polythene covering
roof thereof;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) “slum” includes an area consisting of unplanned and badly built, overcrowded
houses with unhygienic atmosphere and without civic amenities and such other areas
declared as slums by the appropriate Government.
3. (1) The Central Govenment shall, as soon as may be, formulate a national policy for
betterment, upkeep, removal and rehabilitation for the slums and Jhuggi clusters and also for
the welfare measures for the poor people who have to live therein particularly in the
Metropolitan and other cities.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the welfare
and betterment measures referred to therein may provide for,—
(a) basic civic amenities like potable water supply, electricity for dwelling units
and road lights, sewerage, toilets with flush or Sulabh types both individual as well as
community toilets, drainage, road facility in the streets and surroundings, sanitation,
garbage clearance and dumping bins and such other amenities as may be prescribed;
(b) healthcare facilities for the inhabitants;
(c) educational facilities for the children;
(d) adequate Public Distribution  System facilities;
(e) transport facilities; and
(f) such other provisions as the Central Government may deem necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The National Policy so formulated under this Section shall be uniformly implemented
throughout the country by the appropriate Government.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force the
appropriate Government with a view to implementing welfare measures for the dwellers of
Slums and Jhuggi cluster under this Act shall,—
(a) take humane approach by recognizing the right to use Government land in
case Jhuggis have been built thereon till alternative living arrangements are made
by such Government for the dwellers;
(b) construct such number of appropriate dwelling units with attached kitchen,
bathroom, toilets, etc. and allot them to the dwellers with such terms and conditions
and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) the dwelling units so constructed shall be provided with all civic amenities
like potable water, sewerage system, electricity, toilets, drainage, road passage,
sanitation, park, healthcare and such other amenities to the residents of such dwelling
units;
(d) not remove or demolish any slum or jhuggi cluster which is in existence for
more than a year without making alternative arrangement of dwelling units for the
residents of such slums or jhuggi cluster, as the case may be;
(e) provide necessary healthcare through mobile units and distribute free of
costs mosquito nets and repellants and fumigate the clusters from time to time to
save the residents from vector borne diseases like malaria, dengue,  encephalitis etc.
Definitions.
National
Policy for
slums and
jhuggi clusters.
5
10
15
20
25
Miscellaneous
provisions in
respect of
Slums and
Jhuggi clusters.
30
35
40
45

3
(f) render necessary help in cash and kind and advice for the self employment
of the dwellers of slums and jhuggi clusters in such manner as may be prescribed;
(g) make such other provisions as the appropriate Government may deem
necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds from time to time for carrying out the provisions of
this Act.
6. The provisions of this Act and of rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matter dealt
with in this Act.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the
difficulty and the Government of a State shall be guided by such directions and instructions
on questions of policy as may be given to it by the Central Government.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Act to have
ovrerriding
effect.
Power to
remove
difficulties and
issue
directions.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Millions of people in our vast country particularly in the metropolitans and other
urban areas languish in slums and jhuggi clusters in most inhuman conditions without civic
amenities like water, sanitation, electricity, toilets, sewerage, healthcare and so on so forth.
These slums and jhuggi clusters can be seen in all parts of the urban areas and even the
national capital is not an exception in this regard. Unfortunately, the number of slums and
jhuggi clusters is increasing manifold because of exodus from rural areas to urban areas in
search of employment and livelihood and these poor people have no option but to find
shelter in slums or jhuggi clusters or even on pavements under the sky and live in stinking
and inhuman conditions inviting and falling victims to various fatal diseases. But
unfortunately, we do not have national policy on slums and jhuggi clusters which can be
implemented uniformally throughout the country.
Ours is a welfare state and it is the duty of the Central and State Governments to
initiate welfare measures for the inhabitants of the slums and jhuggi clusters because they
too are the citizens of this great nation and the slums and jhuggi clusters too  should be
provided the basic civic amenities like potable water, sewerage system, electricity, toilets,
dainage, roads and clean streets, sanitation facilities, healthcare facilities, educational facilities,
park, etc. so that the inhabitants lead a healthy and good life in such areas. Since the States
can not bear the expenditure, the Central Government should provide requisite funds to
improve the situation in the slums and jhuggi clusters.
Hence this Bill.
A. VIJAYARAGHAVAN
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for various facilities including housing facility to the Slum
and Jhuggi cluster dwellers. Clause 5 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to
provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, if enacted will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
fifteen thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees ten thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures to be undertaken by the State and for the basic amenities
like sanitation, potable water, electricity, healthcare, toilets and garbage management
etc. to the poverty stricken dwellers of slums and jhuggi clusters to be provided by the
appropriate Government and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri A. Vijayaraghavan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4743RS(S-5)—29-12-2008.