1
THE UNIFORM CIVIL CODE IN INDIA BILL, 2020
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the National Inspection and Investigation Committee for
preparation of Uniform Civil Code and its implementation throughout the territory
of India and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Uniform Civil Code in India Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Goverment may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Uniform Civil Code” means the common civil code or common law for every
citizen residing in India irrespective of religion and caste;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. II of 2020
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022
5

2
(b) “Committee” means the National Inspection and Investigation Committee
constituted under section 3; and
(c) “prescribed”  means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of six months from the coming
into force of this Act, constitute a Committee to be known as the National Inspection and
Investigation Committee for the purpose of preparation of Uniform Civil Code and its
implementation in the country.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a retired Chief Justice of India to be nominated
by the Central Government in such manner, as may be prescribed;
(b) the Union Minister of Home Affairs—ex-officio member;
(c) the Union Minister of Law and Justice—ex-officio member;
(d) two members who are retired Chief Justices of the High Courts, to be
nominated by the Central Government in such manner, as may be prescribed;
(e) one member, to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner, as
may be prescribed, from amongst persons of eminence having adequate knowledge
and experience in law;
(f) one member, to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner,
as may be prescribed, from amongst officers of the Indian Administrative
Service—ex-officio Secretary;
(3) The Chirperson and the member of the Committee shall hold office for a period of
three years.
(4) The Salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of Officers and staff to the
Committee, as may be necessary, for its efficient functioning.
(6) The Committee shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the Committee to take such steps, as it may deem
appropriate, for the codification and implementation on the Uniform Civil Code in the
country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Committee
shall ensure:—
(a) the implementation of Uniform Civil Code in entire geographical territory of
India;
(b) the applicability of the Uniform Civil Code for marriage, divorce, succession,
adoption, guardianship and partition of land and assets on all citizens without any
discrimination;
(c) right to equality before law as guaranteed under article 14 and prohibition of
discrimination of any citizen on grounds of religion, race caste, sex or place of birth
provided under article 15 of the Constitution;
(d) gender equality in implementation of the Uniform Civil Code; and
(e) substitution of the personal laws or laws based on religious texts and
traditions by Uniform Civil Code.
Constitution
of the
National
Inspection and
Investigation
Committee.
Functions of
the
Committee.
5
10
20
25
15
30
35
40

3
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf,  provide adequate funds to the Committee for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provision
of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, While it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds
to the
Commmittee.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
20
15

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In 1840, on the basis of Lex Loci Report, Uniform Law was framed for crimes, evidences
and contract but some personal laws of the Hindus and the Muslims were left out. On  the
other hand, the British Indian Judiciary had facilitated uniform application by the British
Judges under the English Laws. Besides, in those days many social reformers were voicing
to make laws to do away with the discrimination against women done under the Sati and
other religious customs.
In the Constituent Assembly, while on the one hand there were people like  Dr. B.R.
Ambedkar who desired reform in the society and wanted to accept the Uniform Civil Code,
there were also Muslim representatives who took side to retaining the Personal Laws based
on religious enshrines. As a result, regarding the Uniform Civil Code, only one line could be
added as article 44 under Part IV as Directive Principles of State Policy in the Constitution. In
this article it is stated that the State shall endeavour to secure for citizens a Uniform Civil
Code throughout the territory of India. Since the Uniform Civil Code has been included in
the Directive Principles of State Policy of the State, hence this cannot be enforced.
Besides, no Government showed proper will power to implement these constitutional
provisions, because the minorities, especially the Muslims believed that the Unifom Civil
Code will lead to the violation of their personal laws. Hence, only to compile the Hindu Laws,
the Acts like the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the Hindu Succession Act 1956, the Hindu
Minority and guardianship  Act, 1956 and the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956
were enacted. In these Acts along with the Buddhist, Sikh, Jain, laws related to different
religious communities of the Hindus are included vide which women have been given right
to divorce and succession and caste has been termed irrelevant for marriage. Also, polygamy
has been done away with.
In the present context, it seems our country is divided into three classes on Uniform
Civil Code, namely political, social and religious. In the Shah Bano Case, the Supreme Court
decided that section 125 of the Code of Crimical Procedure  1973 is applicable to all irrespective
of religion, caste or community. The court directed that Shah Bano must be provided with
living expenses. The then Chief Justice Y.V. Chandrachud said that Uniform Civil Code
would end the dissimilarities in the Indian law which would help in establishing national
unity. Hence, the Supreme Court had observed that the Parliament may make law related to
the Uniform Civil Code.
Sarla Mudgal Case vs. the Union of India is the second example vide which the
Supreme Court under article 44 had again directed the Government. The Supreme Court said
that adopting Islam for marriage is a misuse of the personal laws. It said that a Hindu
marriage can be dissolved only under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 which means after
adopting Islam the marriage done thereafter cannot be dissolved under the Hindu Marriage
Act and it is a crime under section 494(5) of the Indian Penal Code.
In John Vellamettam vs. Union of India, the Suprme Court declared the section 118 of
the Indian Succession Act, 1925 as unconstitutional. The then Chief Justice of India Justice
Khare observed that “it is mentioned in article 44 that the State will strive to provide Uniform
Civil Code to all citizens in its entire territory, but it is a matter of regret that article 44 has not
been given affect to. He also opined that a Uniform Civil Code would help the cause of
national integration by removing the contradictions on the grounds of ideologies.
The decision to implement the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act
seems to be a step towards Uniform Civil Code since this Act permits the people of muslim
community to adopt children whereas Muslims are not permitted or allowed to adopt children
under their personal laws. Recently, the Supreme Court has again asked the Government to

5
implement the Uniform Civil Code so as to end gender inequality and wrong traditions
prevalent under the personal laws.
Under the Uniform Civil Code a collection of laws will be prepared which will protect
the personal  rights of all citizens without considering the religion, which seems to be the
need of the   hour. In reality this is the foundation stone of secularism. Such prograssive
reforms will not only help  to end discrimination against women but also help in strengthening
the secular structure and encourage integrity. In fact our social system is replete with injustice,
discrimination and corruption which is in conflict with our fundamental rights, hence it
needs to be reformed. Already there is Penal Code in our country which is equally applicable
to all without considering the religion, caste and domicile. But there is no uniform law in our
country with regard to divorce and succession and these subjects are controlled by the
personal laws. Hence the Uniform Civil Code should be ensured to all citizens residing in
areas where the population of entire geographical area resides.
Hence, this Bill.
KIRODI  LAL  MEENA.

6
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National Inspection and Inves-
tigation Committee. It also provides for the salary and allowances of the Chairperson, mem-
bers, officers and staff of the Committee. Clause 5  provides that the Central Government
shall provide adequate funds to the Committee. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
of about rupees five hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated  Fund of India
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules   relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the National Inspection and Investigation Committee for
preparation of Uniform Civil Code and its implementation throughout the territory
of India and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1767RS(S3)—12-12-2022.