D:\BILLS5\GAZ\RS\4794RS.PM5
1
Penalty.
Power to make
rules.
Short title, extent
and commence-
ment.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
THE  REGULATION  OF  COMPUTER  TRAINING  CENTRES
BILL, 2002
A
BILL
to provide for proper regulation of computer training centres and banning of all the
computer training centres functioning in the country without registration from the
Government.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Regulation of Computer Training Centres Act, 2002.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. With effect from such date as the Central Government may by notification appoint
in this behalf, no computer training centre shall operate in the country without registration in
the manner prescribed by the Central Government in this behalf.
3. Whoever contravenes the provision of section 2 shall liable to be punished with
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two months or with fine of rupees one lakh, or with
both.
4. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Bill No. II of 2002
Regulation of
Computer Train-
ing Centres.
5
10

D:\BILLS5\GAZ\RS\4794RS.PM5
2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are a number of computer training centres at present operating in the country
without any Government's permission or registration. These computer training centres after
advertising in the newspapers enroll the students by charging thousands of rupees. Many
of these institutions have closed down their activities after collecting money from the stu-
dents. These institutions are charging different rates from students on different type of
computer education. Many of these institutions have cheated the students and spoiled their
career as after receiving the hefty amount they locked their activities within three four
months. This has created great unrest among the students community. Their career has been
marred and these students have been  agitating. Thus, there is a need of closing down all
these computer training centres and award severe punishment to those who operate such
centres in the country without the permission of the Government.
Hence, this Bill.
RUMANDLA  RAMACHANDRAIAH

D:\BILLS5\GAZ\RS\4794RS.PM5
3
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for proper regulation of computer training centres and banning of all the
computer training centres functioning in the country without registration from the
Government.
————
(Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah, M.P.)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—4794RS—05.02.2002.