1
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 45E of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, in sub-section ( 2), after
clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted namely:—
"(ca) the mandatory disclosure and publication within seven months upon expiry
of each financial year by the Bank and by each banking company, notwithstanding anything
to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force or in any instrument regulating
the constitution thereof or in any agreement executed by it, relating to the secrecy of its
dealings with its clients including borrowers, of the names and full details of credit information
of those defaulting borrowers whose loans or advances or other credit facilities with an asset
value of five crore rupees or above, provided by any banking company has been written off
or classified as a Doubtful or Loss Asset in that financial year:
Provided that the publication of credit information of defaulting borrowers shall be
caused by publishing the notice in a newspaper published in English language at national
level and in a newspaper published in a vernacular language which is in circulation in those
States where the borrower ordinarily resides or the principal office of the borrower is situated,
apart from publishing on the websites of the Bank and the banking company concerned.".
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. II of 2023
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON  8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Amendment of
section 45E.
2 of 1934. 5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The modern democratic system rests on the twin pillars of public funding and public 
trust. In an answer tabled by the Ministry of Finance in the Rajya Sabha on 13th December
 
2022, it was conveyed that a staggering amount to the tune of 10,09,510 crore rupees had 
been written off by the Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) during the last five financial 
years, whereas the recovery in the written-off loans during the same period was a paltry sum 
of 1,32,036 crore rupees. In financial year 2021-22 alone, a humongous sum of 1,74,966 crore 
rupees was written off by SCBs, while the recovery thereon during the said period was a 
meagre sum of 33,534 crore rupees.
Section 45E of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 stipulates that any credit information 
contained in statements submitted to or furnished by the Reserve Bank to the banking 
companies shall be treated as confidential. 
As a consequence, the details of top defaulters 
are not available to the public at large. Major corporate giants, private individuals and 
industrialists benefit from this absence of such provisions in the law, while the ordinary 
working-class and middle-class peop
le mostly adhere to the stipulated loan conditions. As 
the adage goes 'sunlight is the best disinfectant', publishing the details of the wilful bigwig 
defaulters in the public domain will, to a large extent, act as a deterrent of such un toward 
classification.
As per RBI guidelines, Non-Performing Assets (NP As), including inter -alia,  those in 
respect of which full provisioning has been made on completion of four years, are removed 
from the balance-sheet of the Bank concerned by way of write-off. Even though it is claimed 
that Banks pursue recovery actions initiated in written-off accounts by filing suits in civil 
courts or Debts Recovery Tribunals, or in the National Company Law Tribunal under the 
I
nsolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, SCBs have only managed to recover a paltry sum of 
1,32,036 crore rupees in the last five financial years as compared to the colossal 
10,09,510 crore rupees being written off by SCBs during the same period. It is equally 
pertinent to note that there is a substantial increase in the quantum of  amounts written off 
over the years as evident from the fact that the amount written off from 01.04.2014 till 
31.03.2019 had been 6,19,244 crore rupees for public and private sector Banks combined.
In the light of the above, there is a pressing need to amend section 45E of the Reserve 
Bank of India 
Act, 1934 so as to publish the details of borrower-wise credit information in the 
public domain, of those defaulting borrowers whose loans or advances or other credit facilities 
provided by any banking companies has been written off or classified as a Doubtful or Loss 
Asset with an asset value of five crore rupees or above, thus infusing greater transparency 
and public confidence in the fiscal management of the nation.
The Bill seeks to achieve the said objectives.
JOHN BRITTAS.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934
ACT NO. 2 OF 1934
45E. (1) Any credit information contained in any statement submitted by a banking
company under section 45C or furnished by the Bank to any banking company under section
45D, shall be treated as confidential and shall not, except for the purposes of this Chapter, be
published or otherwise disclosed.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to—
(a) the disclosure by any banking company, with the previous permission of the
Bank, of any information furnished to the Bank under section 45C;
(b) the publication by the Bank, if it considers necessary in the public interest so
to do, of any information collected by it under section 45C, in such consolidated form
as it may think fit without disclosing the name of any banking company or its borrowers;
(c) the disclosure or publication by the banking company or by the Bank of any
credit information to any other banking company or in accordance with the practice 
and usage customary among bankers or as permitted or required under any other law;
(
d) the disclosures of any credit information under the Credit Information
Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 :
Provided that any credit information received by a banking company under this clause
shall not be published except in accordance with the practice and usage customary among
bankers or as permitted or required under any other law.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no
court, tribunal or other authority shall compel the Bank or any banking company to produce
or to give inspection of any statement submitted by that banking company under section
45C or to disclose any credit information furnished by the Bank to that banking company
under section 45 D.
Disclosure of
information
prohibited.
30 of 2005.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
————
(Dr. John Brittas, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—101—14.12.2023.