THE  FREEDOM  FIGHTERS  AND  THEIR  FAMILIES
(WELFARE)  BILL,  2007
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of freedom fighters and their families and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Freedom Fighters and their Families (Welfare)
Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act,  unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government.
(b) "family" means the family members of a freedom fighter and his dependants.
(c) "freedom fighter" means any leader or martyr or a patriot who has inspired
national struggle for  independence of the country.
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 16TH MARCH, 2007.
Bill NO. II of 2007
Definitions.
5
10

2
3. The Central Government shall establish an Authority to be known as the
"Freedom Fighters Welfare Authority" which shall have offices in  every district of
the country for the purpose of performing functions assigned under this Act.
4. The functions  of the Authority shall be,—
(i) to register all freedom fighters and the members of their families  in the
country;
(ii) to formulate plans and prepare scheme for their welfare;
(iii) to identify the names that have been illegally included in the list of
freedom fighters and to remove them from the list; and
(iv) to identify persons using factually incorrect statements about freedom
fighters or making disgraceful and insulting remarks about them or publishing
such comments by distorting facts in a wrong manner in a book or press or any
other media and ensuring action against them.
5. The appropriate Government shall provide every freedom fighter and his family
and dependants registered with the Freedom Fighters Welfare Authority the following
facilities:—
(a) fifteen thousand rupees per month in the form of financial assistance
for their subsistence  which shall be linked to the Subsistence Expenditure Index
so as to ensure a decent standard of livelihood for freedom fighters and their
family members;
(b) free medical assistance;
(c) free accommodation according to the needs;
(d) free education including technical education for the dependants of the
freedom fighters;
(e) remunerative employment;
(f) professional training;
(g) free travel facilities in AC first class by Railways and Government and
Private owned transport; and
(h) such other facilities, as are necessary for their appropriate progress and
welfare.
6. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
  shal
Freedom
Fighters
Welfare
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
Facilities to be
provided to
freedom
fighters, etc.
Power to make
rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Freedom fighters have played an important role in the liberation of our country. It is
only because of the struggle of freedom fighters that we are the citizens of a free India
today. Today freedom fighters, who made great sacrifices putting their lives at stake and
inspired the country for freedom, are leading a very hard life in an independent India. The
pension that they receive from Government is very meagre. They are not able to sustain
themselves properly with the amount of pension they are receiving. They have been facing
financial hardship. They do not have any housing facility for themselves or their dependant
children and they are unable to get any special financial help for the treatment of chronic
diseases as a result of which they die for want of proper treatment.
Further writers are presenting distorted facts about freedom fighters in Government
and private publications. There are many  authors  who do not have complete and correct
information about freedom fighters, yet they write unrealistic articles about freedom fighters.
They are presenting wrong facts about freedom fighters and making illusive statements, as
a result of which the citizens of the country including the families of freedom fighters are
suffering mental agony. This not only causes disrespect and insult to the freedom fighters,
but also brings disgrace to the nation. Even today, there are many names in the list of freedom
fighters who had no connection with the freedom struggle, but still their names have been
included in the list in an illegal manner.
It is, therefore, necessary to bring legislation for the welfare and safeguard of freedom
fighters and their families.
Hence this Bill.
JAI  PARKASH  AGGARW AL
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of "Freedom Fighter Welfare
Authority" by the Central Government with Offices in every district. Clause 4 provide that
each Freedom Fighter Welfare Authority shall formulate plans and prepare schemes for the
welfare of freedom fighters and their families and shall register the names of all the freedom
fighters and the members of their families living under their jurisdiction. Clause 5 provides
for grant of a help of rupees fifteen thousand per month for the sustenance of all the freedom
fighters and their dependants, free medical assistance and such other facilities, as are necessary
for their appropriate development and welfare, etc.
The enactment of the Bill would, therefore, involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that it may involve a recurring expenditure to the tune of
three hundred crore per annum approximately.
It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees sixty crore.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since these rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of freedom fighters and their families and for matters
connected  therewith.
————
(Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1211RS(S-5)—16.03.2007.