THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 330 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘330A. (1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for the Other
Backward Clases.
(2) The number of seats reserved in any State or Union territory for the Other
Backward Classes under clause (1) shall bear, as nerly as may be, the same proportion
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new article
330A.
Bill No. II of 2018
Reservation of
seats for Other
Backward
Classes in the
House of the
people.
5
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 2ND FEBRUARY, 2018

2
to the total number of seats allotted to that State or Union territory in the House of the
People as the population of the Other backward Classes in the State or Union territory
or part of the State or Union territory, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are
so reserved, bears to the total population of the State or Union territory.
Explanation.— In this article, the expression ‘‘population’’ means the population
as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published.’’
3. After article 332 of  the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘332A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Other Backward Classes in the
Legislative Assembly of every State.
(2) The number of seats reserved in any State for the Other Backward Classes
under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total
number of seats in the Legislative Assembly as the population of the Other Backward
Classes in the State in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total
population of the State.
Explanation.—  In this article, the expression ‘‘population’’ means the population
as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published.’’
4. In article 334 of the Constitution, in clause (a), for the words ‘‘the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes’’, the words ‘‘the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
Other Backward Classes’’ shall be substituted.
5. After article 342 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘342A. (1) The President may with respect to any State or Union Territory, and
where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor therefor, by public notification,
specify the soially and educationally backward classes which shall for the purposes of
this Constitution be deemed to be the Other Backward Classes in relation to that State
or Union Territory, as the case may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the Central List of Other
Backward Classes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any socially and
educationally backward class, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the
said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.’’
6. The amendments made to the Constitution, by this Act, shall not affect any
representation in the House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until the
dissolution of the House or Assembly, as the case may be, in existence at the commencement
of this Act.
Insertion of
new article
332A.
Amendment
of article 334.
Insertion of new
article 342A.
Amendment
not affect the
representation
in the House
of the People
or Legislative
Assembly of a
State until the
dissolution of
the House or
Assembly.
Other
Backward
Classes.
Reservation of
seats for Other
Backward
Classes in the
Legislative
Assemblies of
the State.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In terms of the principles of affirmative action enabled under the Constitution  to
ameliorate the conditions of Other Backward Classes (OBC), and Scheduled Castes (SCs)
and Scheduled Tribes (STs) periodic measures have been taken by the successive
Governments to improve their lot. However, in the law-making bodies of the State, such
OBCs do not secure representation proportionate to their population.
2. The representation of the citizens from socially and educationally backward classes
in the elected bodies at the Centre and State remains significantly incongruent with the
proportion of such individuals in the total population. Only 18 per cent and 20 per cent of the
total members elected were from the Other Backward Classes in the 2009 and 2014 Lok Sabha
elections respectively, while the population of the Other Backward Classes is estimated to be
around 40-55 percent of the total population.
3. There has also been a lack of proportional measures to assess and improve the
social, educational and financial conditions of the Other Backward Classes in the country.
While the Socio Economic and Caste Census 2011 contained data regarding the development
metrics of people belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, such data has
not been published about the people belonging to the Other Backward Classes despite their
relatively large population, Subsequently serious doubt is cast on the adequacy of the
current measures taken by the Government to improve the conditions of socially and
educationally backward classes.
4. The first step in advancing the rights of the people belonging to the Other Backwards
Classes is ensuring a proportionate representation to the people in the representative bodies,
i.e. the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of the State.
Hence, this Bill.
V. VIJAYASAI  REDDY
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
334.  Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the provisions
of this Constitution relating to—
(a) the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States; and
(b) the representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of the People
and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States by nomination, shall cease to have
effect on the expiration of a period of seventy years from the commencement of
this Constitution:
Provided that nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the House
of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until the dissolution of the then
existing House of Assembly, as the case may be.
* * * * *
4
Reservation
of seats and
special
representation
to cease after
seventy years.

MGIPMRND—3962RS(S3)—02-02-2018.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy, M.P.)