AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026 
Bill No. II of 2026 
THE TEMPLE AUTONOMY, GOVERNANCE AND 
CULTURAL HERITAGE MANAGEMENT  
BILL, 2026 
___________________ 
AR
RANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II 
CONSTITUTIONAL PRINCIPLES AND LIMITS OF REGULATION 
3. Preservation of religious autonomy.
4. Scope of permissible regulation.
5. Non-interference in religious matters.
CHA
PTER III 
INDEPENDENT TEMPLE MANAGEMENT BOARDS 
6. Constitution of Independent Temple Management Boards.
7. Disqualifications.
8. Tenure and removal.
9. Transfer of administrative control to the Boards.
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND TRANSPARENCY 
10. Ring-fencing of temple income.
11. Audit of temples.
12. Productive utilization of assets.
13. Prohibition on alienation.
CHAPTER V 
C
ULTURAL AND ARCHITECTURAL HERITAGE PROTECTION 
14. Protection of rituals and traditions.
15. Architectural safeguards.

(ii) 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER VI 
NATIONAL TEMPLE HERITAGE AUTHORITY 
16. Establishment of the National Temple Heritage Authority.
17. Composition of the Authority.
18. Functions of the Authority.
19. Powers of the Authority.
20. Power to make regulations.
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCE AND PENALTIES 
21. Misappropriation of temple funds.
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
22. Central Government to provide funds.
23. Accounts and audit.
24. Protection of action taken in good faith.
25. Overriding effect of the Act.
26. Power to make rules.
27. Power to remove difficulties.
28. Savings.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026 
Bill No. II of 2026 
THE TEMPLE AUTONOMY, GOVERNANCE AND 
CULTURAL HERITAGE MANAGEMENT 
BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the constitutional guarantee of religious autonomy under 
articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution of India by providing a national 
framework for autonomous, transparent, community-led and  
professionally governed management of Hindu temples  
and religious endowments; to ensure protection of  
India’s temple heritage, rituals and traditions;  
to secure financial integrity and optimal 
 utilisation of temple assets for religious  
and community welfare purposes;  
and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental  
thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:– 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Temple Autonomy, Governance and Cultural
Heritage Management Act, 2026.
(2) I t shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Definitions.  2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “Agamas” means the canonical texts governing temple rituals, 
architecture, administration, and religious practices within Hindu 
traditions; 
(b) “Authority” means the National Temple Heritage Authority 
established under section 16 of this Act; 
(c) “Board” means the Independent Temple Management Board 
constituted under section 6 of this Act ; 
(d) “denominational representatives” includes hereditary trustees, 
traditional custodians, priests, maths or recognised sectarian bodies 
having a historical or traditional interest in the temple; 
(e) “heritage temple” means a temple of archaeological, historical, 
architectural, or cultural importance, as may be notified by the Central 
Government or by the State Government with the approval of the 
Central Government; 
(f) “large temple” means a temple whose average annual gross 
income exceeds rupees one hundred crore over the preceding three 
financial years, as may be notified by the Central Government; 
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(h) “temple” means a public Hindu religious institution dedicated 
to the worship of a Hindu deity, including temples, maths , 
devasthanams, and allied religious endowments , as may be notified by 
the Central Government; 
(i) “temple assets” includes all movable and immovable 
properties, which may include, but not limited to, offerings, funds, 
securities, jewellery, lands, buildings, records, and rights belonging to 
or endowed to a temple. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
   CHAPTER II 
CONSTITUTIONAL PRINCIPLES AND LIMITS OF REGULATION 
  
Preservation of 
religious 
autonomy. 
 3. (1) A notification of temples by the Central Government under this Act shall 
recognise Hindu temples as religious institutions entitled to autonomy in 
matters of religion, rituals, and internal governance. 
(2) Every temple, on being notified under this Act, shall be recognized as 
religious institutions entitled to autonomy in matters of religion, rituals, and 
internal governance. 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
Scope of 
permissible 
regulation. 
 4. (1) The regulations under this Act shall not extend to theological 
interpretations or essential religious practices. 
(2) The regulatory powers exercised under this Act shall be limited to:— 
(a) ensuring financial accountability and transparency; 
(b) prevention of mismanagement or misappropriation; 
(c) protection and safeguarding of temple property; and 
(d) conservation of cultural and architectural heritage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
Non-
interference in 
religious 
matters. 
 5. No authority constituted under this Act shall:— 
(a) alter or modify the established rituals, customs or modes of 
worship; or 
(b) interfere with Agamic prescriptions; or 
(c) appoint or remove priests except in accordance with 
established denominational practice. 
 
 
 
45 
 

3 
 
   CHAPTER III 
INDEPENDENT TEMPLE MANAGEMENT BOARDS 
  
  
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
6. (1) Every temple shall be governed by an Independent Temple 
Management Board, which shall be constituted by the Authority in 
accordance with the provisions of section 18 of this Act.  
(2) The Board shall be responsible for the administration, management 
and governance of the temple in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act. 
(3) The Board shall consist of the following members:— 
(a) such number of denominational representatives, as may be 
prescribed; 
(b) one chartered accountant, possessing such qualifications 
and experience as may be prescribed; 
(c) one person having expertise in law; 
(d) one heritage conservationist, whose inclusion shall be 
mandatory in respect of heritage temples; 
(e) one representative of employees of the temple. 
(4) The members of the Board shall elect from amongst themselves a 
Chairperson. 
(5) The manner of appointment, remuneration, allowances and other 
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and members shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 
(6) The Board shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 
 Constitution of 
Independent 
Temple 
Management 
Boards. 
  
25 
7. No person shall be eligible for appointment as a Chairperson or member of a 
Board if such person:— 
(a) is a serving government officer; or 
(b) holds any political office; or 
(c) has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude. 
 Disqualifications. 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
8. (1) The Chairperson and members of the Board shall hold office for a term of 
five years. 
(2) A member or Chairperson of the Board shall be removed only in the event 
of approved misconduct, incapacity, or financial irregularity, after due 
inquiry, conducted in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 Tenure and 
removal. 
  
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
9. 
 
(1) The transfer of administrative control of temples under State 
administration to the Boards constituted under section 6 of this Act shall be 
carried out in such manner, as may be prescribed, which shall not ordinarily 
exceed twelve months from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Upon such transfer:  
(a) the management of temple assets shall vest in the Board;  
(b) the officers of the State Government shall cease to exercise 
any executive or administrative control over such temple; 
(c) all existing records, accounts, and properties shall be handed 
over intact to the Board; and 
(d) all legal proceedings pending immediately before such transfer 
shall continue in the name of the temple.  
 Transfer of 
administrative 
control to the 
Boards. 

4 
 
   CHAPTER IV 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND TRANSPARENCY 
  
Ring-fencing 
of temple 
income. 
 10. (1) The Board shall manage and administer  the income of a temple which 
shall be solely utilised for: — 
(a) arrangement for the proper performance of worship and rituals 
at the temple and to provide facilities to the pilgrims; 
(b) maintenance, conservation and administration, which shall 
include developmental activities concerning the area of the temple and 
its surroundings including construction of buildings;  
(c) education, healthcare,  annadanam, and charitable activities 
and for such other related purposes as may be prescribed. 
(2) No part of the income of a temple shall be credited to the Consolidated 
Fund of India or of any State. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Audit of 
temples. 
 11. Every temple shall be subject to a mandatory annual audit to be conducted by 
an independent auditor in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the large temples shall also be subject to  statutory audit, 
social audit as well as  heritage impact audit, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
 
15 
 
Productive 
utilization of 
assets. 
 12. (1) Subject to the standards or regulations made by the Authority,  the assets 
of temple lying idle or underutilised may be utilised for: — 
(a) pilgrim amenities and community welfare purposes; 
(b) cultural centres; and 
(c) skill development and livelihood programmes. 
(2) Any leasing of temple assets shall be transparent and time-bound. 
 
20 
 
Prohibition on 
alienation. 
 13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, no permanent alienation of temple property  shall be effected except 
with the prior sanction of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
25  
   CHAPTER V 
CULTURAL AND ARCHITECTURAL HERITAGE PROTECTION 
  
Protection of 
rituals and 
traditions. 
 14.  Every Board shall ensure the continuity and protection of: 
(a) Agamic rituals; 
(b) festivals; and 
(c) oral and textual traditions 
 associated with the temple. 
30  
Architectural 
safeguards. 
 15. (1) No person or authority shall affect any structural alteration  without 
obtaining prior heritage clearance in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) Every restoration work in a temple,  shall conform to the recognized 
conservation principles and shall prioritise authenticity over modernisation. 
35  
   CHAPTER VI 
NATIONAL TEMPLE HERITAGE AUTHORITY 
 
 
40 
 
Establishment of 
the National 
Temple Heritage 
Authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish an Authority to be known as the National Temple Heritage 
Authority to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the 
functions assigned to it, under this Act. 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and 
a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 

5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and 
be sued. 
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at such place in the country as 
the Central Government may notify in the Official Gazette. 
(4) The Authority may, with the approval of the Central Government, 
establish its offices at such other places within the country, as it may deem 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
  
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
17. (1) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely: 
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence in 
constitutional law, public administration, heritage conservation or 
religious endowment governance; 
(b) two members having recognised expertise in temple 
architecture, archaeology, or heritage conservation; 
(c) one member having expertise in financial management, 
audit, or trust governance; 
(d) one member, who shall be a scholar of Hindu Agamas or 
traditional temple systems; 
(e) one member representing temple management boards on a 
rotational basis; 
(f) one ex officio member nominated by the Union Ministry of 
Culture; 
(g) one ex officio member nominated by the Union Ministry of 
Law and Justice. 
(2) The Chairperson and members shall be appointed by the Central 
Government on the recommendation of a Selection  Committee 
constituted for such purpose in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The term of office of, salaries and allowances payable to, other terms 
and conditions of service of, resignation by and removal of the 
Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed: 
Provided that removal shall only be for proved misbehaviour or 
incapacity after due inquiry conducted in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 Composition 
of the 
Authority. 
  
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
18.  The Authority shall perform the following functions, namely:— 
(a) to appoint, constitute and regulate the  Boards, constituted 
under section 6, with the prior approval of the Central Government, in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, and to appoint members of 
such Boards by notification in the Official Gazette, in a transparent 
manner ensuring that the composition of each Board complies with the 
eligibility conditions, denominational representation and professional 
requirements specified under this Act; 
(b) to frame and notify minimum governance standards for 
Independent Temple Management Boards, including norms relating to 
transparency, accounting, ethical administration and management of 
conflict of interest, and  to issue advisory guidelines  on professional 
management practices consistent with denominational autonomy. 
(c) to establish and maintain a comprehensive, publicly 
accessible National Digital Temple Registry containing 
comprehensive information relating to temples and religious 
endowments, including details of temple assets and properties, 
management structures, audited financial statements, heritage 
classification and conservation status, and to ensure digitisation of 
records, inventories, and archival material relating to temples; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Functions of 
the Authority. 

6 
 
(d) to discharge heritage protection and advisory role by: 
(i) advising the  Boards on conservation, restoration and 
preservation of architectural and intangible cultural heritage; 
(ii) coordinating with archaeological and heritage authorities 
for protection of ancient temples; and 
(iii) promoting best practices in conservation consistent with 
Agamic prescriptions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Powers of the 
Authority. 
 19.  The Authority may, for the purpose of discharging its functions, 
(a) call for information, records or reports from any Board; and 
(b) issue advisory directions to Boards for rectification of systemic 
deficiencies: 
Provided that the Authority shall not exercise any executive, 
religious or ritual control over temples and shall also not supersede or 
dissolve any Board. 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Power to make 
regulations. 
 20. The Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, make 
regulations consistent with this Act to carry out its functions, by notification 
in the Official Gazette. 
15  
   CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCE AND PENALTIES 
  
Misappropriation 
of temple funds. 
 21. Any person who commits misappropriation of temple funds shall be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to seven years and with 
fine, or with both.  
20  
   CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
  
Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 
 22. 
 
 
The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Authority, for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. 
25  
Accounts and 
audit. 
 23. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authority, as audited and certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India or any other person appointed by him in this 
behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually by 
the Authority to the Central Government, which shall cause t he same to be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
 24. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Board or the Authority 
or its members or its officers for actions taken in good faith in pursuance of 
this Act or of any rules, regulations or orders made thereunder. 
  
Overriding 
effect of the 
Act. 
 25. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any  law relating to Hindu Religious and 
Charitable Endowments or any other law for the time being in force. 
40  
Power to make 
rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule or regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two 
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 

7 
5 
Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or 
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so  however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule or regulation. 
10 
27. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear 
to be necessary for removing the difficulty.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
15 
20 
25 
28. Nothing in this Act shall—
(a) be deemed to authorise any interference in matters of religious
doctrine, rituals, customs or denominational practices of any temple; 
(b) affect the operation of any law for the time being in force
relating to archaeological or heritage protection, conser vation or 
preservation of monuments or sites, insofar as such law is not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act; 
(c) affect the jurisdiction of any court, tribunal or other authority
in respect of any proceeding instituted or order passed prior to the 
commencement of this Act; or 
(d) invalidate anything done or any action taken in good faith
under any law relating to Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments 
before the commencement of this Act, insofar as such action is not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act. 
Savings. 

8 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
     Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution of India guarantee freedom of 
religion and confer upon every religious denomination, the right to manage its 
own affairs in matters of religion, to establish and maintain religious institutions 
and to administer property in accordance with law. 
     Notwithstanding these guarantees, the administration of Hindu religious 
institutions in several States continues to be governed by State-controlled 
statutory mechanisms under various Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments 
laws. Over time, such arrangements have resulted in excessive bureaucratic 
control over religious affairs, diversion of temple revenues for non -religious 
purposes, political intervention in temple administration and dilution of 
traditional Agamic, ritualistic and architectural practices. 
     In contrast, religious institutions of minority communities are governed 
under autonomous, community- led statutory framewor ks such as the Sikh 
Gurdwaras Act, 1925 and the Unified Waqf Management, Empowerment, 
Efficiency and Development Act, 1995. Comparative international practice also 
indicates that while States regulate religious institutions for financial 
accountability and  heritage protection, management is ordinarily vested in the 
religious community itself. 
     The Bill seeks to establish a uniform national framework to provide for 
autonomous, transparent and professionally governed management of Hindu 
temples and religious endowments, consistent with articles 25 and 26 of the 
Constitution. It aims to de -bureaucratise temple administration, ensure financial 
integrity and accountability, protect cultural and architectural heritage, and enable 
lawful and productive utilisation of temple assets for religious and community 
welfare purposes. The Bill does not seek to interfere with matters of religion or 
essential religious practices and confines regulation to secular aspects of 
administration and heritage protection. 
 H ence, this Bill.  
S
UJEET KUMAR. 

9 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
     Clause 6 of the Bill provides for constitution of Independent Temple 
Management Boards, its composition, salaries and allowances payable and other 
terms and conditions of services of the members of the Board. Clause 16 provides 
for the establishment of the National Temple Heritage Authority to exercise th e 
powers conferred upon and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act 
and clause 17 provides for its composition and the salaries and allowances 
payable to the Chairperson and Members thereof as well as the other terms and 
conditions of their service. Clause 18, sub- clause (c) provides for creation of a 
National Digital Temple Registry to establish and maintain comprehensive, 
publicly accessible details of temples and religious endowments, etc. 
    The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about 
rupees five crore would be incurred per annum from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 
     A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be 
involved. 

10 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the National Temple Heritage Authority to 
make regulations consistent with the proposed legislation to carry out its 
functions, with the prior approval of the Central Government. 
Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the Central Government  to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the proposed legislation. Clause 2 7 provides that the 
Central Government may make such provisions, by order, as may be necessary 
for removing any difficulty in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill. 
As the matters in respect of which the rules and regulations may be made  
relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 

 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
______________ 
A
BILL 
to give effect to the constitutional guarantee of religious autonomy under 
articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution of India by providing a national 
framework for autonomous, transparent, community-led and  
professionally governed management of Hindu temples  
and religious endowments; to ensure protection of  
India’s temple heritage, rituals and traditions;  
to secure financial integrity and optimal 
 utilisation of temple assets for religious  
and community welfare purposes;  
and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental  
thereto. 
______________ 
(Shri Sujeet Kumar, M.P.) 
RS-P&P-PMB(E)—085—10.02.2026.