 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No.II of 2025 
  THE CE NSUS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Census Act, 1948. 
   BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
 India as follows:—  
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Census (Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than
three months fr om the date of enactment of this Act, by notification in the
Gazatte bring this Act into force.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment of 
section 3. 
2. In the Census Act, 1948 in section 3, the following provisos shall be
inserted, namely:—
        “Provided that at least one census in the whole of India shall be taken 
in every ten years.  
        P rovided  further that if the Central Government finds it difficult, for 
any sufficient reason such as war, natural calamity, pandemic etc., to take 
census in the whole or any part of India even after expiry of a period of ten 
years from the last census, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare its intention of taking the census in the whole or any part of India, as 
the case may be, as soon as the exigency for not conducting the census 
ceases to be in existence and thereupon the census shall be taken.”   
 
5 
10 
37 of 1948. 

3 
  S TATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
        C onducting the census in whole of the country on a regular interval is 
a must, as in the absence of a complete census for a long span of  time, a 
majority of country’s population will be unable to access several schemes, 
benefits and services. Without a systematically collected population data 
and without having updated information regarding social, political and 
economic status of different sections of the population, implementation of 
developmental projects and social welfare schemes would be 
counterproductive as it may pave way for uneven distribution of resources.  
        P eriodical  census is a legal imperative for the reason that 
constitutionally-mandated policies of social justice, which include 
reservations in electoral constituencies, education and public employments, 
cannot be pursued effectively without correct population data.  
        N either  the Constitution nor the Census Act, 1948 as it stands today 
mandates a census to be conducted at a regular interval. However, the 
census on national level has so far been conducted every ten years. Even the 
British Government had conducted census in India periodically every ten 
years without failure since 1881. The first census of Independent India was 
conducted in 1951 and Government of India continued the practice of 
conducting national census every ten years without any delay till 2011. The 
census to be conducted in 2021 was postponed due to pandemic and the 
country still awaits a nationwide data collection. 
        T en  year is a reasonable span and the population data with all 
significant information must be updated on the official records in a regular 
interval of every ten year. This is mandatory to secure social, political and 
economic justice; and equality of status and of opportunity to all citizens as 
enshrined in the Preamble of the Constitution. Appropriate amendment in 
the Census Act is required to make this periodical census a legally 
enforceable obligation on the part of Central Government.  
 H ence,  this Bill. 
HARIS BEERAN. 

4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central 
Government to                                                         
take census. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE CENSUS ACT, 1948  
(ACT  NO. 37 OF 1948) 
*                      *                         *                         *                         *  
3.   The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare its intention of taking a  census in the whole or any part of the 
territories to which this Act extends, whenever it may consider it necessary 
or desirable so to do, and thereupon the census shall be taken. 
    *                      *                        *                          *                         *                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 RAJY A SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Census Act, 1948 
———— 
(Shr
i Haris Beeran, M.P.) 
RS-P&P-PMB(E)—035—10.02.2026. 