AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA 58818

Bill No. प्‌ 2001

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL 2001
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second year of Republic of India as follows:
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act 2000.
(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. For article 200 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely,—

- "200. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State or, in
the case of a State having a bicameral House has been passed by both the Houses of
the Legislature of that State, it shall be presented to the Governor and the Governor
shall, within fourteen days of such presentation of the Bill other than the Money Bill,
declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that
he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President."

Short title and
‘commencement

Amendment of
article 200.

Assent to Bills.


Amendment of

3. For article 201 of the constitution, the following article shall be substituted
article 201

namely:—
Bills reserved "201. When a Bill is reserved by a Governor for the consideration of the
{er considera: President, the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or he withholds

assent therefrom within fourteen days from the date of receipt of such a Bill by the
President.”

Aw


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present, there 1s not time limit for the Governor or the President as the case may be
to signify their constitutional option on Bills presented to them for assent. The Legislature
of a State 1s a supreme authority in the matter of legislations. Therefore, to ensure that the
object with which the bill is passed by the State Legislature to meet the aspirations of the
people of the State, it is necessary that some time limit should be prescribed within which
this process of giving or withholding of assent be completed. Therefore, it is suggested that
a decision to give assent or withhold the assent as the case may be shall be taken either by
the Governor or the President within fourteen days of the presentation of such a bill.

Hence this Amendment.

K. ८. KONDAIAH


Bills reserved
for considera-
tion.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

ae कक कक

कक कक कक

200. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State or, in the
case of a State having a Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of the Legis-
lature of the State, it shall be presented to the Governor and the Governor shall declare
either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the
Bill for the consideration of the President:

Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the presentation to him of
the Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message requesting
that the House or Houses will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in
particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may
recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall
reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the House or Houses with
or without amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the Governor shall not
withhold assent therefrom:

Provided further that the Governor shall not assent to, but shall reserve for the consi-
deration of the President, any Bill which in the opinion of the Governor would, if it became
law, so derogate from the powers of the High Court as to endanger the position which that
Court is by this Constitution designed to fill.

201. When a Bill is reserved by a Governor for the consideration of the President, the
President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom:

Provided that, where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may direct the
Governor to return the Bill to the House or, as the case may be, the Houses of the Legisla-
ture of the State together with such a message as is mentioned in the first proviso to article
200 and, when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider it accordingly
within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such message and, if it is again
passed by the House’ or Houses with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to
the President for his consideration.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri K.C. Kondaiah, M.P.)

ID—6142RS—24.01.2001.