1
Bill No. II of 2021
THE CIGARETTES AND OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS (PROHIBITION
OF ADVERTISEMENT AND REGULATION OF TRADE AND
COMMERCE, PRODUCTION, SUPPLY AND
DISTRIBUTION) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
A
BILL
further to amend the Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of
Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply
and Distribution) Act, 2003.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy Second Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition
of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and
Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD DECEMBER, 2021
5

2
2. In the Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and
Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the preamble, the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
WHEREAS India is a signatory to the World Health Organization Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control adopted in Geneva, Switzerland on 21st day of May 2003
which came into force on the 27th day of February, 2005;
AND WHEREAS the objective of this Convention and its protocols is to protect present
and future generations from the devastating health, social, environmental and economic
consequences of tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke by providing a
framework for tobacco control measures to be implemented by the Parties at the national,
regional and international levels in order to reduce continually and substantially the prevalence
of tobacco use and exposure to tobacco smoke;
AND WHEREAS, it is considered expedient to enact a comprehensive law to implement
the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and its Guidelines in the public interest
and to protect the public health;
AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to prohibit the consumption of cigarettes and other
tobacco products which are injurious to health with a view to achieving improvement of
public health in general as enjoined by article 47 of the Constitution;
AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to prohibit the advertisement of, and to provide for
regulation of trade and commerce, production, supply and distribution of, cigarettes and
other tobacco products and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto:
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, --
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(a) "advertisement" includes any visible representation by way of notice,
circular, label, wrapper pamphlet, brochure, programme, price-list, label, wrapper
or other document and any form of commercial communication, recommendation,
or action with the aim, effect, or likely effect of promoting cigarettes or any
other tobacco product, or tobacco use, either directly or indirectly;"
(ii) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
(c) "distribution" includes distribution by way of samples.
(iii) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: —
(1) "public place" means any place to which the public have access, whether
as of right or not, and includes auditorium, hospital buildings, airports, railway
station, railway waiting room, bus stop, amusement centres, hotels, restaurants,
public offices, work places, court buildings, educational institutions, libraries,
parks, public conveyances and the like which are visited by general public;
(iv) clause (n), shall be omitted.
4. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"4. No person shall smoke or use tobacco products in any public place.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, "use" means, chewing, inhaling,
ingesting, spitting or otherwise introducing the tobacco product or any of its constituents or
emissions into the human body or voluntary ejecting tobacco product or any of its constituents
or emissions after chewing, inhaling and ingesting;
34 of 2003.
Amendment of
Section 3.
Substitution of
preamble.
Substitution of
section 4.
Prohibition of
use of tobacco
in a public
place.
55
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
5. For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"5.( 1) No person shall initiate, produce, disseminate or broadcast any
advertisement or promotion of  cigarettes or any other tobacco products through any
medium and no person shall directly or indirectly promote the use or consumption of
cigarettes or any other tobacco products.
(2) No person, for any direct or indirect pecuniary benefit or otherwise, shall-
(a) display, cause to display, or permit or authorise to display any
advertisement of cigarettes or any other tobacco product on any medium including
audio, audiovisual, print (including newspapers or magazines whether domestic
or international, pamphlets, leaflets, flyers and letters), billboards, hoardings,
posters, signs, non-tobacco products, tobacco accessories, buildings or other
structures, vehicles, television, radio, films, music, games, live performances,
the internet including over-the-top media services, social media platforms, mobile
telephones, and other new technologies; or
(b) supply or offer to supply free samples of a tobacco product, including
in connection with marketing surveys or taste testing; or
(c) import, distribute, sell or offer for sale any confectionery or other food
product or any toy or any other article that is designed to resemble a tobacco
product or the packaging of which is designed to resemble the packaging
commonly associated with a tobacco product; or
(d) offer to sell any tobacco product at a discounted price; or
(e) provide gifts or discounted products with the purchase of any tobacco
product; or
(f) offer or engage in any incentive promotions, loyalty schemes, or
competitions associated with tobacco products or brand names whether requiring
the purchase of tobacco products or not; or
(g) use a name, brand, mark or trademark of a tobacco product on or in
association with, or for marketing, promoting or advertising, any other product,
service or event; or
(h) use particular colours, layouts or presentation that are associated with
particular tobacco products for marketing, promoting or advertising, any other
product, service or event; or
(i) market tobacco products with the aid of a name, mark or brand which is
known as, or in use as, a name or brand for any other product, service or event;
or
(j) use tobacco products when advertising other goods and services.
Explanation:—For the purpose of this section, "advertising" means any
form of commercial communication, recommendation, or action with the aim,
effect, or likely effect of promoting cigarettes or any other tobacco product, or
tobacco use, either directly or indirectly.
(3) No person, shall:—
(a) provide, receive, initiate or be a party to sponsorship in relation to a
tobacco product;
(b) promote or agree to promote whether directly or indirectly any mark,
trademark or brand name of a company whose principal business is the
manufacture, import or distribution of tobacco products;
Substitution of
section 5.
Prohibition on
advertisement
and
promotion of
cigarettes or
any other
tobacco
products.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(c) provide, receive, initiate or be a party to the provision of financial or
other support to artistic, sporting, political or other events, activities, individuals
or groups, including corporate social responsibility activities, by or from a
company whose principal business is the manufacture, import or distribution of
cigarettes or any other tobacco products.
Explanation:—For the purpose of this sub-section,—
(a) "sponsorship" means any form of contribution to any event,
activity or individual with the aim, effect or likely effect of promoting a
tobacco product or tobacco use either directly or indirectly;
(b) "trade mark" means the whole or a part of a trade mark that is
registered under the Trade Marks Act, 1999 in respect of goods that are or
include tobacco products, irrespective of whether the same or similar marks
are also registered in respect of other goods or services".
(4) No person shall cause or permit display of any tobacco product, or their
packaging at the entrance or inside of a warehouse or a shop where cigarettes or any
other tobacco products are offered for distribution or sale.
Explanation:—For the purpose of this section, "display" means, when any tobacco
product or the packaging of a tobacco product is visible to any member of the public in
general and not during the course of a transaction for the sale of a specific tobacco product.
(5) The owner or person in control of a warehouse or a shop where cigarettes or
any other tobacco products are offered for distribution or sale, —
(a) shall ensure that cigarettes and other tobacco products are kept in a
closed container or dispenser that is not accessible to any member of the public;
(b) may display a sign in black writing on a white background that states
tobacco products are available for sale, provided that the size, nature and location
of the sign are as prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) may provide a list of cigarettes and other tobacco products available
for sale, in a manner as prescribed by rules made under this Act."
6. In Section 6 of the principal Act, —
(i) in clause (a), for the word "eighteen", the word "twenty one" shall be
substituted.
(ii) in clause (b), for the word "yards", the word "meters" shall be substituted.
7. In section 7 of the principal Act,—
(i) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
" (3A) No person shall sell, offer to sell cigarettes or any other tobacco
products outside its package but in sealed, intact, original packaging of standard
size, contents and weights as may be prescribed."
(ii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(4) The specified warning shall appear on the principal display areas of the package
in which cigarettes or any other tobacco products have been packed for distribution, sale or
supply in a manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act."
(iii) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(5) Any person manufacturing or producing cigarettes or any other tobacco
products shall disclose periodically and upon request the constituents and
emissions on each cigarette or as the case may be on other tobacco products to
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
Amendment of
section 6.
Amendment of
section 7.
47 of 1999.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
Provided that the information disclosed on the constituents and emissions
on each cigarette or as the case may be on other tobacco products shall be
indicated by the producer, supplier, distributer or seller on every package of
cigarettes or any other tobacco product in such manner as may be prescribed by
rules made under this Act".
8. In section 10 of the principal Act, for the words  "nicotine and tar contents", the
words, "constituents and emissions" shall be substituted.
9. In section 11 of the principal Act, for the words "nicotine and tar contents", the
words, "constituents and emissions" shall be substituted
10. In section 15 of the principal Act, for the words "nicotine and tar contents", the
words, "constituents and emissions" shall be substituted.
11. For section 20 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
(1)  Any person who produces or manufactures cigarettes or any other tobacco
products, which do not contain, either on the package or on their label, the specified
warning and constituents and emissions shall in the case of first conviction be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may
extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both, and for the second or subsequent
conviction, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees.
(2) Any person who sells or distributes cigarettes or any other tobacco products
which do not contain either on the package or on their label, the specified warning and
constituents and emissions shall in the case of first conviction be punishable with
imprisonment for a term, which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend
to ten thousand rupees, or with both, and, for the second or subsequent conviction,
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which may
extend to twenty five thousand rupees.
(3)  Any person who produces or manufactures cigarettes or any other tobacco
products, does not disclose to the Central Government the constituents and emissions
of cigarettes or any other tobacco products shall in the case of first conviction be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both, and for the second or
subsequent conviction, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years
and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
12. In Section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "two hundred
rupees" the words, "one thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
13. In section 22 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause (a), for the words, "which may extend to one thousand rupees" the
words "which may extend to ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
(ii) in clause (b), for the words, "which may extend to five thousand rupees" the
words, "which may extend to fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
14. For section 23 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
23. Where any person has been convicted under this Act for the contravention
of the provision of sections 3,5, 6 and 7, the advertisements materials and packages of
cigarettes and other tobacco products may be forfeited to the Government and such
advertisements materials and packages shall be disposed of in such manner as may be
prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Amendment of
section 10.
Amendment of
section 11.
Amendment of
section 15.
Amendment of
section 20.
Punishment
for failure to
give specified
warning and
constituents
and emissions.
Amendment of
section 21.
Amendment of
section 22.
Substitution of
section 23.
Forfeiture of
advertisement
materials and
packages of
cigarettes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
15. For section 24 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
24. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 6 shall be guilty of
an offence under this Act and shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to a fine which may extend upto one
lakh rupees.
16. After section 24 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely: —
24A. No person shall directly or indirectly, produce or manufacture or sell or
distribute or offer for sale or permit sale of illicit cigarettes or any other tobacco
products.
"24A. (1) Any person who produces or manufactures or supplies or imports
illicit cigarettes or any other tobacco products shall in the case of first conviction
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both, and for the
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to five years and with fine which may extend to one lach rupees.
(2) Any person who distributes or sells, or offers for sale or permits sale of
illicit cigarettes or any other tobacco products shall in the case of first conviction
be punishable with improsonment for a term, which may extend to one year, or
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both, and, for the
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to two years and with fine which may extend to twenty five thousand rupees."
17. In section 25 of the principal Act, -"the words and figure "or section 6" wherever
they occurred shall be omitted".
18. For section 27 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"27.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, an offence punishable under this Act shall be bailable.
(2) For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that offences punishable
under section 5, 6, and 7 of this Act shall be cognizable."
19. In section 28 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) any offence committed under section 4 may either before or after the
institution of the prosecution be compounded by such officer authorized by Central
Government or State Government and for an amount which may not exceed one
thousand rupees."
20. In section 30 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Central Government, may, by notification, remove any tobacco
product specified in the Schedule of the Act, in respect of which production, supply and
distribution has been prohibited under any other law".
Substitution of
Section 24.
Punishment for
sale of cigarettes
or other tobacco
products in
certain places or
to persons
below the age of
twenty one
years.
Insertion of new
sections 24A
and 24AA.
Prohibition on
production or
sale etc. of illicit
cigarettes or any
other tobacco
products.
Punishment on
production or
sale etc. of illicit
cigarettes or any
other tobacco
products.
Amendment of
section 25.
Substitution of
section 27.
Offences to be
cognizable and
bailable.
Amendment of
section 28.
Amendment of
section 30.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2 of 1974.

7
21. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(b) specify the form and the manner in which constituents and emissions
shall be disclosed to the Central Government and indicated on packages of
cigarettes or other tobacco products under sub-section ( 5) of section 7".
(ii) in clause (d), for the words "nicotine and tar contents", the words,
"constituents and emissions" shall be substituted.
22. In section 32 of the principal Act, in the proviso, for the words "nicotine and tar
contents", the words, "constituents and emissions" shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 31.
Amendment of
section 32.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India has over 26 crores tobacco users, and tobacco kills over 13 lakh Indians each
year. The total direct and indirect cost of diseases attributable to tobacco use was a staggering
1.04 lakh crore ($17 billion) in 2011 or 1.16 per cent of India's GDP according to the ‘Economic
Burden of Tobacco Related Diseases in India’. Owing to such high numbers, there is a
considerably high number of people who are exposed to secondhand smoke which can
prove to be equally dangerous. Over the past two decades, India has made a considerable
amount of progress. Nationwide surveys show that the proportion of people using tobacco
came down from 34.6 per cent in 2010 to 28.6 per cent in 2017. This meant 81 lakh fewer
tobacco users during this period saving a significant number of lives.
The Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and
Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act 2003 was
enacted over 17 years ago. This Bill, while amending some of the penal provisions to make
it more stringent also aims to abolish all designated smoking areas in airports, hotels and
restaurants, as it has been shown that comprehensive smoke-free areas that include workplaces,
restaurants, and bars are estimated to reduce the risk of heart attack by 85 per cent improve
the respiratory health of workers, and may also reduce the risk of stroke. A study conducted
in over 6000 hospitality venues across 8 cities in India found that only 4 per cent of the
venues had a designated smoking room (DSR) and among those that could be assessed for
compliance, only 3 per cent (n=3) were compliant with the requirements as provided for in
the above Act. The Bill also aims to ban all point of sale advertising and point of sale
tobacco product displays. A study assessing data from 130 countries found that point of sale
advertising bans are significantly associated with reduced smoking experimentation among
youth. A study reviewing data from 77 countries estimated that having a point of sale display
ban reduced daily smoking prevalence by about 7 per cent. The Bill makes provision for
prohibiting single stick sales of cigarettes and bidis. Evidence suggests that availability of
single cigarettes facilitates smoking among youth and people with fewer resources, and that
having greater accessibility of single cigarettes reduces the likelihood that smokers will
make a quit attempt. The Bill also provides for establishing fines large enough to deter
violations, establishing a system for increasingly severe penalties for repeat violations and
provide authority for Ministry of Heath and Family Welfare OHFW to revise penalties through
rules.
The Bill seeks to achieve the stated objectives.
Dr. SASMIT PATRA
8

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 21 of the Bill proposes to amend section 31 of the principal Act to empower the
Central Government to make rules for specifying the form and the manner in which the
constituents and omissions shall be disclosed to the Central Government. The rules to be
made by the Government pertain to matters of administrative detail only. The delegation is,
therefore, normal in character.
9

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CIGARETTES AND OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS (PROHIBITION OF
ADVERTISEMENT AND REGULATION OF TRADE AND COMMERCE, PRODUCTION,
SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION) ACT, 2003
(34 OF 2003)
* * * * *
An Act to prohibit the advertisement of, and to provide for the regulation of trade, and
commerce in, and production, supply and distribution of, cigarettes and other tobacco products
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS, the Resolution passed by the 39th World Health Assembly (WHO), in its
Fourteenth Plenary meeting held on the 15th May, 1986 urged the member States of WHO
which have not yet done so to implement the measures to ensure that effective protection is
provided to non-smokers from involuntary exposure to tobacco smoke and to protect children
and young people from being addicted to the use of tobacco;
AND WHEREAS, the 43rd World Health Assembly in its Fourteenth Plenary meeting
held on the 17th May, 1990, reiterated the concerns expressed in the Resolution passed in
the 39th World Health Assembly and urged Member States to consider in their tobacco
control strategies plans for legislation and other effective measures for protecting their citizens
with special attention to risk groups such as pregnant women and children from involuntary
exposure to tobacco smoke, discourage the use of tobacco and impose progressive restrictions
and take concerted action to eventually eliminate all direct and indirect advertising promotion
and sponsorship concerning tobacco;
AND WHEREAS, it is considered expedient to enact a comprehensive law on tobacco
in the public interest and to protect the public health;
AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to prohibit the consumption of cigarettes and other
tobacco products which are injurious to health with a view to achieving improvement of
public health in general as enjoined by article 47 of the Constitution;
AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to prohibit the advertisement of, and to provide for
regulation of trade and commerce, production, supply and distribution of, cigarettes and
other tobacco products and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto:
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
* * * * *
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "advertisement" includes any visible representation by way of notice, circular,
label, wrapper or other document and also includes any announcement made orally or
by any means of producing or transmitting light, sound, smoke or gas;
* * * * *
(c) "distribution" includes distribution by way of samples, whether free or
otherwise;
* * * * *
(I) "public place" means any place to which the public have access, whether as
of right or not, and includes auditorium, hospital buildings, railway waiting room,
Definitions.
10

11
amusement centres, restaurants, public offices, court buildings, educational institutions,
libraries, public conveyances and the like which are visited by general public but does
not include any open space;
* * * * *
4. No person shall smoke in any public place:
Provided that in a hotel having thirty rooms or a restaurant having seating capacity of
thirty persons or more and in the airports, a separate provision for smoking area or space may
be made
* * * * *
5. (1) No person engaged in, or purported to be engaged in the production, supply or
distribution of cigarettes or any other tobacco products shall advertise and no person
having control over a medium shall cause to be advertised cigarettes or any other tobacco
products through that medium and no person shall take part in any Advertisement which
directly or indirectly suggests or promotes the use or consumption of cigarettes or any other
tobacco products.
(2) No person, for any direct or indirect pecuniary benefit, shall—
(a) display, cause to display, or permit or authorise to display any advertisement
of cigarettes or any other tobacco product; or
(b) sell or cause to sell, or permit or authorise to sell a film or video tape containing
advertisement of cigarettes or any other tobacco product; or
(c) distribute, cause to distribute, or permit or authorise to distribute to the
public any leaflet, hand-bill or document which is or which contains an advertisement
of cigarettes or any other tobacco product; or
(d) erect, exhibit, fix or retain upon or over any land, building, wall, hoarding,
frame, post or structure or upon or in any vehicle or shall display in any manner
whatsoever in any place any advertisement of cigarettes or any other tobacco product:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply in relation to-
(a) an advertisement of cigarettes or any other tobacco product in or on a
package containing cigarettes or any other tobacco product;
(b) advertisement of cigarettes or any other tobacco product which is displayed
at the entrance or inside a warehouse or a shop where cigarettes and any other tobacco
products are offered for distribution or sale.
(3) No person, shall, under a contract or otherwise promote or agree to promote the use
or consumption of—
(a) cigarettes or any other tobacco product; or
(b) any trade mark or brand name of cigarettes or any other tobacco product in
exchange for a sponsorship, gift, prize or scholarship given or agreed to be given by
another person.
* * * * *
6. No person shall sell, offer for sale, or permit sale of, cigarette or any other tobacco
product—
(a) to any person who is under eighteen years of age, and
(b) in an area within a radius of one hundred yards of any educational institution.
* * * * *
Prohibition of
smoking in a
public place.
Prohibition of
advertisement of
cigarettes and
other tobacco
products.
Prohibition on
sale of cigarette
or other tobacco
products to a
person below the
age of eighteen
years and in
particular area.

12
7.
* * * * *
(3) No person shall import cigarettes or any other tobacco products for distribution or
supply for a valuable consideration or for sale in India unless every package of cigarettes or
any other tobacco products so imported by him bears thereon, or on its label, the specified
warning.
(4) The specified warning shall appear on not less than one of the largest panels of the
package in which cigarettes or any other tobacco products have been packed for distribution,
sale or supply for a valuable consideration.
(5) No person shall, directly or indirectly, produce, supply or distribute cigarettes or
any other tobacco products unless every package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products
produced, supplied or distributed by him indicates thereon, or on its label, the nicotine and
tar contents on each cigarette or as the case may be on other tobacco products along with the
maximum permissible limits thereof:
Provided that the nicotine and tar contents shall not exceed the maximum permissible
quantity thereof as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
* * * * *
10. No specified warning or indication of nicotine and tar contents in cigarettes and
any other tobacco products shall be deemed to be in accordance with the provisions of this
Act if the height of each letter or figure, or both the used on such warning and indication is
less than the height as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
* * * * *
11. For purposes of testing the nicotine and tar contents in cigarettes and any other
tobacco products the Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette grant
recognition to such testing laboratory as that Government may deem necessary.
* * * * *
15.
* * * * *
(2) On payment of the costs ordered by the court, the seized packages shall be returned
to the person from whom they were seized on condition that such person shall, before making
any distribution, sale or supply of such packages of cigarettes or other tobacco products, get
the specified warning and indication of nicotine and tar contents incorporated on each such
package.
* * * * *
20. (1) Any person who produces or manufactures cigarettes or tobacco products,
which do not contain, either on the package or on their label, the specified warning and the
nicotine and tar contents, shall in the case of first conviction be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees, or with both, and for the second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
(2) Any person who sells or distributes cigarettes or tobacco products which do not
contain either on the package or on their label, the specified warning and the nicotine and tar
contents shall in the case of first conviction be punishable with imprisonment for a term,
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both, and, for the second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees.
Restrictions on
trade and
commerce in,
and production,
supply and
distribution of
cigarettes and
other tobacco
products.
Size of letters
and figures.
Testing
laboratory for
nicotine and
tar contents.
Power to give
option to pay
costs in lieu of
confiscation.
Punishment
for failure to
give specified
warning and
nicotine and
tar contents.

13
21. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 4 shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to two hundred rupees.
(2) An offence under this section shall be compoundable and shall be tried summarily
in accordance with the procedure provided for summary trials in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
22. Whoever contravenes the provision of section 5 shall, on conviction, be
punishable—
(a) in the case of first conviction, with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to two years or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both; and
(b) in the case of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees.
23. Where any person has been convicted under this Act for the contravention of the
provision of section 5, the advertisement and the advertisement material for cigarettes and
other tobacco products may be forfeited to the Government and such advertisement and
advertisement material shall be disposed of in such manner as may be prescribed by rules
made under this Act.
24. (1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 6 shall be guilty of an
offence under this Act and shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred
rupees.
(2)  All offences under this section shall be compoundable and shall be tried summarily
in accordance with the procedure provided for summary trials in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
25. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Central Government or the State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, authorise one or more persons who shall be competent to act under this Act:
Provided that the person so authorised may, if he has reasonable ground for believing
that any person has committed an offence under section 4 or section 6, may detain such
person unless the accused person furnishes his name and address, and otherwise satisfies
the officer detaining him that he will duly answer any summons or other proceedings which
may be taken against him.
(2) Any person detained under sub-section (1) shall forthwith be taken before
Magistrate to be dealt with according to law.
(3) Any person committing an offence under section 4 or section 6 shall be tribal for
such offence in any place in which he may be or which the State Government may notify in
this behalf, as well as in any other place in which he is liable to be tried under any law for the
time being in force.
(4) Every notification issued under sub-sections (1) and (3) shall be published in the
Official Gazette, and a copy thereof shall be exhibited for information to the public in some
conspicuous place or places as the State Government may direct.
(5) Every person authorised under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be a public
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
* * * * *
27. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(2 of 1974), an offence punishable under this Act shall be bailable.
Punishment for
smoking in
certain places.
Punishment
for
advertisement
of cigarettes
and tobacco
products.
Forfeiture of
advertisement
and
advertisement
material.
Punishment for
sale of
cigarettes or
any other
tobacco
products in
certain places
or to persons
below the age
of eighteen
years.
Prevention,
detention and
place of trial of
offences under
sections 4 and 6.
Offences to be
bailable.

14
28. (1) Any offence committed under section 4 or section 6 may either before or after
the institution of the prosecution be compounded by such officer authorised by Central
Government or State Government and for an amount which may not exceed two hundred
rupees.
30. The Central Government, after giving by notification in the Official Gazette, not
less than three months' notice of its intention so to do, may, by like notification, add any
other tobacco product in respect of which it is of opinion that advertisements are to be
prohibited and its production, supply and distribution is required to be regulated under this
Act, and thereupon the Schedule shall in its application to such products be deemed to be
amended accordingly.
* * * * *
31. * * * * *
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) specify the form and manner in which warning shall be given in respect of
cigarettes or other tobacco products under clause (o) of section 3;
(b) specify the maximum permissible nicotine and tar contents in cigarettes or
other tobacco products under the proviso to sub-section (5) of section 7;
(c) specify the manner in which the specified warning shall be inscribed on each
package of cigarettes or other tobacco products or its label under sub-section (2) of
section 8;
(d) specify the height of the letter or figure or both to be used in specified warning
or to indicate the nicotine and tar contents in cigarettes or other tobacco products
under section 10;
(e) provide for the manner in which entry into and search of any premises is to
be conducted and the manner in which the seizure of any package of cigarettes or
other tobacco products shall be made and the manner in which seizure list shall be
prepared and delivered to the person from whose custody any package of cigarettes or
other tobacco products has been seized;
(f) provide for any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
* * * * *
32. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to any cigarette or other tobacco products
or package of cigarettes or other tobacco products which is exported:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise the export of any
package of cigarettes or other tobacco products, not containing the specified warning and
indication of nicotine and tar contents to any country if the law in force in that country
requires that the same or similar warning and nicotine and tar contents shall be specified on
each package of cigarettes or other tobacco products.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, any cigarette or other tobacco products
or package of cigarettes or other tobacco products shall be deemed to be exported before the
commencement of this Act, if the necessary steps for export have already been taken
notwithstanding that the actual export has not taken place.
* * * * *
Composition of
offences.
Power to add
any tobacco
products in the
Schedule.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
Act not to apply
to cigarettes of
other tobacco
products which
are exported.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of
Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production,
Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003.
————
(Dr. Sasmit Patra, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1325RS(S3)—07-12-2021.