THE  DISTRESSED  WIDOWS  AND  SINGLE  WOMEN
(PROTECTION, REHABILITATION AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to provide for the protective measures with need based rehabilitation and welfare to be
undertaken by the Government for the distressed, infirm, neglected, abandoned and
disowned widows and single women by providing financial assistance, pension,
medical care, housing and other facilities through a Welfare Board to such
widows and single women and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Distressed Widows and Single Women (Protection,
Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "abandoned and disowned widow" means a widow who has been deserted
or thrown out of household by her relatives to fend for herself and who has no means
to support her and her dependent children, if any;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. II of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 26TH FEBRUARY, 2016
Definitions.
5
10

2
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Board" means the Distressed Widows and Single Women Welfare Board
established under section 3;
(d) "distressed" in relation to a widow and single women  means any suffering
widow or single woman who lives uncared for and has become infirm due to old age
or chronic or incurable disease, physical deformity or mental imbalance and who
has no independent and adequate means of livelihood for her and her dependent
children, if any;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "single woman" means a female adult human being who is either not married
or divorce or judicially separated from her spouse for the purposes of this Act;
(g) "widow" means a legally married women whose husband has died.
3. (1) The Central Government, shall, as soon as may be, but within six months
after the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Board to be known as the Distressed Widows and Single Women Welfare Board for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property,
both movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be
sued.
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at Aurangabad in the State of
Maharashtra and the Board shall establish its branches in all other States and Union
Territories at conspicuous places as the Board may deem fit and necessary.
(4) The Board shall consist of:—
(a) the Minister of Women and Child Development of the Union Council
of Ministers who shall be the ex-officio chairperson of the Board;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson, preferably a woman with such qualifications
and experience, as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(c) one member representing single women with such qualification, as
may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(d) five women Members of Parliament of whom three shall be from the
Lok Sabha and two from the Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the respective
Presiding Officers of each House;
(e) five members representing Union Ministries of Home Affairs, Human
Resource Development, Health and Family Welfare, Finance and Social Justice
and Empowerment;
(f) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Governments of the States, by rotation in
alphabetical order, to represent the Governments of the States;
(g) three members to be appointed by the Central Government from
amongst the registered Non-Governmental Organisation (NGOs) working for
the Welfare of distressed widows or single women, as the case may be.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
the  Deputy Chairperson and members shall be such as may be  prescribed.
(6) The Board shall follow such procedure for holding its meetings and the
quorum for such meetings shall be such, as may be prescribed.
Establishment
of the
Distressed
Widows and
Single women
Welfare Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(7) The Board shall have a Secretariat Consisting of a Member Secretary and
such number of officers, employees and establishments with such conditions of service,
emoluments and perks, as may be prescribed or determined, from time to time, for
the efficient functioning of the Secretariat of the Board.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the Board shall promote and implement such protective and welfare measures
as it thinks appropriate, expedient, necessary and fit,  including rehabilitation for the
distressed widows and single women who are in dire need of such measures.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board
shall,—
(a) maintain district-wise register of the abandoned, disowned and distressed
widows and single women covered  under this Act  who are to be rehabilitated  and
are in need of assistance from the Board with such particulars and details and in
such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) collect and get verified the antecedents of every widow and single woman
covered under this Act to assess her need for assistance in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(c) work out plans and formulate schemes for the overall welfare  and
rehabilitation of abandoned, disowned or distressed widows  and single women
covered under  this Act and implement them in right earnest;
(d) conduct a special survey of the abandoned and disowned  widows subsisting
on alms as beggar or chanting bhajans  in the temples of Mathura, Vrindavan and
other parts of Uttar Pradesh and other parts of the country or who are languishing in
temples as Devdasis in various parts of the country and formulate appropriate
rehabilitation and reuniting with their families programmes for such widows and
single women in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) give wide publicity through electronic and print media about the welfare
and rehabilitation measures being undertaken by the Board  to enable the widows
and single women covered under this Act to avail them ; and
(f) perform such other functions not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act, as may be assigned to it by the appropriate  Government from time to  time.
5. (1) With effect from such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes
of this Act, a fund with initial corpus of rupee fifty thousand crore through due
appropriation made by Parliament to be called the National Distressed  Widows and
Single Women Rehabilitation and  Welfare Fund to be operated by the competent
Authority in consultation with the Board  in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The fund established under Sub-section (1) shall consist of all receipts from—
(a) The Central Government and  Governments of the States and Union
Territories and their institutions and organisations;
(b) Body Corporates, both of public and private sector and Banks and
financial institutions both domestic and foreign; and
(c) Individuals, associations and others in the form of contributions or
donations.
6. ( 1) On the recommendation of the Board or otherwise, the appropriate
Government shall provide the widows and single women covered under this Act, the
following facilities, namely,
(a) monthly subsistence allowance of not less than five thousand rupees if the
widow  or the single woman, as the case may be, is having any dependent children
and not less than three thousand rupees in case she has no children to support;
Facilities to
be provided
by the
appropriate
Government.
Establishment
of National
Distressed
Widows and
Single women
Rehabilitation
and Welfare
Fund.
Functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

4
(b) residential accommodation free of cost wherever necessary;
(c) free medical care with medicines and with indoor and outdoor facilities
as per the need;
(d) free education to the dependent children including higher, medical,
engineering and education as per the information technology calibre;
(e) gainful employment as per the physical condition after imparting
vocational training wherever possible;
(f) financial assistance for rehabilitation like self employment wherever
required;
(g) free legal aid in case the widow or single woman, as the case may be,
has been thrown out or abandoned by her kith and kin;
(h) such other facilities, as may be necessary for the rehabilitation, welfare,
proper development, regaining her lost status in the family and for maintaining
a respectable life in the society:
Provided that if, a widow or single woman, as the case may be, covered under this
Act either gets married, remarried, gainfully employed or taken back by her kith and kin in
the family, the facilities being provided to her shall be withdrawn by the appropriate
Government.
(2) the costs incurred by the appropriate government on providing the facilities
under this Act to the widows and single women covered under this Act shall be defrayed
from the Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund established under section 5.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time being in force or
in any custom prevelant any widow or single woman covered under this Act shall,—
(a) not be evicted or thrown out of the house of the in-laws or parents, as the
case may be where such widow or single woman was last residing;
(b) be entitled to inherit the property or her share of jointly owned property
from her in-laws or parents, as the case may be;
(c) be entitled for maintenance from her in-laws or kith or kin who neglect or
abandon the widow or single woman, as the case may be.
8. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of hostels at
conspicuous places in various parts of its territorial jurisdiction as it may deem
necessary for boarding and lodging of abandoned and disowned and distressed widows
and single women covered under this Act with necessary facilities of daily life as may
be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government shall also provide necessary free medical aid
and medicines and means of entertainment for the residents of the hostels established
under sub-section (1):
Provided that residents of such old age homes shall not be entitled for subsistence
allowance under this Act.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide the requisite funds to the States, Union Territories and
the Board from time to time for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. The Board shall submit an Annual Report in such form and in such manner, as
may be prescribed, of its activities in implementing the provisions of this Act to the President
of India who shall cause the Report to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament along
with action taken thereon by the Central Government as soon as it is received.
Protective
provisions.
Establishment
of hostels.
Central
Government to
provide
requisite funds.
Annual Report
of the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
12. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being applicable to the widows and single women covered under this
Act.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our Country, worlds second most populous Nation, there are millions of unfortunate
and hapless women who lose their husbands during their lifetime and become widows.
Their number is nearly three percent of the total population of our Nation and more than
fifty percent of these widows are old, infirm suffering from various diseases, physical
deformity or mental imbalance particularly belonging to poor and middle class families
who live uncared for and neglected by their near and dear ones and most of them are wthout
independent and adequate means of livelihood and roof over their heads. It is very common
that when a widow does not have any permanent source of income or livelihood she is
driven out of her in-laws home or even from her parental home. Her position becomes more
miserable if she has dependent children to support and bring up. Sometimes the condition
of such widows become miserable and their problems increase manifold due to poverty and
other compelling reasons where they have no other option but to go for begging for survival
and many such widows can be seen begging in the streets and public places. Several women
who become widows in their youth, in particular in rural and far off areas, are not only
sexually exploited by their known ones and many a times forced into prostituion. At some
places they are branded as witches and tortured even by their own kith and kin or others
from the community. In our society even today they are treated as bad omen and are not
allowed to attend or appear during auspicious occasions. Many of such widows work as
housemaids and take up other jobs for survival. Large number of abandoned and disowned
widows seek refuge in the temples of Mathura, Vrindavan in Uttar Pradesh and other parts
of the Country where they chant bhajans or beg for their survival. Even devadasi system is
still prevalent in some parts of the Country. Where hapless old and inform devdasis languish
in the temples. Many widows take shelter in old age homes but their number is awfully very
short. Then there are quite a large number of single women in our Country. Some of them
opt for not to marry because they have to support their families for various reasons such as
to educate their siblings or for supporting families as there are no male bread earners or for
the treatment of ailing parents etc. etc. It is very common that such women are deserted by
their siblings once they get their education and settle in their lives. Since the spend their
earnings on others they become penniless in their old age, particularly if they where employed
in private sector. Then there are those single women who are either deserted by their husbands
or who are legally separated or divorced from their spouses. Many of them become distressed
and their miseries increase when they  have dependent children to support and bring up.
They too need protective umbrella.
Ours is a welfare State. It is the sacred duty of the State to initiate protective and
welfare measures for the abandoned, disowned and distressed widows and single women to
that they can live gracefully in the society. It is therefore imperative to establish an authority
to exclusively take care of such widows and single women throughout the Country.
Hence this Bill.
RAJKUMAR DHOOT
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment  of the Distressed Widows and
Single Women Welfare Board. Clause 5 provides for the establishment of National Distressed
Widows and Single Women Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund with initial corpus of rupee
fifty thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government. Clause 6 provides for
financial assistance and other facilities for widows and single women. Clause 8 provides
for establishment of hostels. Clause 9 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to
provide requisite and adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, if
enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Apart from the
initial corpus of rupee fifty thousand crore, it is estimated that a sum of rupee fourty thousand
crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupee twenty five thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring
expenditure.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
8

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protective measures with need based rehabilitation and welfare to be
undertaken by the Government for the distressed, infirm, neglected, abandoned and
disowned widows and single women by providing financial assistance, pension,
medical care, housing and other facilities through a Welfare Board to such
widows and single women and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4599RS(S3)—26-02-2016.