THE PREVENTION OF INSULTS TO NATIONAL HONOUR
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Insults to National Honour (Amendment)
Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 16TH MARCH, 2007
5
Bill No. III of  2007

2
 2.  After section 3A of the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971 following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“4. whoever uses baseless attributive terms in regard to freedom fighters and
makes incorrect statements and derogatory comments about them or publishes or gets
published such comments in a book or through press or any other media by distorting
the real facts with this motive, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years or with fine or with both.
Explanation.—  For the purposes of this section, the expression “freedom
fighters” means a leader or a martyr or a patriot who has inspired people for national
struggle for the sake of freedom of the country.”
Insertion of
new section 4.
69 of 1971.
Punishment
for incorrect
statements or
derogatory
comments,
etc. about
freedom
fighters.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Freedom fighters have made a major contribution to the freedom of our country. It was
because of their struggle that we are citizens of an independent India today. Disrespectful
and highly derogatory words and false statements are being made about freedom fighters
who made supreme sacrifices putting their lives at stake and inspired the nation to attain
freedom.
Some writers are presenting facts about freedom fighters in a wrong manner in books
brought out by the government and private publishers. There are many authors who do not
have adequate and correct information about freedom fighters and they write factually incorrect
articles on them in private publications. They are  thus creating confusion by presenting
distorted facts about freedom fighters, hurting the feelings of the ordinary citizens of the
country and the families of freedom fighters. This causes disrespect and insult not only to
the freedom fighters, but also to the nation.
It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Prevention of Insults to National  Honour
Act, 1971 and extend its scope so that such acts of criticising freedom fighters may be
brought within its purview and appropriate punishment is prescribed for such insults.
Hence this Bill.
JAI  PARKASH  AGGARWAL.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971.
————
(Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1227 RS—16.03.2007.