THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 326 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
''Provided that the word 'crime' referred to in this article, in case of undertrial
prisoners, shall be confined to such non-bailable offences, as may be provided for, by
or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature, punishable with imprisonment
for more than seven years."
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. III of 2023
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER 2023
Amendment
of article 326.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 India is one among the few countries to have instituted a blanket ban on the voting
rights of prisoners. When the nation went to the polls in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, nearly
five lakh people out of the ninety crore-strong electorate were denied the right to franchise
on account of being in prison. This number included incarcerated convicted prisoners as
well as undertrial prisoners. Section 62(5) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951
stipulates that "No person shall vote at any election if he or she is confined in a prison,
whether under a sentence of imprisonment or transportation or otherwise, or is in the lawful
custody of the police". The said Act derives its authority to formulate such a provision from
article 326 of the Constitution of India.
2. As per the data in the "Prison Statistics of India, 2020" published by the National
Crime Records Bureau (NCRB), around 76 per cent. of the total number of inmates populating
prisons across the country are undertrial - neither convicted nor acquitted, but simply
languishing in jails, living between one hearing to the next, waiting for the final verdict to seal
their fate. This means that more than three quarters of the people, who were denied suffrage
for being in prison, are actually non-criminals if the edict of "innocent until proven guilty"
holds any water.
3. The socio-economic composition of undertrial prisoners must not be neglected.
Muslims account for around 20 per cent, Dalits around 21 per cent., Adivasis 10 per cent.,
and Other Backward Classes around 42 per cent of the tally. For communities that are
historically marginalised and under-represented in all institutions of the State, the right to
choose their representatives holds great significance. Further, about 27 per cent. of all
undertrial prisoners were found to be illiterate while 41 per cent. had dropped out before
Class X. They are largely poor and unable to afford the bail bond or surety required to secure
bail, or even the hefty costs of litigation itself. Those who can afford the amount are out on
bail and entitled to vote.
4. In Hussainara Khatoon & Ors. v/s. Home Secretary, State Of Bihar, 1980, the Su-
preme Court gave a landmark ruling in the interest of undertrial prisoners, enhancing the
scope of interpreting article 21 of the Constitution (Protection of Life and Personal Liberty).
Later, section 436A has been inserted in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, stipulating
that when a person has "undergone detention for a period extending up to one-half of the
maximum period of imprisonment specified for an offence, for which the punishment of death
has not been specified as one of the punishments under any law, he or she shall be released
by the Court on his personal bond with or without sureties".  However, implementation
continues to be a challenge.
5. The 268th Report of the Law Commission also recognised the need to bring in a Bail
Law based on the principles of liberalising the bail system. As stated several times by the
apex court, "Bail should be the norm, jail is an exception". Reforms in granting bail to undertrial
prisoners are the need of the hour. Likewise, the voting rights of undertrial prisoners are also
to be weighed in a similar fashion.
6. In the light of the above, there is a pressing need to amend article 326 of the
Constitution so as to ensure the right of adult franchise to undertrial prisoners facing charges
of bailable offences or of non-bailable offences punishable with imprisonment of seven
years or less.
The Bill seeks to achieve the said objective.
    JOHN BRITTAS.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
PART XV
ELECTIONS
* * * * *
326. The elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of
every State shall be on the basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every person who is a citizen
of India and who is not less than eighteen years of age on such date as may be fixed in that
behalf by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature and is not otherwise
disqualified under this Constitution or any law made by the appropriate Legislature on the
ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be
entitled to be registered as a voter at any such election.
* * * * *
Elections to
the House of
the People
and to the
Legislative
Assemblies of
States to be on
the basis of
adult suffrage.
3

RAJY A SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. John Brittas, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB( E)—103—14.12.2023.