Bill No.  III  of  2013
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 72 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following provisos shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that the President shall exercise the powers granted under this article
within a period of one year after the petition to grant pardons etc. is presented to him:
Provided further that in the case of non-exercise of powers by the President
within the period of one year, the judgment of the court in respect of the petitioner shall
be enforced immediately".
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 22ND MARCH, 2013
Short  title  and
commencement.
Amendment of
article 72.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is one of the largest democracies in the world. It achieved freedom in 1947 from
the British rule after a prolonged struggle and sacrifice of sons of the soil. Constitution of
India was drafted keeping in view the welfare of the citizens. Though the utmost care was
taken while drafting the Constitution, over the years there have been occasions when need
arose for amending the Constitution to keep pace with the changing scenario in the country.
One such case in point is the Powers conferred upon the President under article 72 of
the Constitution which empowers the President to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or
remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person
convicted of any offence. Though, the President has been bestowed with absolute powers
in this regard, no time limit has been fixed for the President within which such power has to
be exercised. As a result the mercy petitions made before the President keep piling for long
period without any decision. As a fall out of this, the convicts are to be kept guarded in jails
and heavy expenditure is incurred upon them which is tax payers money and a drain on
national exchequer. In the present situation, attempts are being made both externally and
internally to hurt severaly harmony and vibrancy of our civil society and we are continuously
facing probable terrorist attack. It is high time to curb anti-national activities and for that, if
death penalty is awarded to a person by any court after considering the circumstances
which led them to reach such a decision based upon the gravity of the crime and such
person files mercy petition before the President of India, the President should take decision
on such mercy petition within one year time period in order to send a strong signal among
anti-nationals.
Hence this Bill.
PARSHOTTAM  KHODABHAI  RUPALA
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
72. (1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or
remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person
convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any law
relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
(2) * * * * * *
(3) * * * * * *
Power of
President to
grant pardons,
etc., and to
suspend, remit
or commute
sentences in
certain cases.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—6019RS(S4)—22.03.2013.