1
THE ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS AND MISSING FOREIGN
NATIONALS IDENTIFICATION AND DEPORTATION
AUTHORITY OF INDIA BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Authority at the national level for identification and
deportation of illegal immigrants who have come generally from the neighbouring
countries in India and have settled in various parts of the country thereby increasing
the burden on national resources and also to identify and deport the foreign nation-
als who go missing after coming to India after the expiry of their visa period and
many of such immigrants and foreign nationals are threat to the national security
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Illegal Immigrants and Missing Foreign Nationals
Identification and Deportation Authority of India Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. III of  2011
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 (a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that
State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "authority" means the Illegal Immigrants and Missing Foreign Nationals
Identification and Deportation Authority of India established under section 3;
(c) "illegal immigrant" means a foreign national who comes to India without any visa or
proper and valid documents issued by the designated authority of the Government of India
in any foreign country and settles or attempt to settle in India in the garb of Indian citizen by
obtaining ration card and other document by fraudulent means;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(e) terms and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Foreigners Act, 1946 shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an authority to be called the Illegal Immigrants and Missing Foreign
Nationals Identification and Deportation Authority of India for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(2) The Head Office of the Authority shall be at Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra
and the Authority may establish its regional or Branch offices at other places of the
Country as it may deem necessary for the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(4) The Authority shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson who shall be a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or of a
High Court to be appointed by the President of India;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government with such
qualifications and experience as may be prescribed;
(c) five Members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective Presiding Officers of the two
Houses;
(d) five members to represent the Union Ministries of Home Affairs, External
Affairs, Law and Justice, Planning and Defence respectively;
(e) four members of organisations which were spearheading agitations against
illegal immigrants in the north-east and other parts of the Country to be nominated
by the Central Government;
(f) four members to be nominated by the Governments of the States to be rotated
amongst the States in alphabetical order every three years;
(5) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a Secretariat and subordinate offices with such officers
and members of the staff to assist the Authority in discharging its functions on such terms
and conditions of services as may be prescribed from time to time by the Central Government.
4. (1) Subject to the guidelines issued by the Central Government under the provisions
of this Act from time to time, the Authority shall perform and undertake such special steps
in close coordination with the Governments of the States, Union Territory Administrations
various Central and State level investigating agencies, intelligence agencies, local police,
Border Security Force and such other forces and Union Ministries of Home Affairs and
External Affairs for the identification of illegal immigrants and their nationality and the
31 of 1946
Definition.
Establishment
of the Illegal
Immigrants
and Missing
Foreign
Nationals
Identification
and
Deportation
Authority of
India.
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
foreign nationals who have gone missing after their arrival in India on expiry of their visa
period and to ensure their deportation from India to the Countries to which they belong.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1)
of section 4, the Authority shall,—
(a) formulate guidelines for identifying illegal immigrants and their respective
nationality and those foreign nationals who have gone missing after their arrival in
the country;
(b) direct the appropriate Government for the deportation of identified illegal
immigrants and missing foreign nationals to their countries;
(c) facilitate speedy hearing of cases against illegal immigrants and missing
foreign nationals;
(d) direct the appropriate Government to,—
 (i) stop every assistance provided by such Government to the illegal
immigrants and missing foreign nationals;
 (ii) impound the ration card, voters identity card and such other documents
procured fraudulently by the illegal immigrants and missing foreign nationals;
 (iii) delete the names of illegal immigrants and missing foreign nationals
from the electoral rolls, if, included inadvertently or fraudulently;
 (iv) terminate the services of illegal immigrants and missing foreign
nationals in case they are employed either in Government service or in private
sector;
 (v) recover the loans borrowed by illegal immigrants or missing foreign
nationals;
 (vi) take action on priority basis for the deportation of illegal immigrants
and missing foreign national to their countries;
 (vii) take such other actions as the Authority may deem necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to take, as soon as may
be, necessary action as directed by the Authority.
5. It shall be the duty of the Authority as well as of the appropriate Government to
ensure that no inconvenience is caused to any bona fide Indian citizen while implementing
the provisions of this Act.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, pay to the Authority in each financial year such sums as may be considered
necessary and adequate for the performance of the functions of the Authority under this
Act.
7. The Authority shall prepare once in every calender year in such form and at such
time as may be prescribed, as annual report giving a true and full account of its activities
during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the President of India
who shall cause the same to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
8. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to illegal immigrants and missing
foreign nationals in the country.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Authority to
ensure that
inconvenience
is not caused
to bonafide
citizens.
Annual
Report.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be
laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power to make
rules.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our Country is very vast and quite a good length of its borders are open along with the
neighbouring Countries which are poor as per the international standards. Since our border
are quite porous a large number of poor people from such Countries infiltrate into our
Country as illegal immigrants and have settled in various parts of the Country. Since they are
from the neighbouring Countries many of which were once parts of India, they easily mix up
with the local population and it is very difficult to identify them. Special efforts are required
to detect them. As a result, there are millions of illegal immigrants and their infiltration is
continuing unabated. Their number has swelled in the north-east region national capital and
several other parts of our Country. Our Country is overpopulated and struggling hard to
provide the necessities of life to its own citizens and can hardly afford to feed and sustain
these illegal immigrants. These illegal immigrants are not only increasing the numbers of our
overpopulated nation but have been found indulging in criminal and anti-India activities.
They are helping the terrorist activities against our Country and creating law and order
problem in the Country particularly in the urban areas by indulging in thefts, snatchings,
looting and other crimes. Similarly, quite a large number of foreign nationals come to our
Country on a short term visa and before the expiry of such visa, they disappear and go
missing in the Country. Many of such foreign nationals later on have been nabbed found
spying and indulging in disruptive activities in the Country.
But it is unfortunate that such illegal immigrants and missing foreign nationals acquire
ration cards, electors cards etc. in connivance with some greedy elements in the administration
to show them as Indian citizens. Thereafter, these unwanted illegal immigrants and missing
foreign nationals are cleverly creating difficulties for the genuine Indian citizens and usurping
their rights. As such to get rid of them, it has become necessary to identify them on priority
and deport them to their Countries.
Till recently the Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983 (Act No. 39 of
1983) was there to deal with the illegal immigrants but the same has since been declared ultra
vires of the Constitution by the Supreme Court. The Union Government has done nothing
either for the validation of the strucked down law or have another law in its place. As such at
present there is no law in place to deal with the illegal immigrants. Now for both the illegal
immigrants and the missing foreign nationals the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 (Act
No. 31 of 1946) can only be invoked which are not adequate to deal with this gigantic
problem. As such a new law has to be enacted to deal with these twin issues.
Hence this Bill.
RAJKUMAR  DHOOT
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the Establishment of the Illegal Immigrants and Missing
Foreign Nationals Identification and Deportation Authority along with its Secretariat. Clause
6 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds to the Authority
for performing its functions. The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. Though it is not possible to quantify the amount at this stage it is estimated
that a sum of rupee three hundred Crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupee one hundred Crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Authority at the national level for identification and
deportation of illegal immigrants who have come generally from the neighbouring
countries in India and have settled in various parts of the country thereby increasing
the burden on national resources and also to identify and deport the foreign nationals
who go missing after coming to India after the expiry of their visa period and many of
such immigrants and foreign nationals are threat to the national security and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3925RS(S3)—07-12-2012.