1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2020.
2. After article 47 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘47A. The State shall promote small family norms by offering incentives in
taxes, employment, education etc. to its people who keep their family limited to
two children and shall withdraw every concession from and deprive such incentives
to those not adhering to small family norm, to keep the growing population under
control.’’
Short title.
Duty of the
State to
promote small
family norm.
Bill No. III of 2020
Insertion of
new article
47A.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7
TH
  FEBRUARY, 2020

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The fact that population of India has already crossed over 125 crore is really
frightening. The country has doubled its population in just forty years and is expected
to unseat China as the world's most populated country in the next couple of decades
i.e. by the year 2050. As per UN Report, India, Nigeria and Pakistan are the countries
which have the highest rate of growth of population. India's current yearly growth rate
is 1.02 per cent. The country as a whole has a population density of 416 people per
square kilometer, which ranks 31st in the World. Despite the fact that we have framed a
National Population Control Policy, we are the second most populous country in the
world.
Population explosion will cause many problems for our future generations. We
have to be concerned about population explosion. The Centre as well as State
Governments should launch schemes to tackle it. Our natural resources are extremely
over burdened. The rate of growth of any country is directly related to size of its
population. Natural resources like air, water, land, woods etc. are subjected to over
exploitation because of over population. Today, there is a greater need to keep a strong
check on the increase of our population.
Today, there is also a need to encourage the poeple to keep small family by
offering tax concessions, priority in social benefit schemes and school admissions etc.
and at the same time discourage them from producing more children by withdrawing tax
concessions, imposing heavy taxes and by making other punitive provisions for
violations.
Therefore, the Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to make a provision
by the State to discourage the people from increasing their family and encourage them
to keep their family limited to two children only.
Hence this Bill.
ANIL DESAI
2

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Anil Desai, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5269RS(S3)—07-02-2020.