1
THE  MICRO,  SMALL  AND  MEDIUM  ENTERPRISES
DEVELOPMENT  (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2018
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parialment in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (I) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
(Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, after section 10,
the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"10A. (1) Every scheduled commercial bank either belonging to public sector or
10 private sector, shall lend to the micro, small and medium enterprises at the rate of
eight per cent per annum.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. III of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019
Insertion of
new sections
10A and 10B.
5
Lending rate
and limit for
lending of
collateral free
loan.
10

2
(2) Every micro, small or medium enterprises shall be entitled to collateral  free  loan up
to rupees four crore from scheduled commercial banks.
10B. The Central Government shall, from time to time, notify such incentives and
concessions to increase the inflow of equity capital into micro, small and medium enterprises,
as it may deem fit.".
.
Incentives and
concessions to
increase the
inflow of
equity capital.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 aims to provide for
facilitating promotion and development and enhancing the competitiveness of micro, small
and medium enterprises (MSMEs) in the country and also develop skill among employees,
management and entrepreneurs, provisioning for technological upgradation, marketing
assistance or infrastructure facilities.
However, the MSMEs continue to face serious bottlenecks in its development, despite
contributing eight per cent of the country's GDP and forty per cent of India's exports, employing
about sixty five million people. Lack of access to adequate and timely credit at reasonable
rate is the critical problem faced by this sector. Hence, there is an urgent need to make it
compulsory by law for scheduled commercial banks, both public sector and in private sector,
to provide affordable interest rates to MSME sector for their capital.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT ACT, 2006
* * * * *
Section 10. Credit Facilities:— The policies and practices in respect of credit to the
micro, small and medium enterprises shall be progressive and such as may be specified in the
guidelines or instructions issued by the Reserve Bank, from time to time, to ensure timely and
smooth flow of credit to such enterprises, minimise the incidence of sickness among and
enhance the competitiveness of such enterprises.
* * * * *

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Etnerprises Development Act, 2006.
————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—807RS(S3)—25-06-2019.