THE PROHIBITION OF PUBLICATION AND DISSEMINATION OF
OBJECTIONABLE MATERIAL ON RELIGION BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to prohibit the publication and dissemination of objectionable material on religion in
any form in the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-Sixth Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Publication and Dissemination of
Objectionable Material on Religion Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Agency" means as agency for prohibition of publication and dissemination
of objectionable material on religion as established under section 4 of this Act;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. III of 2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 18TH DECEMBER, 2015

2
(b) "Complaint" means an objection registered with the agency by any Indian
citizen or institution;
(c) "Dissemination" means information communicated through recorded
messages on telephones; radio; television, internet film-strips; movies or videos along
with other means of communication;
(d) "Objectionable Material" means any publication and dissemination of contents
hurting the religious sentiments of any Indian citizen;
(e) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules framed under this Act.
(f) "Publication" means a book, article, picture, photograph, pamphlet,
advertisement on poster, banner or any other printed document; and
(g) "Religion" means all religions practiced by the citizens of India.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for time being in force the
publication and dissemination of objectionable material on all religions in the country is
prohibited herewith, no matter, whether a ‘No Objection Certificate’ has been obtained from
any authority or not.
4. ( 1) For the purpose of this Act, the Central Government shall establish an agency,
which shall be termed as Agency for Prohibition of Publication and Dissemination of
Objectionable Material on Religion.
(2) Subject to the provision of this Act, this agency shall be set up in such a
manner, as prescribed.
(3) The terms and conditions of service for the persons employed in the agency
shall be as prescribed.
(4) The headquarters of the agency shall be at such place, as may be prescribed.
5. The agency shall perform the following functions:—
(a) Registration of complaints pertaining to the publication and advertisement
on dissemination of objectionable material on religion; received from concerned
institutions and public; and their redressal;
(b) to investigate the complaints duly registered;
(c) to impose a prohibition on publication and dissemination thereof, on the
basis of the outcome of investigation; and
(d) to derecognise the respective publisher and advertising agency involved in
publication and dissemination of objectionable material on religion.
6. Any person violating the provisions of section 3, shall be punished with an
imprisonment of not less than two years which may extend to five years and with a penalty
of not less than one lakh rupees.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law in this behalf,
provide the required funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being inforce.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Prohibition of
publication and
dissemination
of
objectionable
material on
religions.
Establishment
of an agency
for
prohibition of
publication
and
dissemination
of material on
religion.
Functions of
the agency.
Penalty.
Funds to be
provided by
Central
Government.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In recent times, there has been a sudden rise in the cases of publication and
dissemination of objectionable material on religion in the country. Certain mischievious
elements try to hurt the religious sentiments of the citizens of the country with support from
certain publishers and advertising agencies. In the name of right to freedom of expression
enshrined in our constitution, they tend to threaten the integrity of the country. Such
publication and dissemination of objectionable material on religion needs to be restricted in
order to preserve the secular fabric of the country.
 Hence, this Bill.
PRABHAT  JHA
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of an Agency for prohibition of
publication and dissemination of objectionable Material on Religion and appointment of
officers and employees in the agency. Clause 7 provides that Central Government shall
provide the funds to said agency after due appropriation. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees one hundred crores is likely to be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of rupees six hundred crores is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

————
A
BILL
to prohibit the publication and dissemination of objectionable material on religion in any
form in the country and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3837RS(S3)—18-12-2015.
RAJYA  SABHA