Bill No. III of 2006
THE TRADITIONAL FISHERMEN (SOCIO-ECONOMIC
PROTECTION  AND WELFARE) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the socio-economic protection and welfare measures to be undertaken by
the State for the traditional fishermen in the country by way of establishing a Welfare
Fund for them and by providing comprehensive life insurance against accidents
 caused by bad weather, cyclone, super cyclone or tsunami or for any other reason,
financial assistance for country boats and nets, unemployment allowance
 during lean season, free education medicare and other facilities to
 fishermen and their families and children and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Traditional Fishermen (Socio-Economic Protection
and Welfare) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MARCH, 2006
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "accident" means an accident caused during the course of fishing including
drowning by natural calamity like storm, cyclone, super cyclone or tsunami or otherwise
in which the fishermen loses his life;
(b) "Administrator" means Administrator appointed under section 5;
(c) "appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central  Government;
(d) "Fund" means the Traditional Fishermen Welfare Fund established under
section 4;
(e) “partial disablement” means disablement caused by an accident which reduces
the working capacity of any fishermen temporarily which he was capable of having
before the accident;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) “total disablement” includes any disablement which incapacitates a fisherman
for all work which he was capable of performing prior to the accident.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year of the
commencement of this Act, formulate, in consultation with the Governments of the States
having substantial population of traditional fishermen, a long-term national policy for the
socio-economic protection and welfare of traditional fishermen and their families who are
pursuing their centuries old, traditional, labour intensive rural based occupation.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1)
the national policy shall provide for,—
(a) comprehensive insurance cover for the traditional fishermen and their family
members in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) insurance cover for the country fishing boats and nets and dwelling units;
(c) rehabilitation measures in case of  traditional fishermen affected by sea storm,
cyclone, super cyclone or tsunami;
(d) prevention of intrusion of mechanized boats of any size into traditional
fishing grounds in the inshore coastal and inland waters;
(e) prevention of reckless mechanized fishing to protect the delicate fish ecology
and fish breeding grounds generally located in the warm nutrient rich shallow coastal
waters;
(f) such other measures as the Central Government may deem necessary for the
protection and welfare of traditional fishermen and their families.
4.  (1)  The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Fund to be called the Traditional Fishermen Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The initial corpus money of the Fund shall be one thousand crore rupees which
shall be provided by the Central Government after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf.
(3) After the establishment of the Fund, money to the Fund shall be provided by the
Central and the State Governments in such proportion as may be agreed to from year to year
and the money received by way of donations from individuals, body corporates, financial and
other institutions shall also form the corpus money of the Fund.
(4) The Fund shall be administered by the Central Government in such manner as
may be prescribed.
National
Policy for
the tradi-
tional
fishermen.
Establishment
of the Tradi-
tional Fisher-
men Welfare
Fund.
Definitions.

3
5. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such
number of Administrators from amongst its cadres of officers as it may deem necessary
who shall entertain and dispose of the claims for payment of compensation and other facilities
under this Act and follow such procedures as may be prescribed.
6. The Fund established under this Act shall be utilised for providing,—
(a) comprehensive life insurance cover to the traditional fishermen and their
family members;
(b) insurance for dwelling units and household items of the traditional fishermen;
(c) free medical care to the traditional fishermen and their family members;
(d) financial assistance to the traditional fishermen for purchasing country
fishing boats or repairing such boats, fishing nets and other equipment required for
fishing;
(e) unemployment allowance during illness or financial crisis during lean
periods;
(f) free education including technical and vocational education to the children of
traditional fishermen;
(g) financial assistance for marriage in the family of traditional fishermen;
(h) such other purposes as may be prescribed.
7. (1) Subject to the .provisions of this Act, the amount of compensation payable to a
traditional fisherman sustaining injury resulting in his death or partial or total disablement or
in case of his drowning or sweeping away by the water currents or in his disappearance or
his dwelling unit and movable properties being washed away in a storm or cyclone, super
cyclone or tsunami, shall be such as may be specified by the Central Government from time
to time by notification in the Official Gazette.
(2) In case of death of a traditional fisherman, the compensation fixed under sub-
section (1) shall be paid to the spouse of the deceased or to his legal heir or to the children,
as the case may be, and in case the deceased being unmarried the compensation shall be paid
to his parents.
(3) Every claimant for payment of compensation under this Act shall apply to the
Administrator in prescribed format giving such details as may be prescribed.
(4) Every claim for compensation under this Act shall be finalized by the Administrator
and payment shall be made within thirty days of the claim.
8. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) establish adequate number of schools and vocational training institutes and
healthcare centres in and around the areas inhabitated by traditional fishermen for
their benefit including their families and children;
(b) provide adequate and hygienic marketing facilities to the fishermen for their
catch;
(c) provide subsidy for small scale hatcheries and medium scale hatcheries for
those traditional fishermen who intend to set up shrimp/prawn farms;
(d) establish adequate number of chill room facilities in the areas of traditional
fishermen;
(e) prevent the intrusion of mechanized boats into the old traditional fishing
grounds in the inshore coastal and inland waters by national and multinational
companies;
(f) through the Coast Guard and Navy, prevent the trespassing by fishermen of
other countries into the fisheries of Indian waters;
Appointment
of Administra-
tors.
Utilisation of
the Fund.
Fixation of
compensa-
tion and
payment
thereof.
Miscellaneous
provisions.

4
(g) take up the issue with neighbouring countries through diplomatic channels
whenever the Indian fishermen are detained with their boats and nets by such countries
so as to ensure their timely release;
(h) take such other measures as it may deem necessary for the protection and
welfare of traditional fishermen.
9.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, if
any person resorts to mechanised fishing in any water to catch or destroy any fish therein,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with
a fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both and his mechanised boat and nets
shall also be confiscated.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law applicable to fishermen for the time being in force.
11. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, to the States for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Application
of other laws
not barred.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
funds to the
States.
Power to
make rules.

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are millions of traditional fishermen and their families living in over 1800 villages
along the entire 5650 Kms. coast line of our country who earn their livelihood by catching
fish with their country boats and nets and selling it in the market. Catching fish is their family
vocation and they are doing it for generations. Traditionally , male fishermen venture into the
sea and  catch fish whereas the women do the processing work of the fish. However, the
fishermen and their families live in abject poverty are debt ridden and have hand to mouth
existence whereas the middlemen wholesalers and retailers, etc. flourish at the cost of fisher-
men because seafood is becoming popular worldwide. Many a time when there is storm,
cyclone or super cyclone, large numbers of fishermen are carried away by water currents.
Thousands of fishermen lost their lives when Orissa was swept away by super cyclone few
years back and during the recent tsunami disaster in various parts of the country including
Pondicherry, Tamil Nadu, Andaman Nicobar, etc. They also lose their dwelling units mainly
huts and their household belongings and food items when hit by cyclone, super cyclone or
tsunami. Similarly, many a time they get drowned during fishing or receive injuries leading to
their partial or total disablement. But nobody except their family members are there to look
after them who being poverty stricken themselves can not afford to look after the affected
fishermen. The whole family is ruined due to death or disablement of a fishermen. Further, the
survival of traditional fishermen is threatened by the intrusion of mechanized boats into their
centuries old traditional fishing grounds in the inshore coastal and inland waters. These
mechanized boats not only deprive the traditional fishermen of their catch but also destroy
the delicate fish ecology and fish breeding grounds by reckless mechanized fishing which
causes killing of fish eggs resulting in alarming depletion of fish resources, disastrous
decline in daily fish catch rendering poor traditional fishermen impoverished.
Hence in a welfare State like ours, the State should come forward to provide a helping
hand to the poor traditional fishermen. They should be provided with adqauate insurance
against accidents caused by storm, cyclone, super cyclone or tsunami and insurances for
their dwelling units and household items. They should also get (i) healthcare, financial
assistance for marriages and other needs, educational and vocational facilities for their
children, (ii) marketing facilities, chill room facilities and other necessary facilities, and
socio-economic protection firm steps should be taken to prevent mechanized fishing as well.
Hence this Bill.
V .  NARAYANASAMY
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117(3) OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Copy of letter No. 47-11(1)/2006-Fy(S) dated the 28th February, 2006 from Shri Sharad
Pawar, Minister of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution to the
Secretary-General, Rajya Sabha).
‘The President having been informed of the subject matter of above mentioned Bill,
has accorded his recommendation under article 117(3) of the Constitution for consideration
of the Bill, in the Rajya Sabha.’

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the traditional Fishermen Welfare
Fund. Clause 5 provides for the appointment of Administrators. Clause 11 provides that the
Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the States for carrying out the purposes
of this Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
Apart from the initial corpus fund of one thousand crore rupees it is estimated that a sum of
two thousand crore rupees may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees one thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
6

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the socio-economic protection and welfare measures to be undertaken by
the State for the traditional fishermen in the country by way of establishing a Welfare
 fund for them and by providing comprehensive life insurance against accidents,
 caused by bad weather, cyclone, super cyclone or tsunami or for  any other
 reason, financial assistance for country boats and nets, unemployment
 allowance during lean season, free education, medicare and other
 facilities to fishermen and their families and children and for
 matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri V. Narayanasamy, M.P.)
MGIPMRND— 5992RS—(S-5)—03-03-2006.