AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. III of 2025 
THE VIRAL HEPATITIS (PREVENTION AND CONTROL) 
BILL, 2025 
__________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
__________ 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement.
2
. D
efinitions.
CHAPTER II 
PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ACTS 
3. Prohibition of discrimination.
4
. P
rohibition of certain acts.
CHAPTER III 
INFORMED CONSENT 
5. Informed Consent for undertaking Viral Hepatitis test or treatment.
6. I
nformed consent not required for conducting Viral Hepatitis tests in certain
cas
es.
7. G
uideline for testing centres, etc.
CHAPTER IV 
DISCLOSURE OF VIRAL HEPATITIS STATUS 
8. Disclosure of Viral Hepatitis Status.
9
. D
isclosure of Viral Hepatitis-positive status to partner of Viral Hepatitis-
positive person.
10. D
uty to prevent transmission of Viral Hepatitis.
CHAPTER V 
OBLIGATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS 
11. Confidentiality of data.
12. V
iral Hepatitis Control policy for establishments.

ii 
CLAUSES 
C
HAPTER VI 
ANTIVIRAL THERAPY FOR PEOPLE INFECTED WITH VIRAL HEPATITIS 
13. Government to take measure.
14. A
ntiviral therapy by appropriate Government.
CHAPTER VII 
WELFARE MEASURES BY THE APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT 
15. Welfare Measures by the appropriate Government.
16. P
rotection of property of children affected by Viral Hepatitis.
17. P
romotion of Viral Hepatitis related information, education and
communication programmes.
18. W
omen and children infected with Viral Hepatitis.
CHAPTER VIII 
SAFE WORKING ENVIRONMENT 
19. Obligation of establishments to provide safe working environment.
20. G
eneral responsibility of establishments.
21. G
rievance redressal mechanism.
CHAPTER IX 
PROMOTION OF STRATEGIES FOR REDUCTION OF RISK 
22. Strategies for reduction of risk.
CHAPTER X 
VIRAL HEPATITIS COMPLAINT OFFICER 
23. Appointment of Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer.
2
4. P
owers of Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer.
25. P
rocedure of complaint.
26. O
rders of Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer.
27. A
uthorities to assist Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer.
28. R
eport to appropriate Government.
CHAPTER XI 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
29. Right of residence.

iii 
CLAUSES 
30. Viral Hepatitis-r elated information, education and communication before
marriage.
31. P
ersons in care or custody of State.
32. R
ecognition of guardianship of older sibling.
33. L
iving wills for guardianship and testamentary guardianship.
CHAPTER XII 
SPECIAL PROCEDURE IN COURT 
34. Special procedure in Court.
3
5. Mai
ntenance applications.
36. S
entencing.
CHAPTER XIII 
PENALTIES 
37. Penalty for contravention.
3
8. P
enalty for failure to comply with orders of Viral Hepatitis Complaint
Officer.
39. P
enalty for breach of confidentiality in legal proceedings.
40. P
rohibition of victimisation.
41. C
ourt to try offences.
42. O
ffences to be cognizable and bailable.
CHAPTER XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
43. Act to have overriding effect.
44. P
rotection of action taken in good faith.
45. D
elegation of powers.
46. G
uidelines.
47. P
ower of Central Government to make rules.
48. L
aying of rules before both Houses of Parliament.
49. P
ower of State Government to make rules and laying thereof.
50. P
ower to remove difficulties.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. III of 2025 
THE VIRAL HEPATITIS (PREVENTION AND 
CONTROL) BILL, 2025 
A  
BILL 
to provide for the prevention and control of the spread of Viral Hepatitis 
and for the protection of human rights of persons affected by 
 the said virus and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS the spread of Viral Hepatitis is a matter of grave concern to 
all and there is an urgent need for the prevention and control of said virus; 
AND WHEREAS there is a need to protect and secure the human rights 
of persons who are Viral Hepatitis -positive, affected by Viral Hepatitis and 
vulnerable to the said virus; 
AND WHEREAS there is a necessity for effective care, support and 
treatment for Viral Hepatitis-positives; 
 AND WHEREAS there is a need to protect the rights of healthcare 
providers and other persons in relation to Viral Hepatitis; 
AND WHEREAS India is committed to combating the disease in line with 
the Resolution at the 69th World Health Assembly on Viral Hepatitis; 
AND WHEREAS the Republic of India, being a signatory to the aforesaid 
Resolution, it is expedient to give effect to the said Resolution. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:– 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Viral Hepatitis (Prevention and Control) Act,
2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Government of India may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— 
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 
(b) “capacity to consent” means the ability of an individual, 
determined on an objective basis, to understand and appreciate the nature 
and consequences of a proposed action and to make an informed decision 
concerning such action; 
(c) “discrimination” means any act or omission which directly or 
indirectly, expressly or by effect, immediately or over a period of time,— 
(i) imposes any burden, obligation, liability, disability or 
disadvantage on any person or category of persons, based on  one or 
more Viral Hepatitis-related grounds; or 
(ii) denies or withholds any benefit, opportunity or advantage 
from any person or category of persons, based on one or more Viral 
Hepatitis-related grounds, and the expression “discriminate” to be 
construed accordingly. 
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this clause, Viral Hepatitis -related 
grounds include— 
(i)  being a Viral Hepatitis-positive person; 
(ii) ordinarily living, residing or cohabiting with a person who is 
Viral Hepatitis-positive person; 
(iii) ordinarily lived, resided or cohabited with a person who was 
Viral Hepatitis-positive. 
Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that 
adoption of medically advised safeguards and precautions to minimise the 
risk of infection shall not amount to discrimination; 
(d) “domestic relationship” means a relationship as defined under 
clause (f) of section 2 of the Protection of Women from Domestic 
Violence Act, 2005; 
(e) “establishment” means a body corporate or cooperative society 
or any organisation or institution or two or more persons jointly carrying 
out a systematic activity for a period of twelve months or more at one or 
more places for consideration or otherwise, for the production, supply or 
distribution of goods or services; 
(f) “guidelines” means any statement or any other document issued 
by the appropriate Government indicating policy or procedure or course 
of action relating to Viral Hepatitis to be followed b y the Government, 
governmental and non -governmental organisations and establishments 
and individuals dealing with prevention, control and treatment of Viral 
Hepatitis; 
(g) “healthcare provider” means any individual whose vocation or 
profession is directly or indirectly related to the maintenance of the health 
of another individual and includes any physician, nurse, paramedic, 
psychologist, counsellor or other individual providing medical, nursing, 
psychological or other healthcare services including Viral H epatitis 
prevention and treatment services; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
1
8 of 2013. 
 
 
6 of 2009. 
5 
10 
15 
2
0 
25 
30 
35 
40 
(h) “hepatitis viruses” includes all types of hepatitis viruses - types
A, B, C, D, E, and possibly G, that primarily attack the liver in human 
beings;  
( i) “informed consent” means consent given by any individual or his
representative specific to a p roposed intervention without any coercion, 
undue influence, fraud, mistake or misrepresentation and such consent is 
obtained after informing such individual or his representative, as the case 
may be, such information, as specified in the guidelines, relati ng to risks 
and benefits of, and alternatives to, the proposed intervention in such 
language and in such manner as understood by that individual or his 
representative, as the case may be; 
(j) “notification” means a notification published in the Officia l
Gazette; 
(k) “p artner” means a spouse, de facto  spouse or a person with whom 
another person has a relationship in the nature of marriage; 
( l) “person” includes an individual, a Hindu Undivided Family, a
company, a firm, an association of persons or a body of individuals, 
whether incorporated or not, any corporation established by or under any 
Central or State Act or any company including a Government company 
incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013, any Limited Liability 
Partnership under the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, any body 
corporate incorporated by or under the laws of a country outside India, a 
co-operative society register ed under any law relating to co- operative 
societies, a local authority, and every other artificial juridical person; 
(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate
Government, as the case may be; 
(n) “protected person” means a person who is—
(i) Viral Hepatitis-Positive; or
(ii) ordinarily living, residing or cohabiting with a person
who is Viral Hepatitis-positive person; or 
(iii) ordinarily lived, resided or cohabited with a person
who was Viral Hepatitis - positive; 
(o) “reasonable accommodation” means minor adjustments to a job or 
work that enables a Viral Hepatitis -positive person who is otherwise 
qualified to enjoy equal benefits or to perform the essential functions of 
the job or work, as the case may be; 
(p) “relative”, with reference to the protected person, means—
(i) spouse of the protected person;
(ii) parents of the protected person;
(iii) brother or sister of the protected person;
(iv) brother or sister of the spouse of the protected person;
(v) brother or sister of either of the parents of the protected
person; 

4 
(vi) in the absence of any of the relatives mentioned at sub -
clauses ( i) to ( v), any lineal ascendant or descendant of the 
protected person; 
(vii) in the absence of any of the relatives mentioned at sub
clauses ( i) to ( vi), any lineal ascendant or descendant of the 
spouse of the protected person; 
(q) “significant risk” means—
(i) the presence of significant-risk body substances;
(ii) a circumstance which constitutes a significant risk for
transmitting or contracting Viral Hepatitis infection; or 
(iii) the presence of an infectious source and an uninfected
person. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause,— 
(i) “significant-risk body substances” are blood, blood
products, semen, vaginal secretions, breast milk, tissue and the 
body fluids, namely, cerebrospinal, amniotic, peritoneal, 
synovial, pericardial and pleural; 
(ii) “circumstances which constitute signific ant-risk for
transmitting or contracting Viral Hepatitis infection” include 
infectious body fluids, such as blood, vaginal secretions, or 
semen, containing the Hepatitis B virus (HBV): 
Provided that “significant-risk” shall not include exposure 
to urine, f aeces, sputum, nasal secretions, saliva, sweat, tears or 
vomit that does not contain blood that is visible to the naked eye; 
(r) “Universal Precautions” means control measures that prevent
exposure to or reduce, the risk of transmission of pathogenic agents 
(including Hepatitis virus) and include education, training, personal 
protective equipment such as gloves, gowns and masks, hand washing, 
and employing safe work practices; 
( s) “viral hepatitis” means an infection  afflicted by the hepatitis
viruses that causes liver inflammation and damage; 
(
t) “Viral Hepatitis -affected person” means an individual who is
Viral Hepatitis -positive or whose partner (with whom such individual 
normally resides) is Viral Hepatitis -positive or has lost a partner (with 
whom such individual resided) due to Viral Hepatitis; 
(u) “Viral Hepatitis -positive person” means a person whose Viral
Hepatitis test has been confirmed positive; 
(v) “Viral Hepatitis -related information” means any information
relating to the Viral Hepatitis status of a person and includes— 
(i) information relating to the undertaking performing the
Viral Hepatitis test or the result of a Viral Hepatitis test; 
(ii) information relating to the care, support or treatment of
that person; 
(iii) information which may identify that person; and
5 
1
0 
15 
2
0 
2
5 
30 
3
5 
4
0 

5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(iv) any other informatio n concerning that person, which is 
collected, received, accessed or recorded in connection with a 
Viral Hepatitis test, Viral Hepatitis treatment or Viral Hepatitis -  
related research or the Viral Hepatitis status of that person; 
(w) “Viral Hepatitis test”  means a test to determine the presence of     
an antibody or antigen of Viral Hepatitis. 
   CHAPTER II 
PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ACTS 
  
.  
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
3.  No person shall discriminate against the protected person on any ground 
including any of the following, namely:— 
(a) the denial of, or termination from, employment or occupation, 
unless, in the case of termination, the person, who is otherwise 
qualified, is furnished with— 
(i) a copy of the written assessment of a qualified and 
independent healthcare provider competent to do so that such 
protected person poses a significant risk of transmission of Viral 
Hepatitis to other person in the workplace, or is unfit to perform 
the duties of the job; and 
(ii) a copy of a written statement by the employer stating 
the nature and extent of administrative or financial hardship for 
not providing him reasonable accommodation; 
(b) the unfair treatment in, or in relation to, employment or 
occupation; 
(c) the denial or discontinuation of, or, unfair treatment in, 
healthcare services; 
(d) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, 
educational, establishments and services thereof; 
(e) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatm ent with 
regard to, access to, or provision or enjoyment or use of any goods, 
accommodation, service, facility, benefit, privilege or opportunity 
dedicated to the use of the general public or customarily available to 
the public, whether or not for a fee, including shops, public restaurants, 
hotels and places of public entertainment or the use of wells, tanks, 
bathing ghats, roads, burial grounds or funeral ceremonies and places 
of public resort; 
(f) the denial, or, discontinuation of, or unfair treatment wi th 
regard to, the right of movement; 
(g) the denial or discontinuation of, or, unfair treatment with 
regard to, the right to reside, purchase, rent, or otherwise occupy any 
property; 
(h) the denial or discontinuation of, or, unfair treatment in, the 
opportunity to stand for, or, hold public or private office; 
(i) the denial of access to, removal from, or unfair treatment in, 
Government or private establishment in whose care or custody a person 
may be; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prohibition of 
discrimination. 

6 
(j) the denial of, or unfair treatment in, the provision of insurance 
unless supported by actuarial studies; 
(k) the isolation or segregation of a protected person;
(l) Viral Hepatitis testing as a pre -requisite for obtaining
employment, or accessing healthcare services or education or, for the 
continuation of the same or, for accessing or using any other service or 
facility: 
           Provided that, in case of failure to furnish the written assessment 
under sub-clause (i) of clause (a), it shall be presumed that there is no 
significant risk and that the person is fit to perform the duties of the job, 
as the case may be, and in case of the failure to furnish the written 
statement under sub-clause (ii) of that clause, it shall be presumed that 
there is no such undue administrative or financial hardship. 
5 
1
0 
Prohibition of 
certain acts. 
4. No person shall, by words, either spoken or written, publish, propagate,
advocate or communicate by signs or by visible representation or otherwise
the feelings of hatred against any protected persons or group of protected
persons in general or specifically or disseminate, broadcast or display any
information, advertisement or notice, which may reasonably be construed to
demonstrate an intention to propagate hatred or which is likely t o expose
protected persons to hatred, discrimination or physical violence.
15 
2
0 
CHAPTER III 
INFORMED CONSENT 
Informed 
Consent for 
undertaking 
Viral Hepatitis 
test or 
treatment. 
5. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act,—
(a) no Viral Hepatitis test shall be undertaken or performed upon 
any person; or 
(b) no protected person shall be subject to medical treatment,
medical interventions or research, 
except with the informed consent of such person or his representative and in 
such manner, as may be specified in the guidelines. 
(2) The informed consent for the Viral Hepatitis test shall include pre -test
a
nd post -test counselling to the person being tested or such person’s
representative in the manner as may be specified in the guidelines.
2
5 
3
0 
Informed 
consent not 
required for 
conducting 
Viral Hepatitis 
tests in certain 
cases. 
6. The  informed  consent  for  conducting  a  Viral  Hepatitis  test shall not be
required—
(a) where a court determines, by an order that the carrying out
of the Viral Hepatitis test of any person either as part of a medical 
examination or otherwise, is necessary for the determination of issues 
in the matter before it; 
(b) for procuring, processing, distribution or use of a human
body or any part thereof including tissues, blood, semen or other body 
fluids for use in medical research or therapy:  
    Provided that where the test results are requested by a donor 
prior to donation, the donor shall be referred to a counselling and testing 
centre and such donor shall not be entitled to the results of the test 
unless he has received post-test counselling from such centre; 
3
5 
4
0 
4
5 

7 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
           (c) for epidemiological or surveillance purposes where the Viral 
Hepatitis test is anonymous and is not for the purpose of determining 
the Viral Hepatitis status of a person:  
          Provided that persons who are subjects of such epidemiological 
or surveillance studies shall be informed of the purposes of such 
studies; and 
        (d) for screening purposes in any licensed blood bank. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
10 
7. No Viral Hepatitis test shall be conducted or performed by any testing or 
diagnostic centre or pathology laboratory or blood bank unless such centre or 
laboratory or blood bank follows the guidelines laid down for such test. 
 Guideline for 
testing centres, 
etc. 
   CHAPTER IV 
DISCLOSURE OF VIRAL HEPATITIS STATUS 
  
  
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force,— 
(i) no person shall be compelled to disclose his Viral Hepatitis 
status except by an order of the court that the disclosure of such 
information is necessary in the interest of justice for the determination 
of issues in the matter before it; 
(ii) no person shall disclose or be compelled to disclose the Viral 
Hepatitis status or any other private information of another person 
imparted in confidence or in a relationship of a fiduciary nature, except 
with the informed consent of that other person or a representative of 
such another person obtained in the manner as specified in section 5, as 
the case may be, and the fact of such consent has been recorded in 
writing by the person making such disclosure:  
        Provided that, in case of a relationship of a fiduciary nature, 
informed consent shall be recorded in writing. 
(2) The informed consent for disclosure of Viral Hepatitis -related 
information under clause (ii) of sub -section (1) is not required where the 
disclosure is made— 
(a) by a healthcare provider to another healthcare provider who is 
involved in the care, treatment or counselling of such person, when 
such disclosure is necessary to provide care or treatment to that person; 
(b) by an order of a court that the disclosure of such information 
is necessary in the interest of justice for the determination of issues and 
in the matter before it; 
(c) in suits or legal proceedings between persons, where the 
disclosure of such information is necessary in filing suits or legal 
proceedings or for instructing their counsel; 
(d) as required under the provisions of section 9; 
(e) if it relates to statistical or other information of a person that 
could not reasonably be expected to lead to the identification of that 
person; and 
(f) to the officers of the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, for the purposes of monitoring, 
evaluation or supervision. 
 Disclosure of 
Viral Hepatitis 
Status. 
 
  

8 
Disclosure of 
Viral Hepatitis-
positive status to 
partner of 
Viral Hepatitis-
positive person.
 
9. (1) No healthcare provider, except a physician or a counsellor, shall disclose 
the Viral Hepatitis -positive status of a person to his or her partner.
(2
) A healthcare provider, who is a physician or counsellor, may disclose
the Viral Hepatitis - positive status of a person under his direct care to his
or her partner, if such healthcare provider—
(a) reasonably believes that the partner is at a significant risk of
transmission of Viral Hepatitis from such a person; and 
(b) such Viral Hepatitis -positive person has been counselled to
inform such partner; and 
(c) is satisfied that the Viral Hepatitis -positive person will not
inform such partner; and 
(d) has inf ormed the Viral Hepatitis -positive person of the
intention to disclose the Viral Hepatitis - positive status to such 
partner:  
        Provided that disclosure under this sub- section to the partner 
shall be made in person after counselling:  
        Provided further that such healthcare provider shall have no 
obligation to identify or locate the partner of a Viral Hepatitis -
positive person:  
        Provided also that such healthcare provider shall not inform the 
partner of a woman where there is a reasonable apprehension that such 
information may result in violence, abandonment or actions which 
may have a severe negative effect on the physical or mental health or 
safety of such woman, her children, her relatives or someone who is 
close to her. 
(3) The healthcare provider under sub-section (1) shall not be liable for any
criminal or civil action for any disclosure or non- disclosure of confidential
Viral Hepatitis-related information made to a partner under this section.
5 
10 
15 
2
0 
25 
Duty to prevent 
transmission of 
Viral Hepatitis. 
10. Every person, who is Viral Hepatitis -positive and has been counselled in
accordance with the guidelines issued or is aware of the nature of Viral
Hepatitis and its transmission, shall take all reasonable precautions to
prevent the transmission of Viral Hepatitis to other persons which may
include adopting strategies for the reduction of risk or informing in advance
his Viral Hepatitis status before any sexual contact with any person or with
whom needles are shared with:
P rovided that the provisions of this section shall not be applicable to
prevent transmission through sexual contact in the case of a woman, where
there is a reasonable apprehension that such information may result in
violence, abandonment or actions which may have a severe negative effect
on the physical or mental health or safety of such woman, her children, her
relatives or someone who is close to her.
30 
35 
4
0 
CHAPTER V 
OBLIGATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS 
 Confidentiality 
of data. 
11. Every establishment keeping the records of Viral Hepatitis -related
information of protected persons shall adopt data protection measures in 45 

9 
5
accordance with the guidelines to ensure that such information is protected 
from disclosure. 
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, data protection measures 
shall include procedures for protecting information from disclosure, 
procedures for accessing information, provisions for security systems to 
protect the information stored in any form and mechanisms to ens ure 
accountability and liability of persons in the establishment. 
12. The appropriate Government shall notify model Viral Hepatitis Control
policy for establishments, in such manner, as may be prescribed. 
Viral Hepatitis 
Control policy 
for 
establishments. 
10 CHAPTER VI 
ANTIVIRAL THERAPY FOR PEOPLE INFECTED WITH VIRAL HEPATITIS 
13. The appropriate Government, as the case may be, shall take all such
measures as it deems necessary and expedient for the prevention of the 
spread of Viral Hepatitis, in accordance with the guidelines. 
Government to 
take measure. 
15 
20 
14. (1) The measures to be taken by the appropriate Government under
section 13 shall include the measures for providing, as far as possible, 
diagnostic facilities relating to Viral Hepatitis. 
(2) The appropriate Government shall issue necessary guidelines in
respect of protocols for Viral Hepatitis relating to diagnostic facilities,
and Anti-Viral Management which shall be applicable to all persons
and shall ensure their wide dissemination.
Antiviral 
therapy by 
appropriate 
Government. 
CHAPTER VII 
WELFARE MEASURES BY THE GOVERNMENT 
25 
15. (1) The appropriate Government shall take measures to facilitate better 
access to welfare schemes to persons infected or affected by Viral 
Hepatitis. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub- section ( 1), the
appropriate Government shall frame schemes to  address the needs of
all protected persons.
Welfare 
Measures by the 
appropriate 
Government. 
2
 of 2016. 
30 
35 
40 
16. (1) The appropriate Government, as the case may be, shall take appropriate
steps to protect the property of children affected by Viral Hepatitis for the 
protection of property of child affected by Viral Hepatitis. 
(2) The parents or guardians of children affe cted by Viral Hepatitis, or any
person acting to protect their interest, or a child affected by Viral Hepatitis
may approach the Child Welfare Committee for the safekeeping and deposit 
of documents related to the property rights of such child or to make
complaints relating to such child being dispossessed or actual dispossession
or
 trespass into such child’s house.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, “Child Welfare Committee” 
means a Committee set up under section  27 of the Juvenile Justice (Care 
and Protection of Children) Act,  2015. 
Protection of 
property of 
children 
affected by 
Viral Hepatitis. 
17. The appropriate Government shall formulate Viral Hepatitis related
information, education and communication programmes which are age -
appropriate, gender-sensitive, non-stigmatising and non-discriminatory.
Promotion of 
Viral Hepatitis 
related 
information, 
education and 
communication 
programmes. 

10 
Women and 
children infected 
with Viral 
Hepatitis. 
18. (1) The appropriate Government shall lay down guidelines for the care,
support and treatment of children infected with Viral Hepatitis.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub- section (1)
a
nd notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, the appropriate Government as the case may be, shall take
measures to counsel and provide information regarding the outcome of
pregnancy and Viral Hepatitis related treatment to the Viral Hepatitis
infected women.
(3) No Viral Hepatitis positive woman, who is pregnant, shall be subjected
to sterilisation or abortion without obtaining her informed consent.
5 
1
0 
CHAPTER VIII 
SAFE WORKING ENVIRONMENT 
Obligation of 
establishments 
to provide safe 
working 
environment. 
19. Every establishment, engaged in healthcare services and every such other
establishment where there is a significant risk of occupational exposure to
Viral Hepatitis, shall, for the purpose of ensuring a safe working
environment—
(i) provide, in accordance with the guidelines—
(a) Universal Precautions to all persons working in such
establishment who may be occupationally exposed to Viral
Hepatitis; and
(b ) training for the use of such Universal Precautions;
(ii) inform and educate all persons working in the es tablishment of
the availability of Universal Precautions. 
15 
20 
General 
responsibility of 
establishments. 
20. (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all establishments
consisting of one hundred or more persons, whether as an employee or
officer or member or director or trustee or manager, as the case may be:
Provided that in the case of hea lth care establishments, the provisions
of this sub-section shall have the effect as if for the words “one hundred or
more”, the words “twenty or more” had been substituted.
(2) Every person, who is in charge of an establishment, referred to in sub-
section (1), for the conduct of the activities of such establishment, shall
ensure compliance of the provisions of this Act.
25 
30 
Grievance 
redressal 
mechanism. 
21. Every establishment referred to in sub -section (1) of section 20 shall
designate such person, as it deems fit, as the Complaints Officer who shall
dispose of complaints of violations of the provisions of this Act in the
establishment, in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.
35 
CHAPTER IX 
PROMOTION OF STRATEGIES FOR REDUCTION OF RISK 
Strategies for 
reduction of 
risk. 
22. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force any strategy or mechanism or technique adopted or implemented for
reducing the risk of Viral Hepatitis transmission, or any act pursuant
thereto, as carried out by persons, establishments or organisations in the
manner as may be specified in the guidelines issued by the appropriate
Government shall not be restricted or prohibited in any manner, and shall
not amount to a criminal offence or attract civil liability.
40 
4
5 

11 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
       Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, strategies for reducing risk 
of Viral Hepatitis transmission means promoting actions or practices that 
minimise a person’s risk of exposure to Viral Hepatitis or mitigate the 
adverse impacts related to Viral Hepatitis including— 
(i) the provisions of information, education and counselling
services relating to prevention of Viral Hepatitis and safe 
practices; 
(ii) the provisions and use of safer sex tools, including
condoms; 
(iii) drug substitution and drug maintenance; and
(iv) provision of comprehensive injection safety
requirements. 
Illustrations 
(a) A supplies condoms to B who is a sex worker or to C, who is a
client of B. Neither A nor B nor C can be held criminally or civilly liable 
for such actions or be prohibited, impeded, restricted or prevented from 
implementing or using the strategy. 
(b) M carries on an intervention project on Viral Hepatitis and sexual
health information, education and counselling for men, who have sex with 
men, provides safer sex information, material and condoms to N, who has 
sex with other men. Neither M nor N can be held criminally or civilly liable 
for such actions or be prohibited, impeded, restricted or prevented from 
implementing or using the intervention. 
(c) X, wh o u ndertakes an intervention providing registered needle
exchange programme services to injecting drug users, supplies a clean 
needle to Y, an injecting drug user who exchanges the same for a used 
needle. Neither X nor Y can be held criminally or civilly liab le for such 
actions or be prohibited, impeded, restricted or prevented from 
implementing or using the intervention. 
(d) D , who carries on an intervention programme providing Opioid
Substitution Treatment (OST), administers OST to E, an injecting drug user. 
Neither D nor E can be held criminally or civilly liable for such actions or 
be prohibited, impeded, restricted or prevented from implementing or using 
the intervention. 
35 CHAPTER X 
VIRAL HEPATITIS COMPLAINT OFFICER 
40 
23. (1) The appropriate Government shall appoint one or more Viral
Hepatitis Complaint Officer— 
(a) possessing such qualification and experience as may be
prescribed, or 
(b) designate any of its officers not below such rank, as may be
prescribed, by that Government, to exercise such powers and 
discharge such functions, as may be conferred on Viral Hepat itis 
Complaint Officer under this Act. 
Appointment of 
Viral Hepatitis 
Complaint 
Officer. 

12 
(2) The terms and conditions of the service of a Viral Hepatitis
Complaint Officer appointed under clause ( a) of sub -section (1) shall
b
e such as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(3) The Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer appointed under sub-section
(1) s
hall have such jurisdiction in respect of such area or areas as the
appropriate Government may, by notification, specify.
5 
Powers of Viral 
Hepatitis 
Complaint 
Officer. 
24. (1) The Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer shall, upon a complaint made by
any person, inquire into the violations of the provisions of this Act, in
relation to acts of discrimination mentioned in section 3 and providing of
healthcare services by any person, in such manner as may be prescribed by
the appropriate Government.
(2) The Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer may require any person to furnish 
information on such points or matters, as he considers necessary, for
inquiring into the matter and any person so required shall be deemed to be
legally bound to furnish such information and failure to do so shall be
punishable under sections 211 and 212 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,
2023.
(3) The Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer shall maintain records in such
manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
1
0 
1
5 
4
5 of 2023. 
Procedure of 
complaint. 
25. The complaints may be made to the Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer
under sub-section (1) of section 24 in such manner, as may be prescribed, 
by the appropriate Government. 
20 
Orders of Viral 
Hepatitis 
Complaint 
Officer. 
26. The Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer shall, within a period of thirty days
of the receipt of the complaint under sub-section (1) of section 24, and after
giving an opportunity of being heard to the parties, pass such order, as he
deems fit, giving reasons therefor:
Provided that in cases of medical emergency of Viral Hepatitis positive
persons, the Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer shall pass such order as soon
as possible, preferably within twenty-
four hours of the receipt of the
complaint.
25 
3
0 
Authorities to 
assist Viral 
Hepatitis 
Complaint 
Officer. 
27. All authorities including the civil authorities functioning in the area for
which the Officer has been appointed under section 23 shall assist i n
execution of orders passed by the Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer.
Report to 
appropriate 
Government. 
28. The Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer, after every six months, reports to
the appropriate Government, the number and nature of complaints received,
the action taken and orders passed in relation to such complaints and such
report shall be  published on the website of the Viral Hepatitis Complain
t
O
fficer.
35 
CHAPTER XI 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS 4
0 
Right of 
residence. 
29. Every protected person shall have the right to reside in the shared
household, the right not to be excluded from the shared household or any
part of it and the right to enjoy and use the facilities of such shared
household in a non-discriminatory manner.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “shared
household” means a household where a person lives or at any stage has lived 
45 

13 
5 
in a domestic relationship either singly or along with another person and 
includes such a household, whether owned or tenanted, either jointly or 
singly, any such household in respect of which either person or both, jointly 
or singly, have any right, title, interest or equity or a household which may 
belong to a joint family of which either person is a member, irrespective of 
whether either person has any right, title or interest in the shared household. 
30. The appropriate Government shall specify guidelines for the provision of
Viral Hepatitis -related information, education and communication before 
marriage and ensure their wide dissemination. 
Viral Hepatitis -
related 
information, 
education and 
communication 
before marriage. 
2 of  2016. 
104 of 1956. 
10 
15 
31. (1)  Every person who is in the care or custody of the State shall have the
right to Viral Hepatitis prevention, counselling, testing and treatment
services in accordance with the guidelines issued in this regard.
(2) For the purposes of this section, persons  in the care or custody of the
State include persons convicted of a crime and serving a sentence, persons
awaiting trial, persons detained under preventive detention laws, persons
under the care or custody of the State under the Juvenile Justice (Care a nd
P
rotection of Children) Act, 2015, the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act,
1956 or any other law and persons in the care or custody of Government -
run homes and shelters.
Persons in care 
or custody of 
State. 
20 
25 
30 
3
5 
32. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force,
a person below the age of eighteen but not below twelve years, who has 
sufficient maturity of understanding and who is managing the affairs of his 
family affected by Viral Hepatitis, shall be competent to act as guardian of 
other sibling below the age of eighteen years for the following purposes, 
namely: — 
(a) admission to educational establishments;
(b) care and protection;
(c) treatment;
(d) operating bank accounts;
(e) managing property; and
(f) any other purpose that may be required to discharge his duties
as a guardian. 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, a family affected by Viral 
Hepatitis means where both parents and the legal guardian is incapacitated 
due to Viral Hepatitis -related illness or the legal guardian and parents are 
unable to discharge their duties in relation to such children. 
Recognition of 
guardianship of 
older sibling. 
40 
33. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in
force, a parent or legal guardian of a child affected by Viral Hepatitis may 
appoint, by making a will, an adult person who is a relative or friend, or a 
person below the age of eighteen years who is the managing member of the 
family affected by Viral Hepatitis, as referred to in section 33, to act as legal 
guardian immediately upon incapacity or death of such parent or legal 
guardian, as the case may be. 
Living wills for 
guardianship 
and 
testamentary 
guardianship. 

14 
(2) Nothing in this section shall  divest a parent or legal guardian of their
rights, and the guardianship referred to in sub- section (1) shall cease to
operate upon by the parent or legal guardian regaining their capacity.
(3) Any parent or legal guardian of children affected by Viral Hepatitis may
make a will appointing a guardian for care and protection of such children
and for the property that such children would inherit or which is bequeathed
through the will made by such parent or legal guardian.
5 
CHAPTER XII 
SPECIAL PROCEDURE IN COURT 
Special 
Procedure in 
Court. 
34. (1) In any legal proceeding in which a protected person is a party or such
person is an applicant, the court, on an application by such person or any
other person on his behalf may pass, in the interest of justice, any or all of
the following orders, namely:—
(a) that the proceeding or any part thereof be conducted by
suppressing the identity of the applicant by substituting the name of 
such person with a pseudonym in the records of the proceedings in 
such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) that the proceeding or any part thereof may be conducted i n
cam
era; and 
(c) restraining any person from publishing in any manner  any
m
atter leading to the disclosure of the name or status or identity of the 
applicant. 
(2) In any legal proceeding concerning or relating to a Viral Hepatitis -
positive person, the court shall take up and dispose of the proceeding on a
priority basis.
10 
1
5 
20 
2
5 
Maintenance 
applications. 
35. In any maintenance application filed by or on behalf of a protected person
under any law for the time being in force, the court shall consider the
application for interim maintenance and, in passing any order of
maintenance, shall take into account the medical expenses and other Viral
Hepatitis -related costs that may be incurred by the applicant.
30 
Sentencing. 36. In passing any order relating to sentencing, the Viral Hepatitis -positive
status of the persons in respect of whom such an order is passed shall be a
relevant factor to be considered by the court to determine the custodial place 
where such person shall be transferred to, based on the availability of proper 
healthcare services at such place.
3
5 
CHAPTER XIII 
PENALTIES 
Penalty for 
contravention. 
37. Notwithstanding any action that may be taken under any other law for the
time being in force, whoever contravenes the provisions of section 4 shall
be  punished  with  imprisonment  for  a  term which shall not be less than
three months but which may extend to two years and with fine which may
e
xtend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
40 
Penalty for 
failure to 
comply with 
orders of Viral 
Hepatitis 
Complaint 
Officer. 
38. Whoever fails to comply with any order given by a Viral Hepatitis
Complaint Officer within such time as may be specified in such order, under 
section 26, shall be liable to pay a fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees and in case the failure continues, with an additional fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure
continues.
45 

15 
5 
39. Notwithstanding any action that may be taken under any law for the time
being in force, whoever discloses information regarding the Viral Hepatitis
status of a protected person which is obtained by him in the course of, or in
relation to, any proceedings before any court, shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees unless such disclosure is pursuant to
any order or direction of a court.
Penalty for 
breach of 
confidentiality 
in legal 
proceedings. 
10 
1
5 
40. No person shall subject any other person or persons to any detriment on the 
ground that such person or persons have taken any of the following actions,
namely: —
(a) m ade complaint under this Act;
(b) b
rought proceedings under this Act against any person;
(c) furnished any information or produced any document to a
person exercising or performing any power or function under this Act; 
or 
(d) appeared as a witness in a proceeding under this Act.
Prohibition of 
victimisation. 
41. No court other than the court of a Judicial Magistrate First Class shall take
cognizance of an offence under this Act.
Court to try 
offences. 
46 of 2023. 
42. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik  Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023, offences under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable.
Offences to be 
cognizable and 
bailable. 
20 CHAPTER XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
43. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time in force or in 
any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
 
Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 
25 
30 
44. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the
Government Viral Hepatitis Complaint Officer or any member thereof or
any officer or other employee or person acting under the direction either of
the Government Viral Hepatitis Complain t Officer in respect of anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act
or any rules or guidelines made thereunder or in respect of the publication
by or under the authority of the Government Viral Hepatitis Complaint
Officer.
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
35 
45. The appropriate Government, as the case may be, may, by general or
special order, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, in
s
uch circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be mentioned
in the order, be exercisable also by an officer subordinate to that
Government or the local authority.
Delegation of 
powers. 
40 
45 
46. (1) The  appropriate  Government  may,  by  notification,  make  guidelines
consistent with this Act and any rules thereunder, generally to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particu lar and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such guidelines may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:—
(a) information relating to risk and benefits or altern atives to the 
proposed intervention under clause (i) of section 2; 
Guidelines. 

16 
(b) the manner of obtaining the informed consent under sub-section
(1) and the manner of pre -test and post -test counselling under sub-
section (2) of section 5;
(c) guidelines to be followed by a testing or diagnostic centre or
pathology laboratory or blood bank for Viral Hepatitis test under 
section 7; 
(d) the manner of taking data protection measures under section
11; 
(e) guidelines in respect of protocols for Viral Hepatitis relating to
Antiviral Therapy Management under sub-section (2) of section 14; 
(f) care, support and treatment of children infected with Viral
Hepatitis under sub-section (1) of section 18; 
(g) guidelines for Universal Precautions under section 19;
(h) manner of carrying out the strategy or mechanism or technique
for reduction of risk of Viral Hepatitis transmission under section 22; 
(i) manner of implementation of a drug substitution, drug
maintenance and needle and syringe exchange programme under 
section 22; 
(j) provision of Viral Hepatitis-related information, education and
communication before marriage under section 30; 
(k) manner of Viral Hepatitis prevention, counselling, testing and
treatment of persons in custody under section 31; and 
(l) any other matter which ought to be specified in guidelines for
the purposes of this Act. 
5 
10 
1
5 
2
0 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
make rules. 
47. (1) The   Central  Government  may, by notification, make rules to carry
out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
provision, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) manner of notifying model Viral Hepatitis Prevention &
Control policy for the establishments under section 12; and 
(b) any other matter which may be or ought to be prescribed by the
Central Government. 
25 
3
0 
Laying of rules 
before both 
Houses of 
Parliament. 
48. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessi
on
a
foresaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
35 
40 

17 
5
49. (1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out
the provisions of this Act and not inconsistent with the rules, if any, made
by the Central Government.
(2) Every rule made by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it
consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House,
before that House.
Power of State 
Government to 
make rules  and 
laying thereof.  
10 
15 
50. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as ma y
ap
pear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry
of
 the period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 

18 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Viral Hepatitis, encompassing a group of infectious diseases 
classified as Hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E, poses a significant public health 
challenge in India. The disease is a leading cause of liver -related morbidity 
and mortality, contributing to chronic liver conditions, cirrhosis, and 
hepatocellular carcinoma. According to data from the National Viral 
Hepatitis Control Program (NVHCP), an estimated 40 million people in India 
are chronically infected with Hepatitis B, while 6 to 12 million are infected 
with Hepatitis C. These figures represent a substantial portion of the global 
disease burden, underscoring the urgency of addressing this silent epidemic. 
D espite its severity, Viral Hepatitis remains largely underdiagnosed 
and undertreated in India. The stigma and discrimination faced by individuals 
living with the disease often act as barriers to timely diagnosis and access to 
treatment. This societal bias, coupled with a lack of widespread awareness 
about the disease, perpetuates a cycle of neglect and exclusion, leaving 
millions vulnerable. Additionally, the economic impact of Viral Hepatitis on 
families and the healthcare system is profound. The high cost of diagnosis 
and treatment, particularly for Hepatitis B and C, exacerbates the financial 
strain on affected individuals, despite the availability of newer and more 
effective therapies. 
I ndia has committed to the Global Health Sector Strategy on Viral 
Hepatitis adopted at the 69th World Health Assembly, which aims to 
eliminate Viral Hepatitis as a public health threat by 2030. In line with this 
commitment, the National Viral Hepatitis Control Program was launched 
under th e National Health Mission in 2018. This program emphasizes 
preventive measures such as immunization, safe injection practices, and 
improved sanitation, while also providing free treatment for Hepatitis B and 
C.
H
owever, significant gaps remain in implement ation, particularly in
ensuring equitable access to care, protecting the rights of those affected, and
addressing societal stigma.
T his Bill seeks to provide a comprehensive legal framework for the 
prevention and control of Viral Hepatitis in India while safeguarding the 
human rights of those affected. It aims to institutionalize mechanisms for 
prevention, care, and support while ensuring affordable and accessible 
treatment. The Bill also addresses the rights and protection of healthcare 
providers working with Viral Hepatitis -
positive patients and emphasizes 
aligning national efforts with global targets. By codifying these measures, the 
Bill seeks to reinforce India’s commitment to combating Viral Hepatitis and 
fulfilling its obligations under the World Hea
lth Assembly’s strategy. 
Enacting this legislation will be a decisive step toward reducing the burden 
of Viral Hepatitis and protecting the health and dignity of affected individuals 
across the country. 
       Hence, this Bill. 
SUJEET KUMAR 

19 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
       The current National Viral Hepatitis Control Program takes care of 
the concerns expressed in the Bill for prevention and control of Viral 
Hepatitis.  
       Clause 13 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government 
shall take all such measures as it deems necessary and expedient for the 
prevention of the spread of Viral Hepatitis. Sub- clause (1) of Clause 14 
provides that the measures to be taken by the appropriate Government under 
section 13 shall include the measures for providing, as far as possible , 
diagnostic facilities relating to Viral Hepatitis.  
       Clause 15 provides that the appropriate Government shall take 
measures to facilitate better access to welfare schemes to persons infected or 
affected by Viral Hepatitis. Clause 23 provides for the appointment of Viral 
Hepatitis Complaint Officer by appropriate Government. 
      It is difficult to estimate the provision required for new activities 
such as number of persons who will be appointed as Viral Hepatitis 
Complaint Officers by the appropria te Government, new schemes etc. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is, however, not possible at this stage to estimate the 
expenditure involved. 

20 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
   Clause 47 and Clause 49 of the Bill empowers the Central 
Government and the State Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill, respectively . Clause 50 of the Bill p rovides power 
to the Central Govern ment to remov e difficulties, if any. The 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the prevention and control of the spread of Viral Hepatitis 
 and for the protection of human rights of persons affected  
by the said virus and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Sujeet Kumar, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB-(E)—113—10.02.2025.