THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
2. After article 275 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"275A. Notwithstanding anything in article 275, there shall be paid out of the
consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of
West Bengal such capital and recurring sums as may be necessary to enable the
State to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by it for
the purpose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in that State or raising
the level of administration of the Scheduled Areas therein to that of the Administration
of the rest of the areas of that State:
Short title.
Grants from
the Union to
the State of
West Bengal.
Bill No. III of 2017
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD FEBRUARY, 2017
Insertion of
new article
275A.
  5
10

2
Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India a sum of
rupees ninety thousand crore as one time grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of
West Bengal and a sum of rupees thirty thousand crore every year to that state:
Provided further that such grants-in-aid shall be in addition to the annual
allocation made by the Finance Commission to the State of West Bengal and such
other financial assistance as may be provided by the Government of India to that State:
Provided also that the grants-in-aid referred to in this article may be reviewed
by the Government of India on the expiration of a period of five years from the
commencement of this Act."
3. After article 371 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"371K. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may by
order made with respect to the State of  West Bengal, having regard to the requirements
of the States as a whole for development, poverty, alleviation, employment opportunities
and other welfare measures for the people of the State, provide for:—
(a) restructuring public debt of the State Government;
(b) implementation of long term schemes for the accelerated development
of the State;
(c) an integrated scheme for driniking water supply and irrigation in the
drought prone areas of the State;
(d) long term schemes for the development of infrastructure such as
roads, highways, electricity, industries sanitation, health care and such other
projects;
(e) adequate facilities for technical education, vocational training, equitable
opportunities for employment in services under the control of  the Government
and in private sector;
( f ) free housing facilities for the population lying below the poverty line;
(g) waiving off agricultural farmers' and plantation labourers, loan and
educational loan taken by them for their wards;
(h) large proportion of fund allocation under any Central Governments,
welfare and development schemes, in comparison to the other states.
Insertion of
new article
371K.
Special
Provision with
respect to the
State of West
Bengal.
  5
  10
  15
  20
  25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The fourth most populous state, West Bengal, located in East India, is strategically
one of the most important states of the Indian Union. It is blessed ecologically and shares
international borders with three neighbouring countries, namely Bangladesh, Nepal and
Bhutan. Though the state's GDP has risen significantly since 1990 after economic liberalization,
West Bengal is currently a debt-ridden state with Rs. 3 trillion as debt. This has become the
biggest hindrance for the state's governance to undertake long-term ambitious developmental
projects in scheduled areas and other poorer sections of the society. The proposed Bill aims
to address all such hindrances through constitutional amendments so as to furnish adequate
resources to the state, thereby helping it to craft better prospects for the marginalized sections
of the society.
The above mentioned prevailing economic condititons have various determental effects
on the holistic development of various tribal communities residing in the State. It has been a
well known fact that a very small number in the tribal community have benefitted from the
Centre's policies and programmes meant for their development. Of the total tribal population
of 5.2 million in the State, more than 92% belong to rural areas. This raises the need for
improving infrastructure with regard to roads, highways, electricity, sanitation, healthcare
and other social development projects. Through this Bill, a new article 275A shall be inserted
in the Constitution to provide for grants to the state of Bengal. This additional fund will help
the state Government carry out the necessary developmental activities in the Scheduled
Areas. Also, despite unprecedented economic progress within some parts of the State, it
continues to suffer from holistic progress in social indicators, which encompass education,
health and living conditions, as a whole. Thus, the State of West Bengal is in dire need of
sustained financial assistance through provisional amendments in the Constitution. To address
this, the Bill shall also insert a new article 371 K to provide for restructuring of the State’s
debt and other targeted allocation of funds from the Centre for schemes relating to the
overall development of the State.
Though the State Government is optimally utilizing the available financial resources
for holistic socio-economic growth, financial assistance from the Centre will help the State to
come out of the debt trap easily. In a federal strucrture, the Central should take an active role
in supporting States, as they are the ultimate drivers of India's growth story.
Hence this Bill.
VIVEK  GUPTA
3

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for grant-in-aid of the revenues of the State of
West Bengal for development activities. It also provides for one time grant-in-aid to the tune
of rupees ninety thousand crore and rupees thirty thousand crore as recurring annual
expenditure. Clause 3 provides for special provision for the development of the State of
West Bengal. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve a recurring expenditure of rupees
thirty thousand crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ninety thousand crore is also likely to be involved.

GMGIPMRND—4425RS(S3)—03.02.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P .)