1
Short title, extent,
commencement
and applications.
THE SOLAR POWER (DEVELOPMENT, PROMOTION AND
MANDATORY USE) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to provide for the development of solar power generation and mandatory use
of solar power in the Government and Semi-Government buildings,
corporate and business establishments in the Country with a view
to saving conventional energy and protecting the environment
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Solar Power (Development, Promotion and
Mandatory Use)  Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir,
and applies also to all citizens of India domiciled in the territories to which this Act
extends who are outsider in the said territories.
Bill No. III of  2012
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH APRIL, 2012
5

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(4) It shall be applicable to all Government and Semi-Government buildings
and also to corporate and industrial houses, plants, and factories.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means, in the case of State, the Government
of that State, and in other cases, the Central Government.
(b) ‘‘Authority’’, means the National Solar Power Development Authority
of India, established under section 4 of this Act;
(c) ‘buildings’ include all such structures, sheds, houses and buildings
notified under the rules framed by the appropriate Government under this Act;
(d) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this act;
(e) ‘‘solar photovoltaic modules, panels and solar thermal collectors’’
mean flat or concentrating devices which collect, convert or store solar energy
for use in the form of heat or electricity.
3. (1) It shall be obligatory for the owners, lessees, tenants, builders and
promoters of every building, to install solar photovoltaic modules and panels, on
the top of buildings and/or in the land forming part of the property, for generating
electricity in order to meet a part of its total electricity requirement in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be obligatory for the owners, lessees, tenants, builders and
promoters of every such building to install solar assisted water heating systems
where there is a requirement of hot water.
(3) It shall be obligatory for the owners, lessees, tenants, builders and
promoters of every new building, that requires mass cooking on regular basis, to
maintain a solar-powered kitchen and other cooking facilities.
4. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government shall, by notification
in the Official Gazette, establish an Authority, to be known as the National Solar
Power Development Authority of India, with its headquarters at New Delhi.
(2) The Authority may have such number of regional offices in any region or
parts or in the States as may be required.
5. (1) The Authority shall be headed by a Chairperson and five other members
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The terms and conditions of the service of the Chairperson and the members
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such set up as may be
prescribed.
(4) The Authority shall meet at such time and such places, and shall observe
such procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be
prescribed.
6. The Authority shall take such actions as may be necessary for the
implementation of this Act including, inter alia, the following:—
(a) specify the categories and size of the buildings to be covered by the
Act;
Definition.
Obligation for
the owners,
lessees, tenants,
builders and
promoters of
buildings.
Establishment of
a National Solar
Power
Development
Authority of
India.
Constitution of
the Authority.
Functions of the
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(b) amendments to the building bye-laws so as to make it obligatory for
the owners, contractors, builders and promoters of all new buildings to install
solar thermal collectors and photovoltaic modules as specified in this Act;
(c) specify the percentage of the total electricity requirements of a building
to be met through solar energy;
(d) specify the circumstances and technical grounds under which
exemptions may be granted from the provisions of this Act;
(e) make provisions for subsidies and other incentives for the installation
of solar energy systems in new buildings as well as existing buildings; and
(f) specify appropriate concessions like subsidies, exemption from various
taxes, etc. for the solar energry equipment, in order to popularize and promote
awareness among the people about the availability of solar thermal and
photovoltaic products and the benefit arising from their use.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by
Parliament, provide requisite funds for the purposes of this Act, from time to time.
8. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act, shall be liable to
imprisonment which may extend to two years and fine of up to fifty thousand rupees.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
10. The Central Government and the appropriate Government as the case may
be, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Penalty.
Saving.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Sun is the source of all energy. But for the Sun, life will not exist on the
Earth. Naturally, from ancient times, the people worshipped the Sun as God. Needless
to say, life will be impossible for the living organisms on this planet, without the
energy from the Sun.
Today, for our energy requirements, we are using Coal, Oil and Natural Gas,
Hydro-Energy and Nuclear Energy. Production of Hydro-electric power requires big
dams, with an even bigger catchment area that causes environmental and collateral
damage. Our coal reserves are expected to be not more than 100 billion tonnes. If, we
continue to use coal the way we use it today, the entire coal reserves would be
depleted in less than 100 years. The same is the case with Oil and Natural Gas resources,
which are likely to be exhausted in a few decades.
After the Fukushima Nuclear Disaster in Japan in 2011, exploiting the potential
of Nuclear Energy also deserves re-consideration. In any case, because of the huge
investments and necessity of importing fissionable materials, we can't go in for the
Nuclear Energy in a big way. In the case of the Nuclear Energy, even a minor nuclear
disaster is unthinkable. Moreover, disposal of the nuclear waste is a real problem
being faced even by the developed countries. The environmental hazards in all the
aforesaid categories of energy sources are alarming. Whether it is Coal, Oil or Natural
Gas, their exploitation will pollute the atmosphere, due to the generation of huge
quantities of Carbon Dioxide, which will cause damage to the protective Ozone layer
and will further contribute to climate change and global warming.
Considering all the above aspects, one comes to the natural conclusion that the
safest and the best option is to change over to the most clean energy source i.e., the
Solar Energy. It is clear that the only long-term solution to our power requirements is
harnessing the Solar Energy, which is in abundance in our country. India lies in the
sunniest region in the world with most part of the country receiving sunlight everyday,
the State of Rajasthan being the highest recipient of annual solar radiation. Thus, it is
imperative that the Government must give top most priority for augmenting the
generation of Solar Energy in the cheapest possible manner.
There is a huge potential for solar energy applications in grid-interactive solar
power generation plants, solar thermal industrial applications, rural electrification,
roof top-based applications and mobile towers in off-grid areas, and also for domestic
lighting, cooking and water heating. Although the cost of initial installation is a little
high, there is negligible recurring expenditure involved in maintaining the solar thermal
modules sand photovoltaic panels. More importantly, there are also no problems of
power-theft and long periods of load-shedding.
Keeping in view the rapid industrialization and urbanization of the country and
the ever-increasing demand for domestic as well as industrial power, it is essential to
make it mandatory for installation of solar power generators in all the Government and
Semi-Government buildings and also in the Corporate and Industrial establishments
across the country, with such terms and conditions as are necessary to substantially
enhance production of Solar Power, with appropriate concessions like subsidies,
exemption from various taxes, etc. for the Solar Power equipment, in order to encourage
more and more people to voluntarily opt for this clean energy source.
Hence, this bill.
P .J. KURIEN
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall establish the National
Solar Power Development Authority of India for development and promotion of the
use of the solar energy. Clause 6 of the Bill makes provision of subsidy and other
incentives for installation of solar energy systems in new buildings as well as existing
buildings. Clause 7 makes provisions for the Central Govt. to provide due requisite
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. The recurring and non-recurring expenditure on this count cannot be
estimated at this stage, but has to be worked out by the Central Government while
implementing the provisions of the Act.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make appropriate
rules for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of
details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the development of solar power generation and mandatory use
of solar power in the Government and Semi-Government buildings,
corporate and business establishments in the country with a view
to saving conventional energy and protecting the environment
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Prof. P.J. Kurien, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—444RS(S3)—27-04-2012.