Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 16TH MARCH, 2007
Bill No.  IV of  2007
THE FINANCIAL RELIEF TO THE NATURAL CALAMITY
VICTIMS BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for financial relief to the people for damage caused to their crops, property,
livestock and/or loss of life suffered by them due to earthquake, cyclones, tsunami,
floods, landslide, cloudburst and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Financial Relief to the Natural Calamity Victims
Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. Every person whose crops have been damaged by cyclones, earthquake, tsunami,
floods, cloudburst, landslide shall, on an application made in the prescribed form, be
paid reasonable financial relief by the Central Government in proportion to the loss of
crops suffered by him.
Financial
Relief for
damaged
crops.

2
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section crop means and includes all types
of cereals, pulses, oil-seeds, vegetables, fruits, jute, sugarcane and cotton.
3. The Central Government shall, in consultation with the concerned State
Government, provide to every family, whose house and property have been destroyed by
cyclone, earthquake, tsunami, floods, cloudburst, landslide, a dwelling unit either at
the same place or at any other place earmarked for rehabilitation by Central or by the
concerned State Government.
4. Every person whose livestock has been lost due to cyclone, earthquake, tsunami,
floods, cloudburst, landslide shall, on an application made in the prescribed form, be
paid by the Central Government adequate financial relief to purchase essential livestock.
5. If any person dies as a result of cyclone, earthquake, tsunami, floods, cloudburst,
landslide, the Central Government shall, on an application made in the prescribed form
by the surviving dependent(s) of the deceased, pay an adequate sum of money, not
less than one hundred thousand rupees to them as financial relief.
6. The Government of the State or the Union Territory, in whose territorial
jurisdiction the victims loses his life due to cyclone, earthquake, tsunami, floods,
cloudburst or landslide, shall provide a suitable job to one of the eligible dependents of
the victim as it may think fit, and determine their functions and conditions of services.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
8. The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Government of the State
or Union Territory concerned, appoint within a fortnight of the occurrence of any
cyclone, earthquake, tsunami, floods, cloudburst or landslide, a Commissioner with such
other staff as may be necessary, for settling the claims for payment of financial relief
to the victims:
Provided that the Commissioner shall dispose of a claim within sixty days of the
receipt of the application by him.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Shelter in
case of
destruction of
house and
property.
Financial
relief for loss
of livestock.
Financial
relief for loss
of life.
Employment
provision for
dependents of
deceased
victim.
Saving of
other laws.
Appointment
of
Commissioner
for payment
of relief.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
V arious parts of the country are inundated by floods and devastations by other
natural disasters namely, super-cyclone, earthquake, cloudburst, landslide which have been
occurring in various places at regular intervals causing irreparable damage to lives and
properties of the victims who are mostly caught unaware by such occurrences like the
incident of tsunami occurred on 26th December, 2004.
Lakhs of helpless poor people in the states viz., Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
West Bengal and others are badly affected by floods. A very large number of people in
various other States often suffer due to earthquake, cloudburst, landslide, cyclone and
other natural calamities, by way of destruction of their dwelling units and other properties.
Such calamities pose a threat their livestock and often result in loss of life. For instance,
coastal areas of the country particularly Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and Tamil Nadu are frequently
affected by cyclones causing widespread devastation of crops, properties and lives. Although
the concerned State Governments do try to mitigate the sufferings of the affected people but
due to financial constraints they can seldom provide adequate relief to them. Traditionally,
there have always remained a big gap between the demands made by the affected States and
the relief given by the Central Government.
Since the assistance provided by the Central Government is the main source on which
the State Governments depend for providing relief to the persons affected by incidents of
natural calamities, it is felt that the Central Government should bear the entire burden in this
regard. Therefore, it is proposed that financial relief to the victims of natural calamities
should be paid by the Central Government through a Commissioner.
Hence this Bill.
S. S.  AHLUWALIA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for provision of dwelling unit in case of destruction of
house and property. Clause 4 provides for financial relief for loss of livestock. Clause 5
provides for financial relief in case of death. Clause 6 provides for suitable job to eligible
dependents of victims of natural calamities. Clause 8 provides for appointment of
Commissioner for settling the claims. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand
crores will be required for the purpose from the Consolidated Fund of India per annum as
recurring expenditure. However, this may not be required if there is no such natural calamity
in a particular year.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crores is also likely to be incurred.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the delegation of powers relates to routine matters only, it is of
normal character.
5

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for financial relief to the people for damage caused to their crops, property,
livestock and/or loss of life suffered by them due to earthquake, cyclones, tsunami,
floods, landslide, cloudburst and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri S. S. Ahluwalia, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1225RS(S-3)—16.03.2007.