AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. IV of 2025 
THE REGULATION OF ANIMAL BREEDING BILL, 
2025 
A 
BILL 
 to provide for regulation of animal breeders and owners and to prohibit 
the inbreeding and cross-breeding of non-indigenous domestic and  
pet animals in the country and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:⸺ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Regulation of Animal Breeding Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title  and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2.   In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,⸺ 
(a) “animal” means a domestic animal which may be kept for any 
purpose, including but not limited to livestock, research, or as a 
pet animal; 
(b) “animal breeder” means anyone who is legally authorised to 
breed animals, whether through Government licensing or 
authorisations provided by the Animal Welfare Board of India or 
the State Animal Welfare Board; 
(c) “animal owner” shall have the same meaning as assigned to 
“owner” in the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960; 
(d) “Animal Welfare Board of India” means the statutory 
advisory body established under section 4 of the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, functioning under the aegis of the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying and 
promotes animal welfare in the country; 
(e) “commercial animal breeding ” (or “commercial breeding ”) 
means the business of breeding animals for the purpose of selling 
them and does not include using them as livestock or pack 
animals; 
(f) “ Committee for Control and Supervision of Experiments on 
Animals” means the statutory body established under section 15 
of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, for 
controlling and supervising experiments on animals; 
(g) “cross-breeding” means the deliberate mating of two animals 
that are different breeds or varieties of the same species; 
(h) “domestic animal” means any species of animal that has been 
tamed, whether socially or genetically, and can co-exist in society 
without being a threat; 
(i) “inbreeding” means the deliberate mating of animals that 
share a recent common ancestor and for the purposes of this Act, 
two animals are considered to have recent common ancestors if 
they share a common ancestor within the last three generations 
before the older animal; 
Illustration.⸺ For instance, any animal whose parent, 
grandparent, or great -grandparent is the same as the parent, 
grandparent or  great-grandparent of another animal shall be 
considered to have recent common ancestors; 
(j) “indigenous breed” means any animal breed which is native to 
the soil and climatic conditions of India, and shall include local 
indigenous breeds emerging from specific regions of the country; 
(k) “livestock” means any animal  which is kept as an  asset and 
can provide labour or produce commodities for consumption; 
(l) “non-indigenous breed” means any animal breed which is not 
an indigenous breed;  
(m) “pet animal”  means any domestic animal that is kept by a 
person in their household for private enjoyment and 
companionship; and 
(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
10 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
40 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 of 1960. 
 
 
 
 
59 of 1960. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 of 1960. 
 
 

3 
 
   CHAPTER II 
REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF ANIMAL BREEDERS AND ANIMAL 
OWNERS 
  
. 
5 
 
 
10 
 
 
15 
 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
3.  (1) No person shall be permitted to pursue commercial animal breeding 
unless they are registered with the Animal Welfare Board of India. 
(2) The Animal Welfare Board of India shall, either through sub- units in 
States, or by itself: 
(i) maintain a register of animal breeders in the country in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed and sha ll include 
information on the species, breeds, and number of animals bred 
by them; and 
(ii) make criteria for the inclusion of animal breeders in the register. 
(3) While registering and licensing an animal breeder, the Animal Welfare 
Board of India shall ensure that minimum requirements for animal 
breeding are met as specified through guidelines under section 6 of this 
Act. 
(4) The State Government may formulate add itional regulations to issue 
licenses for animal breeders. 
(5) The registration of animal breeders as done by the Animal Welfare 
Board of India shall be valid for not more than a period of six years, 
beginning from the date of issuance of the certificate o f registration, and 
the registration may be renewed before the expiry of the previous 
registration certificate for a person to continue as an animal breeder. 
(6) The Animal Welfare Board of India may formulate regulations on the 
procedure for registration of animal breeders including the fees, renewal of 
registration certificate after adequate quality checks, and the timeline of 
registration, which should not exceed ninety days, starting from the date of 
submission of the application to register to the issu ance of the registration 
certificate or proof of rejection of the application. 
(7) The provisions of this section are applicable to all animal breeders, 
including those that are currently practicing animal breeding. 
 Registration and 
licensing of 
animal breeders. 
 
35 
 
40 
 
 
45 
4. (1) All animal owners, owning animals for any purpose, including as 
pets, livestock, or for research purposes, except for commercial 
breeding, shall be required to register their animals with the  Animal 
Welfare Board of India. 
(2) The Animal Welfare Board of India shall, either through sub-units 
in States, or by itself: 
(i) maintain a register of animals owned in the country in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed and shall 
include information on the species, breeds, and details of the 
owner; and 
(ii) have the right to refuse registration, and hence ownership of 
animals to any person that do not seem well -equipped to care for 
the animal, as per the criteria as may be prescribed. 
(3) While registering an animal and its owner, the Animal Welfare 
Board of India shall ensure that minimum requirements for animal 
ownership are  met as specified through guidelines under section 7 of 
this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Registration of 
animal owners. 

4 
(4) In the event of the birth of offspring(s) of an already registered
animal, it is the responsibility of the owner of the parent  animal to
register the offspring(s) and accordingly obtain a new litter certificate
f
or the same, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The State Government may formulate additional regulations t o
register animals and their owners.
(6) T he registration of animals as done by the Animal Welfare Board
of India shall be valid throughout the lifetime of an animal and may
b
e renewed in the case of change of ownership.
(7) Th e  Animal Welfare Board of India may formulate regulations on the
procedure for registration of animals and their owners.
(8) T he provisions of this section are applicable to all owned animals,
including those that are currently animal owned for personal or
professional uses.
5 
10 
CHAPTER III 
REGULATORY BODIES 
15 
Formation of 
animal-specific 
regulatory 
bodies. 
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
facilitate the formation of separate regulatory bodies for each species of
animal under the Animal Welfare Board of India.
(2) T he animal -specific regulatory bodies shall be responsible for:
(i) ensuring safe and ethical breeding of each animal variety;
(ii) ensuring availability of adoption shelters and foster homes with
adequate provisions for animals without owners;
(iii) encouraging research towards healthy breeding practices and for
improvements to the breed quality of indigenous animals;
(iv) ensuring compliance of the extant provisions of animal breedin g
a
nd animal ownership;
(v) regulating the animal breeding and ownership industry to prevent
cruelty and abandonment of animals;
(vi) promoting adoption of indigenous animal breeds for a ll
purposes, particularly as pets; and 
(vii) formulating guidelines pertinent to sections 6 and 7 of this Act.
20 
25 
30 
CHAPTER IV 
GUIDELINES FOR BREEDING, PET OWNERSHIP, AND IMPORT 
Guidelines for 
breeding and 
breeders. 
6. The Central Government shall issue guidelines, not later than one
hundred and eighty days from the date of commencement of this Act, 
on breeding of animals which shall include provisions regarding, but 
not limited to: 
(i) the minimum age at which an animal may be used for breeding,
specified based on the species and its average life span;
(ii) t he maximum age at which an animal may be used for breeding,
specified based on the species and its average life span;
(iii) the frequency at which a singular animal may be used for
breeding to prevent any health deterioration of the parent and
offspring animals;
35 
40 
45 

5 
 
 
5 
10 
15 
(iv) the minimum and maximum age by which an animal shall be 
vaccinated; 
(v) authorising only qualified persons, either by training or by 
experience, to take up commercial breeding; 
(vi) ensuring that any commercial breeding facility is well equipped 
for breeding animals and follows ethical practices of breeding; 
(vii) ensuring that no animals are harmed or deprived in a breeding 
facility; 
(viii) ensuring that offsprings of animals are registered through new 
litter certificates; 
(ix) encouraging research to improve breeds of indigenous animals 
and setting breed standards through scientifically monitored 
processes; and 
(x) encouraging efforts towards popularising indigenous animal 
breeds through collaboration with animal lovers and regulatory 
bodies; and 
(xi) any genetic deficiency identified during cross-breeding animals for 
research purposes shall be reported to the Animal Welfare Board of 
India within sixty days of identifying the deficiency.  
 20 
 
25 
30 
35 
7. The Central Government shall issue guidelines, not later than one hundred 
and eighty days from the  date of commencement of this Act , on pet 
ownership which shall include provisions regarding, but not limited to: 
(i) ensuring that a pet owner does not cause their pet animal any 
unnecessary pain, suffering or distress, throughout its lifetime, 
including at times when the pet animal’s life may have to be terminated 
to free it of suffering; 
(ii) ensuring health and welfa re of the pet animals, including 
vaccinations and microchipping; 
(iii) ensuring the provision of food, water, exercise, and space for a pet 
animal based on the typical traits of its species and breed; 
(iv) limiting pet ownership to persons above the age of eighteen; 
(v) preventing pet ownership to persons who may not be well-equipped 
to care for an animal; and 
(vi) preventing pet ownership of animals that are unsuitable to be kept 
as pets. 
 Guidelines for pet 
ownership. 
  
40 
 
45 
8. The Government shall issue guidelines, not later than one hundred and 
eighty days from the  date of commencement of this Act , on import of 
animals for breeding purposes which shall include provisions regarding, 
but not limited to: 
(i) ensuring that every animal that enter s the country has a health 
certification issued by the country of origin to prove the animal’s good 
health and status of vaccination; 
(ii) ensuring that every animal that is imported into the country is 
suitable to survive in the climate of its destination  and that adequate 
resources are available for its wellbeing; 
(iii) ensuring that every animal that enters the country reaches its 
destination, is not allowed to escape, and its excreta is not littered; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guidelines for 
import of animals. 

6 
 
(iv) cleaning and disinfecting of animal that is imported into the 
country immediately upon reaching its destination; 
(v) facilitating random checks of animals being imported to ensure 
their health conditions and adequate safety measures being undertaken 
while transporting them; 
(vi) ensuring that the imported animals comply with guidelines 
specified for breeding and pet own ership, as specified in Sections 6 
and 7 of this Act; and 
(vii) ensuring that any animal for non- breeding purposes is sterilised 
before it enters the country. 
 
 
5 
10 
   CHAPTER IV 
BREEDING RESTRICTIONS FOR PETS AND LIVESTOCK 
  
Banning cross - 
breeding and 
inbreeding of non- 
indigenous animal 
breeds for non-  
research and non - 
livestock 
purposes. 
 9. (1) No animal breeder shall be permitted to cross-breed a non -
indigenous animal breed with an indigenous animal breed of the same 
species for any non -research and non-livestock purposes, including for 
keeping it as a pet or pack animal. 
(2) No animal breeder shall be permitted to cross -breed two different  
non-indigenous animal breeds of the same species for any non -research 
and non -livestock purposes, including for keeping it as a pet or pack 
animal. 
(3) No animal breeder shall be permitted to inbreed a non -indigenous 
animal breed  for any non -research and non -livestock purposes, 
including for keeping it as a pet or pack animal. 
(4) Any animal breeder cross -breeding or inbreeding a non- indigenous 
animal breed for research purposes shall strictly comply  with the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, its rules and guidelines.  
(5) The Committee for Control and Supervision of Experiments on 
Animals shall formulate rules to prevent any cross -breeding or 
inbreeding of a non-indigenous animal breed for research purposes, 
which is known to cause genetic deficiencies  in the offspring, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
15 
 
20 
 
 
25 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 of 1960 
Partial ban on 
cross-breeding 
and complete ban 
on inbreeding of 
non-indigenous 
animal breeds for 
livestock 
purposes. 
 10. (1) An animal breeder may cross -breed a non -indigenous and indigenous 
animal breed or two non -indigenous breeds for livestock purposes if it has 
been scientifically tested to be advantageous for the  offspring in terms of 
its health and product yield, and poses no threat of genetic deficiencies.  
(2) No animal breeder shall be permitted to inbreed a non- indigenous 
animal breed for livestock purposes. 
35 
 
Sterilising animal 
breeds with genetic 
deficiencies due to 
cross-breeding and 
inbreeding with  
non-indigenous 
animals. 
 11. An animal offspring already produced for any purpose, before the 
implementation of this Act, through cross-breeding or inbreeding of a non-
indigenous animal breed with known genetic deficiencies, shall be 
sterilised by the owner or the breeder, in the abse nce of an owner, to 
prevent reproduction and amplification of genetic deficiencies. 
40 
 
   CHAPTER V 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 
  
Grievance 
redressal with the 
Animal Welfare 
Board of India. 
 12. (1) Any person aggrieved with the violation of any provisions of this Act 
may approach the Animal Welfare Board of India or the State Animal 
Welfare Board, if available. 
(2)  The Animal Welfare Board of India shall constitute a Grievance 
Appellate Committee with at least five members, as may be prescri bed, to 
45  

7 
address any grievances it receives with respect to the provisions of this Act 
and their enactment. 
5 of
 1908. 5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
13. (1) The Grievance Appellate Committee shall, while inquiring into any
matter under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court 
while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of 
the following matters, namely: 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and
compelling them to give oral or written evidence on oath and to
produce the documents or things;
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court
or office;
(e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) N otwithstanding anything inconsistent in any other law for the time
being in force, the Grievance Appellate Committee may, during the
inquiry into any complaint under this Act, examine any record to which
this Act applies which is under the control of the Committee, and no such
record may be withheld from it on any grounds.
(3) T he Grievance Appellate Committee shall inquire into any matter in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Grievance Appellate Committee shall maintain a register of
complaints containing such particulars and such record of proceedings as
may be prescribed.
Powers of the 
Grievance 
Appellate 
Committee. 
30 
14. The Grievance Appellate Committee may, on the basis of an inquiry mad e
in accordance with the procedure laid down by or under this Act: 
(a) impose a fine of up to ten lakh rupees for violation of code of
ethics and conduct by animal breeders, owners, regulators, or elected
administrators of regulated bodies; and
(b) i nitiate criminal prosecution in cases of severe violation of code
of ethics and conduct, or unethical or unprofessional conduct,
against animal breeders, owners, regulators, or elected
administrators of regulatory bodies.
Violations and 
penalties. 
35 CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
40 
45 
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) E very rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after i t
i
s made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in t he rule or both the 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
Powers of Central 
Government to 
make rules and 
laying thereof. 

8 
 
Power of State 
Government to 
make regulations 
and laying 
thereof. 
 16. (1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of this Act and not inconsistent with the rules, if any, 
made by the Central Government. 
(2) Every regulations made by the State Government shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature 
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one 
House, before that House. 
5 
 
  

9 
 
 STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
 Many Indians are increasingly purchasing exotic animal breeds as pets, 
including canines, felines, and avians that are not suited to the Indian habitat. This 
rising demand has contributed to illegal breeding practices, notably cross -
breeding and inbreeding of non-native species within the country. 
Cross-breeding within animal species, especially in livestock, has been 
applied to achieve desirable outcomes, such as increased yields. However, this 
practice can also introduce genetic weaknesses that negatively impact animal 
health. Inbreeding is particularly detrimental,  as it increases the likelihood of 
genetic disorders, leading to shorter lifespans and reduced disease resistance in 
offspring. 
Commercially bred animals, whether through cross-breeding or inbreeding, 
often suffer from mistreatment and abandonment. Female animals are frequently 
subjected to repeated pregnancies,  resulting in nutritionally and genetically 
deficient mothers and offspring that are either abandoned or fail to survive. 
This Bill addresses these critical issues in the animal breeding industry by 
establishing a framework  to regulate illegal animal breeding through mandatory 
registration of breeders and animal owners, and by prohibiting the cross -breeding 
and inbreeding of non-native species. The framework promotes a transparent and 
safe import policy and introduces rule -based guidelines on breeding and 
ownership to encourage ethical practices and prevent the mistreatment and 
abandonment of animals. 
By decentralizing regulatory authority to be species -specific, the 
framework aims to address unique challenges associated with different animal 
types and includes legal consequences, including imprisonment, for violations. 
This Bill, along with its accompanying regulations,  may also foster a shift in 
demand toward Indian breeds naturally adapted to the country’s climate, 
encouraging humane breeding practices. 
 Hence, this bill. 
 
                                         PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI.  
  

10 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The registration and licensing of animal breeders; registration of animal owners 
and formation of separate regulatory bodies for each specific by Animal Welfare Board 
of India and Animal Welfare Boards of States shall be undertaken within the funds 
already allocated to them. Hence, no additional expenditure is likely to be incurred for 
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. 

11 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 15 and Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules and the State Government to make regulations for carrying out the purpose of this 
Bill. As the rules and regulations relate to the matters of details only , the delegation of 
the legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for regulation of animal breeders and owners and to prohibit the 
inbreeding and cross-breeding of non-indigenous domestic and  
pet animals in the country and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
___________ 
(Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi, M.P.) 
RS-P&P-PMB(E)—041—10.02.2026.