1
Bill No. IV of 2023
THE ANTIQUITIES AND ART TREASURES (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Antiquities and Art Treasures (Amendment)
Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 25 of the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972,—
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words, "imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than six months but which may extend to three years and with fine", the words,
"imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend
to ten years and with fine that the court may determine after taking into consideration
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 25.
52 of 1972.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
5
10

2
the factors including but not limited to the age of antiquity or art treasure, rarity of the
antiquity or art treasure and the artistic, aesthetic, historical, architectural,
archaeological or anthropological importance of the antiquity or art treasure" shall be
substituted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), for the words, "for a term which may extend to six
months", the words, "for a term which may extend to three years" shall be substituted;
and
(iii) in sub-section ( 3), for the words, "for a term which may extend to six
months", the words, "for a term which may extend to three years" shall be substituted.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Despite regulations, thieves and smugglers continue to threaten India's unique cultural
wealth and heritage. According to the National Crime Records Bureau, just over 200 Indian
antiquities were either returned or were in the process of being deported from the United
States, Australia, Singapore, Germany, Canada, and England. This pales in comparison to the
enormous quantity of antiquities that have been illegally removed from the country and are
still unaccounted for. According to an audit done by the Hindu Religious and Charitable
Endowments Department of the Government of Tamil Nadu, in 2018, 4,408 items were stolen
from 3,676 protected monuments across India between 1992 and 2017.
2. The Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972, prohibits export of antiquities and
allows their sale within the country only under a license and its non-compliance can result in
jail sentences of up to three years, a fine, or both. These punitive measures are not enough,
considering the rewards accruing from smuggling which are disproportionately large. Global
Financial Integrity, a Washington-based advocacy group, estimates that illegal trade in
paintings, sculptures, and other artifacts is one of the world's most lucrative criminal
enterprises, worth six billion dollars a year.
3. It is with this objective that the Bill is presented to re-examine and restructure the
penal provisions with regard to the export or an attempt to export the antiquities or art
treasures in contravention of the provisions under the aforesaid Act. The aim is to deter the
stealing and smuggling of the antiquities by enhancing the term of imprisonment in order to
protect and preserve the priceless and invaluable antiquities and art treasures of the country.
Hence, this Bill.
SUJEET  KUMAR.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ANTIQUITIES AND ART  TREASURES ACT, 1972.
(ACT NO. 52 OF 1972)
*****
25. (1)  If any person, himself or by any other person on his behalf, exports or attempts
to export any antiquity or art treasure in contravention of section 3, he shall, without prejudice
to any confiscation or penalty to which he may be liable under the provisions of the Customs
Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) as applied by section 4, be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to three years and with fine.
(2) If any person contravenes the provisions of section 5 or section 12 or
sub-section (2) or sub-section ( 3) of section 13 or section 14 or section 17, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine or with
both and the antiquity in respect of which the offence has been committed shall be liable to
confiscation.
(3) if any person prevents any licensing officer from inspecting any record, photo-
graph or register maintained under section 10 or prevents any officer authorized by the
Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 23 from entering into or searching any
place under that sub-section, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
*****
Penalty.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972.
————
(Shri Sujeet Kumar,  M.P .)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—043—12-12-2023.