1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill  No.  IV of  2008
THE PUBLIC FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (CONVERSION OF LOANS
TO COMPANIES INTO EQUITY SHARE CAPITAL) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for conversion of the entire loan amount given by the public financial institutions
to the companies into equity share capital to give powers to the financial institutions
to exercise control over the companies taking loan from them and matters connected
therewith.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty- ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Public Financial Institutions (Conversion of  Loans
to Companies into Equity Share Capital) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "company" means a company formed, incorporated and registered under the
Companies Act, 1956;
Definitions.
1 of 1956.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
(b) "public financial institutions" means the financial institutions specified in
section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956.
3.  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act or in any other law for
the time being in force, the entire amount of loan given by any public financial institution to
any company shall be deemed to have been converted into equity share capital of the
Company if the loan so advanced exceeds fifty per cent of the total equity capital of the
Company.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956.
Conversion of
loan amount
of companies
into equity
share capital
in certain
cases.
Savings.
1 of 1956.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In our country almost all the Companies, big or small, mainly exist on loans taken from
the Public Financial Institutions such as the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of
India, Industrial Finance Corporation of India, Industrial Development Bank of India, Life
Insurance Corporation of India and Unit Trust of India. Apart from taking loans from the
Public Financial Institutions the Companies particularly owned by big industrial houses take
huge loans from the Banking sector also. In most of the cases the loan amount exceeds more
than fifty per cent. of the total capital of the companies. Thus the moneys are de facto
invested in such companies by the public financial institutions and Banks but all the benefits
derived therefrom accrue to the owners of these companies and industrial houses. As a
result, the industrialists and business houses in our country are prospering on the money of
Public Financial Institutions and Banks. It has also been the practice with the industrial
sector that after taking huge loans the companies do not bother to return the money and the
interest accrued thereon and often resort to creating legal hurdles deliberately in the recovery
process initiated by such Public Financial Institutions. As a result, huge public funds are
lying blocked with the companies in the private sector. Sometimes it happens with the
connivance of the greedy elements in the public financial institutions but in most of the
cases the companies default deliberately. It has also been noticed that after taking, loans the
companies declare themselves sick and force the Government to take them over and the
Government has to write-off the loans and also pay compensation to the owners of the
companies. Such cases are clear instances of frauds committed by the owners of the companies
but, unfortunately, these frauds are legalised in one way or the other.
If it is made mandatory that where the loan amount is more than 50 per cent of the total
equity capital of company, the entire loan should be converted into equity share capital of
the company held by the Public Financial Institution advancing the loan to the company so
that the Institution can have a strong say in the affairs of the company for taking due care of
the repayment of loans with interest in the national interest. Moreover, in such circumstances,
the owners will also not be in position to cripple the company deliberately and declare it sick.
It will put a check on the financial management of the Company.
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
S. S. AHLUWALIA
3

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for conversion of the entire loan amount given by the public financial institutions
to the companies into equity share capital to give powers to the financial institutions
to exercise control over the companies taking loan from them and matters connected
therewith.
————
(Shri  S. S. Ahluwalia, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4739RS(S-5)—29-12-2008.