AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. IV of 2026 
THE DOMESTIC WORKERS (SOCIAL SECURITY 
AND WELFARE) BILL, 2026  
A 
BILL 
to provide for the social security, welfare, regulation of employment 
c
onditions, dignity of labour, and protection of the rights of  
domestic workers; and to provide for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto.  
 
    BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
I
ndia as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 
1
0 
1. ( 1)  This Act may be called the Domestic Workers (Social Security and
Welfare) Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to
the coming into force of that provision.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Definitions .  2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— 
   (a)  “appropriate Government” means in the case of a St ate, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 
    (b)  “Board” means the Domestic Workers Welfare Board 
constituted under section 3; 
(c) “domestic work” means work performed in or for a ho usehold, 
including but not limited to cleaning, cooking, was hing, care giving, 
childcare, elder care, gardening, driving for house hold purposes, and such 
other work as may be notified; 
(d) “domestic worker” means any person engaged for remu neration, 
whether in cash or kind, directly or through an age ncy, in domestic work 
in a household, whether on a full-time, part-time, live-in, live-out, 
temporary or permanent basis, and includes migrant domestic workers, 
but excludes any member of the employer’s family; 
(e)  “employer” means any individual, household, or ass ociation of 
households that employs or engages a domestic worke r, directly or 
through an agency; 
(f) “Fund” means the Domestic Workers Welfare Fund cons tituted 
under section 8. 
(g)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
and 
(h)  “welfare scheme” means any scheme formulated and n otified 
under section 9 for providing benefits relating to health, maternity, old 
age, disability, accident, housing, education, skil l development or any 
other social security measure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
   CHAPTER II 
SOCIAL  SECURITY  
  
Constitution 
of Domestic 
Workers 
Welfare 
Boards 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. (1)  The appropriate Government within their territoria l jurisdiction, shall, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute  a State/Union territory 
Domestic Workers Welfare Board in each State and Un ion territory 
within six months from the date of commencement of this Act, to carry out 
such functions as may be prescribed. 
(2)  The Board shall be a body corporate by the name af oresaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power,  subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispos e of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue 
or be sued. 
(3)  The Board shall consist of the following, to be appointed by the 
appropriate Government — 
(a)  a Chairperson who shall be a social worker with fifteen 
years of experience in the field of welfare of workers; 
(b) five members representing various departments of 
appropriate Government, as may be prescribed; 
(c) two members representing registered domestic workers’ 
unions or associations; 
(d) two members representing employers; and 
(e) two members of civil society having expertise in issues 
relating to labour matters. 
(4) Not less than one-third of the members of the Board shall be women. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
(5)  The Board shall have office in each district of th e State or Union 
territory, as the case may be. 
(6) The terms and conditions of appointment and the sal aries and other 
allowances payable to the Chairperson and other mem bers of the Board, 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(7)   The Board shall have such number of officers and employees as may 
be prescribed. 
(8) The terms and conditions of appointment and the sal ary and 
allowances payable to the officers and employees of  the Board shall be as 
such as may be prescribed. 
(9)  The Board shall have powers to regulate its own procedure. 
 
  CHAPTER III 
REGISTRATION , R IGHTS  AND  CONDITIONS OF  EMPLOYMENT  
  
  
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
4. (1)  Every domestic worker shall have the right to be r egistered under this Act 
with the Board having territorial jurisdiction, eit her individually or through an 
organization, union, in such manner and form, as may be prescribed. 
(2)  Every employer engaging a domestic worker shall be  required to register 
with the Board having territorial jurisdiction, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) The Board shall issue a unique identity card to the  domestic worker on 
registration, which shall be transferable to other Boards constituted under this 
Act. 
(4)  Registration under this Act shall not be denied on  the ground of lack of 
documentary proof of residence or employment. 
(5) The renewal of registration of domestic workers sha ll be at such intervals 
and in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
 Registration 
of domestic 
workers and 
employers. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
5. (1) No employer shall engage a domestic worker without entering into a 
written contract, specifying— 
(a) the nature and scope of work to be performed; 
(b) the hours of work including rest intervals; 
(c) the wages payable and mode of payment thereof; 
(d) the leave entitlements; 
(e)  the duration of employment and conditions governing  
termination of employment; and 
(f)  such other matters as may be prescribed: 
Provided that every domestic worker shall be entitled to— 
(a)  a weekly day of rest; 
(b)  fifteen days of leave with wages in a calendar year; 
(c)  leave on such national and festival holidays, as m ay be notified; 
and 
(d)  humane working hours and adequate rest intervals, consistent 
with human dignity and health, as may be notified. 
(2)  No domestic worker shall be subjected to any form of physical, verbal, 
sexual or economic abuse, or any forced or bonded l abour, or to any 
discriminatory practices. 
 Written 
contract and 
conditions of 
employment. 

4
Wages and 
equal 
remuneration. 
6. (1) No domestic worker shall be paid wages less than the minimum rates of
wages notified by the appropriate Government for different categories of
domestic work.
(2) There shall be no discrimination in the payment of wages on the ground of
gender, caste, religion, place of origin or any other status of the domestic
worker.
(3) Wages shall be paid to a domestic worker at least once every month, either
in cash or through bank transfer or digital mode, with proper records
maintained by the employer, in such manner as may be prescribed.
5
 
. 
Central 
Government 
to formulate 
policy 
framework.
 
7. T he Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
formulate a policy and model framework for implementation of the provisions
of this Act in States and Union territories.
10 . 
C HAPTER IV 
WELFARE FUND AND SCHEMES 
D
omestic 
Workers 
Welfare 
Fund. 
8. ( 1) There shall be constituted by the appropriate Government a Fund to be
called the State/Union territory Domestic Workers Welfare Fund and there
shall be credited thereto—
(a) grants and loans made by the appropriate Government;
(b) contributions or cess from employers registered with the Board
having territorial jurisdiction, as may be prescribed; 
(c) amounts received from fines imposed under this Act, as may be
apportioned by the Central Government; and 
(d) donations, contributions, or assistance from any lawful source.
(2) The Fund shall be utilized exclusively for the welfare and social security of
registered domestic workers in such manner as may be prescribed.
15 
20 
25 
. 
Welfare 
schemes. 9. ( 1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette
formulate welfare schemes for domestic workers, which shall include, but not
limited to —
(a) health and accident insurance;
(b) maternity benefits and childcare support;
(c) old age pension and disability pension;
(d) assistance in case of injury or death during employment;
(e) housing, education scholarships for children, and skill
upgradation; 
(f) legal aid and counselling services;
(g) any other matter as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the Boards constituted under this Act to
ensure the implementation of the welfare schemes, as may be notified under
sub-section (1).
3
0 
35 
C HAPTER V 
REGULATION, INSPECTION AND GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 
40 
Inspection 
and 
monitoring. 
10. ( 1)  The appropriate Government shall, by notification, appoint or
designate inspectors or facilitators for the purposes of this Act possessing
such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed.
(2) The inspections of households shall be undertaken only upon receipt of
a complaint and subject to such safeguards, as may be prescribed, in a
manner that balances enforcement with the right to privacy.
45 

5 
 
(3) Inspectors or facilitators shall have the power to examine records, 
inquire into complaints, and issue directions or recommend corrective 
measures in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
11. (1) The Board shall establish a toll-free helpline and one or more 
facilitation centres in each district, and shall establish a time-bound 
grievance redressal system. 
(2) The facilitation centre shall receive complaints, relating to non-
payment of wages, abuse, harassment, wrongful termination, or denial of 
benefits, on behalf of the Board, from registered domestic workers, in 
written or electronic mode, in such manner or form as may be prescribed. 
(3) The complaints received under sub-section (2) shall be inquired into 
and disposed of within a period of thirty days from the date of its receipt. 
(4) The Board may, in the first instance, attempt conciliation and, 
wherever necessary, refer cases to the appropriate authority or a court of 
competent jurisdiction for such action as deemed fit. 
 Grievance 
redressal 
mechanism. 
   CHAPTER VI 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
12. (1) Any employer who contravenes the provisions of this Act or the rules and 
regulations made there under shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend up to rupees 
fifty thousand or with both. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall prevent the application of relevant 
provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or of any other law for the 
time being in force, in cases involving abuse, trafficking, or forced labour. 
 Offences and 
penalties. 
 25  CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
  
  13. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State 
Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 
 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
14. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure 
incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Board to the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person 
appointed by him in connection with the auditing of the accounts of the Board 
under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
has in connection with the auditing of the Government accounts and, in 
particular shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the 
offices of the Board under this Act. 
 Accounts and 
audit. 
 45 15. The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year as 
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities 
during the previous financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the appropriate 
Government. 
 Annual 
report. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
50 
16. The appropriate Government shall cause the annual report together with a 
memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, and 
the reasons for the non acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations and 
the audit report to be laid as soon as may be after the reports are received, 
before each House of Parliament or the State Legislature, as the case may be. 
 Annual report and audit report to be laid 
before Parliament or 
State legislature. 

6 
 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make rules . 
 17. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 . 
Power of 
Boards to 
make 
regulations . 
 18. The Boards may, with the previous approval of the a ppropriate Government, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, make regul ations consistent with this 
Act and the rules generally to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
. 
Rules and 
regulations to 
be laid before 
Parliament or 
State 
legislature.  
 19. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act  shall be laid, as soon as 
after it is made before each House of Parliament or  state legislature as the case 
may be, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successi ve sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the  session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, the House or both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or regulation shall thereafter have eff ect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however , that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the vali dity of anything previously 
done under that rule or regulation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith . 
 20. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shal l lie against the appropriate 
Government, the Board or any person acting under it s authority for anything 
done in good faith under this Act. 
 . 
Act to have 
overriding 
effect . 
 21. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwit hstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law f or the time being in force, 
save as otherwise provided. 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties . 
 22. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the pr ovisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official  Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with this Act as appear  necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
. 
 
  

7 
 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Domestic workers constitute one of the largest segm ents of the unorganized workforce 
and play an indispensable role in sustaining househ olds and enabling broader economic 
participation, particularly of women. Despite their  significant contribution, domestic workers 
largely remain outside the ambit of formal labour protection and social security laws. They are 
often subjected to low wages, excessive working hou rs, lack of written contracts, absence of 
social security, vulnerability to abuse and harassm ent, and denial of basic dignity and labour 
rights. The nature of domestic work, performed with in private households, renders domestic 
workers particularly vulnerable to exploitation and  makes enforcement of existing labour laws 
difficult. While certain welfare schemes exist, the ir coverage is fragmented, non-uniform, and 
largely dependent on voluntary registration, resulting in limited reach and effectiveness. 
A separate national law for domestic workers is ess ential due to the unique nature of 
employment of the domestic workers i.e.,  part-time / full-time, live-in and live-out. There  are 
a lot of complexities in the employment of the dome stic workers, and therefore, these workers 
are not squarely covered under the new Code of Wage s 2019 or other labour laws. There is an 
asymmetric relationship between the employers and e mployees in case of domestic workers. 
Last year, the Supreme Court has given a direction to the Central Government for having a 
separate law for domestic workers. The Court took n ote of the vulnerability of domestic 
workers because of lack of regulations. Though some  States do have regulations but the Court 
noted that there is a need for a national law applicable to all States. 
It is therefore considered necessary to enact a com prehensive legislation to recognize 
domestic workers as workers, ensure their registrat ion, regulate their conditions of 
employment, provide for minimum wages and decent wo rking conditions, and establish a 
dedicated institutional mechanism for social securi ty and welfare. The Bill seeks to create a 
Domestic Workers Welfare Board and a Welfare Fund f or providing health insurance, 
maternity benefits, pension, skill development, acc ident compensation, and other welfare 
measures. It also provides for grievance redressal,  inspection with due regard to household 
privacy, and penalties for violations. 
The proposed legislation is aligned with the consti tutional mandate of social justice 
under articles 14, 15, 16, 21, 23, 38, 39 and 43 of  the Constitution, and is consistent with 
international labour standards, including the ILO D omestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 
189). The enactment of this law will be a significa nt step towards ensuring dignity, security, 
and justice for domestic workers. 
 
   
   Hence, this Bill.  
 
 
 A. D. SINGH.  
 
 
 
 
 
  

8 
 
  FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of D omestic Workers Welfare 
Boards to provide social security to domestic worke rs as well as appointment of 
Chairperson and Members of the Boards along with ap pointment of officers and staff 
for efficient discharge of its functions. Clause 10  provides for appointment of 
Inspectors for the purposes of this Bill. Clause 11  provides for establishment of toll-free 
helpline and facilitation centres in each district.  Clause 13 provides that the Central 
Government shall provide adequate funds to the Stat e Governments for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 
 
The Bill, therefore if enacted, will involve expend iture from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees  five hundred crores will be required 
as recurring expenditure. Non-recurring expenditure  to the tune of rupees fifty crores is 
likely to be involved. 
 
   
  

9 
 
  MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Governme nt to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 18 em powers the Domestic Workers 
Welfare Boards to make regulations. Clause 22 empow ers the Central Government 
to make such provisions through an order for removi ng any difficulty that might 
arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. 
As the rules or regulations or orders will relate t o matters of procedural and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legis lative power is of a normal 
character. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
to
 provide for the social security, welfare, regulation of employment 
conditions, dignity of labour, and protection of the rights of 
domestic workers; and to provide for matters connected 
th
erewith or incidental thereto. 
___________ 
(Shri A. D. Singh, M.P.) 
RS-P&P-PMB(E)—089—10.02.2026.