THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In article 51A of the Constitution, after clause (k), the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(l) to participate in mass movement for cleanliness and propagate the message
of Clean India through his words and deeds."
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. IV of 2017
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 24TH MARCH, 2017
Amendment of
article 51A.5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
To realize the concept of "Shreshth Bharat" (Superior India) the dream of Clean India
has to be fulfilled. India is ranked very low in terms of cleanliness. This backwardness with
respect to cleanliness, is a hindrance in the way of India in becoming a developed country.
To free India from the clutches of filth and with an objective to pave the way for India to
become a developed country "Clean India Campaign" was launched by the Prime Minister
on 2nd October, 2014. There is a need to make Cleanliness Mission a mass movement so that
every citizen may participate in this mission and propagate the message of Clean India
through his words and deeds. This duty of a citizen should be included in the list of
Fundamental Duties envisaged in the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
PRABHAT  JHA
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
PART  IVA
FUNDAMENTAL  DUTIES
51A.  Fundamental duties:— It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the
people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities;
to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity
so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement;
(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his
child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.

GMGIPMRND—5503RS(S3)—24.03.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P.)