1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Preamble to the Constitution, for the word "India" the word "Bharat"
shall be substituted.
3. In article 1 of the Constitution in clause (1), for the words, "India, that is
Bharat" the word "Bharat" shall be substituted.
Amendment of
the Preamble.
Bill No. IV of  2012
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH MAY, 2012
Amendment of
article 1.
5

2
4. In article 28 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the state or any other educational
institutions recognized or aided by the State from imparting instruction in
‘Dharma’.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this article 'Dharma' means moral and
righteous code of conduct of individuals which sustains the Society, maintains social
order, ensures well-being and progress of humanity as distinct from religion which in
clause (1) of article 28 of the Constitution shall mean only various methods or mode of
worship of God by any class of persons who believe in the existence of God, by
whatever name they choose to call him."
Amendment of
article 28.
5
10

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECT AND REASONS
As far as the name of  the Country is concerned, the Bill provides that the word
'India' be deleted and it should stand substituted by the word 'Bharat'. The reason for
this is the name of the Country from times immemorial is Bharat and as evidenced by
all ancient literature commencing from the Mahabharat, and in particular the Vishnu
Purana contains an entire chapter dedicated to the territorial description of the country
wherein the name of the country is given as "Bharat".
It reads:
mÙkja ;r~ leqnzL; fgeknzs'pSo nf{k.ke~A
o"k± rn Hkkjra uke Hkkjrh ;= lUrfr%AA
The country which lies to the north of the seas and to the south of the Himalayas,
is Bharat, and the people of this Country are 'Bharateeyas'.
The name 'India' was given by the foreign rulers. The moment we got rid of
foreign rule, we should have also got rid of the name given by them to our Country.
Dr. Radhakumud Mukherjee, the great historian of our times, in his famous book
'Fundamental Unity of India' has stated that "The name 'Bharat' is not a mere
geographical expression like the term "India", having only a physical reference, it has
a deep historical significance symbolizing a fundamental unity".
But strangely, in article 1 of the Constitution, the name  'India' is retained along
with 'Bharat'. Two names are unnecessary and proper noun should not  be translated.
It is also necessary that the name of our country must be in conformity with our
National Anthem and National Slogan. It is well known that in our National Anthem
the word used to identify our Country is "Bharata" and not "India" and similarly our
National Slogan is Bharat Mata Ki Jai which is ever unifying and inspiring, which
has a tremendous appeal for fraternity, unity and integrity of the Nation, and not
"India Mata Ki Jai". Hence, the word 'India' should be deleted in article 1 and in all
places in the Constitution and the laws wherever the word 'India' occurs it should
stand replaced by the word "Bharat".
As regards clause (4) of  article 28 together with explanation proposed to be
inserted by this Bill, the reasons are that the panacea for corruption, abuse of power
and immoral sexual behaviour and moral degradation which are rampant and eating
into the vitals of the Nation lies in making instructions in Dharma or moral code
compulsory in the school curriculum and National Education System. there is no
word which is equivalent to the Sanskrit word 'Dharma' in any other language of the
World. Dr. Radhakrishnan has rightly stated 'virtue is Dharma' and 'vice is adharma'.
To put in one sentence, Dharma is moral code of conduct common to all human
beings whereas religion is mode of worship of God by believers in god by giving him
different names. Religions are many and personal but Dharma is one and Universal.
Good code of conduct which are prescribed in different religions could also be
supplemented.  It is no doubt a long term remedy but a sure one and the only panacea
for moral degradation with which Nation is suffering.
It is paradoxical that comprehensive word Dharma came to be translated as
religion wrongly though there is a vast difference between Dharma and Religion for
whereas Dharma means righteous code of conduct, religion means mode of worship
of God by believers and secularism means respect and equal treatment of all religions.
Dharma respects all religions and prohibits discrimination on ground of religion and,
therefore, secularism-par-excellence. All the rules of righteous conduct in every

4
sphere of human activity evolved from times immemorial in the World fall within the
meaning of the word Dharma. This meaning of Dharma as given in the Mahabharata
Karna Parva has been quoted with approval by the Supreme Court in the case of
Narayana Dixitalu Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh [1996 (9) SCC 548 at praragraph 59].
Therefore, it is mandatory that Dharma should be made part of instruction in Schools
and Colleges so that every individual develops from childhood the Dharma abiding
nature.  Further, Dharma is preventive in nature as declared in
Mahanarayanopanishad in the following words: 
/kesZ.k ikieiuqnfr  "Dharma destroys
sinful thoughts". It is an internal check against wrong doing. Any instrumentality
created by the State, Lokpal or Lokayukta or the Courts or Police Force are of punitive
in nature and come into operation only after the offence is committed. It is well known
that "prevention is better than cure". Therefore, as part of National Education System,
Dharma abiding nature should be inculcated in each individual by making instructions
in Dharma supplemented by moral code laid down in various Religions from childhood.
This is the only remedy to eradicate corruption.
As far as the instructions in Dharma is concerned, it is universal for all and
would prevent the acquisition of illegal wealth [artha] and fulfilling of illegitimate
desires and therefore constitute the panacea for all human problems. Moreover,
Dharma includes duties of individuals. In fact our Society from most ancient times
has established duty based society [Karma Bhumi] and Mahatma Gandhi in his book
"My Picture of Free India" in the first paragraph itself has reiterated the declaration
made in the Vishnu Purana to the effect that ours is a duty based society [Karma
Bhoomi] and that is the mark of our distinction as distinct from other lands. Though
a chapter on Fundamental Duties was omitted in the original constitution obviously
by oversight, it came to be incorporated in the Constitution by the Constitution 42nd
Amendment. Justice J.S. V erma Committee appointed by Central Government has
recommended in its report that Fundamental Duties should be made part of school
curriculum. Thus, the Fundamental Rights, Directive Principles and the Fundamental
Duties incorporated in Part-III, IV and IV A together fall within the scope of Dharma
and are binding on all. Therefore, instructions in Dharma should be made compulsory
in the school curriculum in order to inculcate Dharma abiding nature in all the citizens.
It is high time that we should make a clear distinction which exists between Dharma
and Religion as explained in the Bill which is sure to strengthen true secularism which
is one of the elements of the basic structure of the Constitution. Hence this Bill.
M. RAMA JOIS

ANNEXURE
EXRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
PREAMBLE—WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to
constitute India into a SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
and to secure to all its citizens:
*** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
1. Name and territory of the Union—(1) India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of
States.
(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as specified in the First
Schedule.
(3) The territory of India shall comprise—
(a) the territories of the States;
(b) the Union territories specified in the First Schedule; and
(c) such other territories as may be acquired.
5
*** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri  M. Rama  Jois, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1025RS(S3)—11-05-2012.