THE  DECLARATION OF  ASSETS   AND  LIABILITIES BY
SUPREME COURT,  HIGH COURT AND  SUBORDINATE
 COURT  JUDGES   BILL,  2009
A
BILL
to provide for declaration of assets and liabilities by Judges of Supreme Court, High Court
and Subordinate Courts to a designated authority; to provide for rights to the Central
Government to call for information on declaration of assets and liabilities and; to
provide for penalty for non-declaration or forged declaration of assets and liabilities
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  Declaration of Assets and Liabilities by the  Supreme
Court, High Court and Subordinate Court Judges Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appointed day’’ means the first day of January, 2009.
(b) ‘‘assets and liabilities’’ means assets and liabilities in and outside India and
includes movable and immovable property.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. IV  of  2009
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD JULY, 2009
Definitions.
5

2
(c) ‘‘Judge’’ includes Magistrate, Sub-Judges or any other person performing
judicial functions under the judicial set up by whatever name called.
(d) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by  rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Every Judge of the Supreme Court, High Court and Subordinate Court shall,
within forty-five days of the coming into force of this Act make, in such form as may be
prescribed, a declaration of all—
(a) his assets and liabilities;
(b) the assets and liabilities of his spouse;
(c) the assets and liabilities of each of his children on the appointed day.
(2) Where a person who on the commencement  of the Act is not a person to whom this
Act applies becomes thereafter a person to whom this Act applies, he shall, within forty-five
days of his appointment, make a declaration of his assets and liabilities as on the day of his
appointment.
(3) The declaration of assets and liabilities that a Judge is required to make under sub-
section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) shall, unless such person ceases to be a Judge, be made
periodically in every third year after the first declaration of assets and liabilities or at such
shorter periodic intervals as the Parliament may by resolution determine.
4. The declaration of assets and liabilities shall be made in the following manner:—
(a) To the President—by the Chief Justice of India.
(b) To Chief Justice of India—by Supreme Court Judge, Chief Justice of High
Court and Judges of High Court.
(c) To the Chief Justice of High Court—by Session Judge, District Judge and
Other Subordinate Judges.
5. The Central Government shall have the right to call for and refer to any declaration
of assets and liabilities made by the Supreme Court, High Court and Subordinate Court
Judges and such information shall also be made available to any citizen under the provisions
of the Right to Information Act, 2005.
6.  (1) In case a Judge—
(a) who fails without reasonable cause to make any declaration of assets and
liabilities which he is required to make under section 3; or
(b) who makes any false statement in any such declaration; or
(c) who otherwise contravenes any other provisions of this Act,
the matter shall be dealt under the Contempt of Court Act, 1971 as if it is the contempt
of court.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
8.  The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force on the subject and save
aforesaid the provisions of the Act shall be in addition to and not derogation of any other law
for the time in force.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
To whom
declaration of
assets and
liabilities are
to be made.
22 of 2005.
Non-
declaration or
false
declaration of
assets and
liabilities.
Power to
refer to
declaration of
assets and
liabilities.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
70 of 1971.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Of late, controversies have been generated on the issue of declaration of assets by the
Judges of the Supreme Court. The Central Information Commission has opined that the
information relating to assets and liabilities of the Judges comes under the preview of Right
to Information  ( RTI)  Act, 2005 and, therefore, it should be made available to the citizens. On
the other hand, the judiciary feels that the information which is available with the Chief
Justice of India does not come under the preview of the RTI Act and, therefore, the information
relating to assets and liabilities of Judges which is available with the Chief Justice of India
cannot be given under the RTI. It is being largely felt that there should not be any objection
to the Judges in declaring their assets and liabilities or making available this information to
the citizens. As the Law stands today, even the Members of Parliament are bound to declare
their assets and liabilities within a specified period after taking oath as Members of Parliament.
In order to put the controversy at rest it is felt necessary that there should be a mandatory
provision for declaration of assets and liabilities by the Supreme Court, High Court and
Subordinate Judges.
Hence this Bill.
MAHENDRA MOHAN
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.
The rules will relate to details only. The delegation of legislative power is of normal
character.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for declaration of assets and liabilities by Judge of Supreme Court, High Court and
Subordinate Courts to a designated authority; to provide for rights to the Central
Government to call for information on declaration of assets and liabilities and; to
provide for penalty for non-declaration or forged declaration of assets and liabilities
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2544RS(S5)—03.07.2009.