Bill No. IV of  2020
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
(Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, after section 18 of the
principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
''18A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, where a child commits or attempts to commit any offence punishable under this
Act or to cause such an offence to be committed and in such attempt, does any act
towards the commission of  the offence, he shall  be charged as adult for such offence
and shall be liable for punishment provided under this Act.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section 'child' means any person between
fifteen to eighteen years of age.''
Insertion of
new section
18A.
5
10 Punishment
for offences
by child
between
fifteen to
eighteen
years of age.
15
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7
TH
  FEBRUARY, 2020

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 provides for severe
punishment for sexual offences against children below eighteen years of age. The Act provides
for death panalty for rape of a child below twelve years of age as well. But this law does not
highlight how the offender would be treated if he himself is a minor. Today, the rate of
physical and mental development of children has advanced much in comparision to earlier
period which attributed to climate, eating habits and electronic gadgets such as mobile,
television etc. It is, therefore, not appropriate to consider a child as adult only after he attains
the age of eighteen years. Today, even a fifteen year child possesses qualities in thought and
knowledge of an adult and knows what is good or bad. The incidents of heinous crimes like
murder, rape and robbery committed by this age group are on the rise in the society. The girls
who are comparatively innocent become easy prey to the offenders of the same age group.
Hence, it would be appropriate if child offenders between fifteen to eighteen years of
age are also punished under the same sections under which the punishment for adults for
offences such as raping minors or committing sexual offences against them have been
provided for, so that our girls can stay safe at home and outside.
The Bill proposes that child offenders between fifteen to eighteen years of age should
be covered under the ambit of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 and
be given the same punishment as is given to adults.
Hence, this Bill.
SAROJ PANDEY
2

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
————
(Ms. Saroj Pandey, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5263RS(S3)—07-02-2020.