THE  CHILD  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAMMES  COORDINATION
AGENCY  BILL,  2015
A
Bill
to provide for the constitution of the Child Development Programmes Coordination
Agency in order to ensure smooth functioning of child development programmes
and achievement of targets for such programmes within a set time frame
 and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Child Development Programmes Coordination Agency
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "Agency" means the Child Development Programmes Coordination Agency
established under section 4 of the Act.
(b) "Child Development Programmes" means the programmes being run by the
Ministry of Women and Child Development of the Central Government with an object
of child development in the country;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. IV of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 18TH DECEMBER, 2015
5
10

2
Coordination
of Child
Development
Programmes.
(d) "Supreme Departmental Authority" means the Secretary of the Department
of Women and Child Development of the Central Government;
(e) "top official" means the head of the Child Development Programmes being
run by the Central Government.
3. An Agency shall be established to bring coordination among child development
programmes run by the Central Government with an objective to ensure that the child
development programmes are run smoothly and the targets are achieved within the set time
frame.
4. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the official gazette establish an
agency for the purpose of this Act to be known as the Child Development Programme
Coordination Agency, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff for the
efficient functioning of the agency and the terms and conditions of the  services of such
persons appointed shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The headquarter of the agency shall be at such place as may be prescribed.
5. The agency shall perform the following functions:—
(a) conduct monthly review of child development programmes run by the Central
Government;
(b) hold meetings with the top officials in connection with the quarterly execution
of programme based on the review;
(c) submit half-yearly progress report and give suggestions to Supreme
Departmental Authority; and
(d) such other functions as may be prescribed by the Central Government from
time to time.
6. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the official gazette establish a
fund to be known as "Child Development Programmes Coordination Fund'.
(2) The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Establishment
of Child
Development
Coordination
Agency.
Functions of
the Agency.
Establishment
of Agency
Fund.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is unfair to think of development of a nation without the development of its children.
Actually, child development is the foundation of national development. The responsibility
of ensuing health care, availability of good nutrition and quality education to children lies
not only with the parents but also with the Government. Presently, a number of programmes
on child development are being run by the Central Government among which the Integrated
Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme is the primary one which was started in 1975.
Subsequenlty, many small or big programmes were introduced. Despite all this Schemes
there seems to be a continuous deterioration in child development scenario in the country,
be it the state of health or nutrition or education. Owing to lack of coordination among
various ongoing programmes, the state of child development in the country continues to be
at the lowest level despite spending hundreds of crores of rupees annually. Therefore, the
need to establish a coordination agency for ensuring smooth functioning of child development
programme and achievement of targets of such programmes within the set time frame is
inevitable.
Hence, this  Bill.
PRABHAT  JHA
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill Provides for the establishment of the Child Development Programmes
Coordination Agency and the appointment of officers and staff in the Agency. Clause 6 of
the Bill provides for the establishment of a Child Development Programme Coordination
Fund. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is  likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill Empowers the Central Government  to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relates to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the Child Development Programme Coordination Agency
in order to ensure the smooth functioning of child development programmes and
achievement of targets for such programmes within a set time frame and
for matters connected herewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3835RS(S3)—18-12-2015.