Sec. 2} THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 18

Ti

Bu No. IX or 1994

A Bill to provide for the prohibition of production, sale and distribution
of soups, detergent cakes and powders coniaining washing soda and
other chemicals in excess whieh are havinful to the hands or other
parts of the human body as काला as to the clothes wid environment
fo whieh such soaps, cakes or powders aye appticd ov released and
Jor matters connected therewit ov incidentul thereto,

He a enacted by Piilinnieit in ane Torcy-fith year of the Republic of
Indin as follows:

1, (7) ‘This Avt may be called the 1190 Soaps, Detergeat cukes aud
Powders (Prohibition of Production, Sale and Distribution) Act, 1994,

2) Tt exteads to the whote of India,

(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.

2, In this Act, wnleas the context otherwise requires —

(a) “appropriate Goveruniext” incaus in the case of a State the
Government of that State and in all other cases the Central Government;

(0) “detergent cake” means a cake of soap containing cleausine
agents therein used for cleansing purposes;

Shor
७७
enbeat
nad
Olu
menice=
meat,

Defini-
ions,


Bureau of
Tadian
Standards
10 pres+
0108 sian-
dards for
soap,
detergent
cakes,

and
powders.

Probibi-
tion of
produc.
tion of
homfal
soaps,
detergent
cakes

and

det erent
powders,

Probibi-
tjon of
sale

nid

suyyly

of harmful

deiergebi
powder?

Wrapper

iggy
details

of chenti-
cals used,

Food Ins-
pectors to
admaisicr
the Act

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr a

(c) “detergent powder” means cleansing powder containing cleansing
agents used for cleansing purposes;

@ “barmful soap" means a cake of soap or its powder containing
washing soda and other chemicals in excess which ig harmful to the
human skin and is pollutant to the environment;

(९) “label” means a display of written, marked, stamped printed or
graphic matter affixed to or appearmmg upon the wrapper of a soap or.
detergent cake or the container of the detergent powder:

Y) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Burcau of Indian Standards
Act, 1986, it shall be the duty of the Bureau of Indian Standards to determine
the minimum standards for washing soda and other chemicals to be added to
the soaps, detergent cakes and powders in such manner as may be prescribed

4, (1) The production of harmful soaps, detergent cakes and powders in
violation of the standards prescribed under section 3 is hereby prohibited.

(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (J) shall be guilty
of an offence under this Act.

3. No person shall supply, distribute or keeps for sale any harmful soap,
Gefergent. cake and powder which has been manufactured in violation of the
provisions of section 3 if such person reasons 10 believe thal the soaps,
defurpent cakes and powders kept by him dor sale contain वात. agents
whic way affect the hauds or other parts ot the body of ॥५ user or which may
cau pollution in the oavironuiem wi कराए आजाद,

ygent cake and.

6, (7) The wrapper or the container of every soap de
powder shall indicate in a clear and conspicuous manner the chemicals cleans-

ing agents and other mateiists wsed therein.

(2) The wrapper and container of every soap, detergent cake and powder
shall indicate in clear and conspicuous manner the name and address of its

mawufactuier,
7. Notwithstanding anything contaiued in any other law for the time being

in force the food inspectors of the appropriate Government shall administer the
provisions of this Act in such manner and exercise such powers as may be

presented.


KITE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17

8. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 4 or section 5 or section
6 shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to five years or
with fine which may extend to thirty thousand rupees or with. both.

9. Where a person committing an offence under this Act is a company or
any otherbody corporate or an association of persons, whether incorporated or,
not, every Director, Manager, Secretary, Agent or other Officer or person con-
cerned with the management thereof shull, unless he proves that the offence
was committed without his knowledge or consent, be deemed to be guilty af
such offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
acco ‘dingly.

10. The provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder shall
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any
ofer law for the time being in force.

11, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Panalties,

Offence
by com-
panies.

Over-
riding
effect,

Of the
Act and
rules
made
there-
under.

Power
to make
rules,


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part It—

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It has been observed that in various parts of the country pucticularly in
the rural and some urban areas spurious soaps, detergent cakes and powders
are freely sold in retail and are widely used by consumers. These harmful
products have adverse effect on the skin of the users, While using these
products their hands and other parts of the body get in touch with the excess
washing soda and other chemicals used in these products which pierce the skin
of the users and cause wounds therein. After sometime the wounds turn into
eczema and other skin ailments. Women are the worst sufferers because they
mainly use these products. It is, therefore, necessaty to prohibit the produc-
tion, sale and distribution of these products in the larger public interest so
that it will have deterrent effect on the manufacturers of these products.

Hence this Bill.

SURESH PACHOURI.


‘THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19

FINANCYAL. MEMORANDUM

Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Act will be administered by — the
Food Inspectors of the appropriute Government. The Bill, if enacted and
brought into operation, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. If is estimated that a sum of rupees cight lakhs will involve

as
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India per annum.

No non-recurring expenditure is Ukely 10 bo involved,


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Parr 1—

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 ofthe Bill gives the power to the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters
of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character,