1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill  No.  IX of 2008
THE ERADICATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for a scheme for eradication of unemployment from the country.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty- ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Eradication of Unemployment Act,  2008.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
(3) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires, "prescribed" means prescribed by
rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall endeavour to provide every citizen who has attained
the age of eighteen years and who is registered with the Employment Exchange with
employment suited to his age, qualification and potential.
Definitions.
Employment
to citizens.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
4. Till such time an employment is provided to a citizen under section 3, he or she
shall be entitled to such unemployment allowance, as may be prescribed.
5. The Central Government shall frame an Unemployment Insurance Scheme so as to
provide for a special fund for the grant of unemployment allowance under this Act.
6. A citizen who has registered himself with the Employment Exchange shall be eligible
to receive benefit of unemployment allowance under this Act subject to his furnishing an
agreement to contribute to Unemployment Insurance Scheme for a prescribed period
immediately after securing employment at a rate as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for the following matters, namely:—
(a) the rate of unemployment allowance referred to in section 4 and different
rates may be prescribed on the basis of qualification and skills;
(b) the necessary details of the Unemployment Insurance Scheme;
(c)  the rate of contribution to the Unemployment Insurance Scheme under section 6;
(d) the procedure to regulate all payments under this Act; and
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
Grant of
unemployment
allowance.
Unemployment
Insurance
Scheme.
Contribution
to
Unemployment
Insurance
Scheme.
Power to
make rules.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The problem of unemployment has assumed alarming proportion in our country.
Consequently, even the educated citizens are rendered indigent and the young generation is
under the grip of frustration. Their energy is not being utilized for nation building. In
desperation and due to abject poverty, they choose the path of violence and crime. Lack of
opportunity of employment in the country is also leading to brain drain and exodus of a large
number of skilled and unskilled persons abroad. It is time that concerted efforts are made by
the State to assure employment to the citizens of the country and to provide unemployment
relief to those who have not been able to secure employment. It is also necessary to promote
an Unemployment Insruance Scheme for the purpose, so that the funds could be arranged
for making available relief to unemployed people through this scheme.
Hence the Bill.
JAI PARKASH  AGGARWAL
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the grant of unemployment allowance to those citizens
who have attained the age of eighteen years. Clause 5 provides for the establishment of
Unemployment Insurance Scheme, so that special fund could be arranged for the unemployed
people. It is estimated that due to this provision approximately a sum of rupees one hundred
fifty crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is expected that this recurring expenditure will begin to reduce substantially with the
generation of more and more employment opportunities.
No non-recurring expenditure is expected to involve thereon.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 empowers the Central Government to make rules for implementing the
provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of details only.
Therefore, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a scheme for eradication of unemployment from the country.
————
(Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4745RS(S-5)—29-12-2008.