AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024 
Bill No. IX of 2024 
T
HE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
 fu
rther to amend the Constitution of India. 
           BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
  India as follows: – 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)Act, 2024.
(2
) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement 
2. In article 361 of the Constitution, —
(1)
for clause 2, the following clause shall be substituted, namely: —
“(2) No criminal proceedings whatsoever shall be instituted or continued
against the President in any court during his term of office.” 
Amendment 
of article 
361. 

2 
(2) for clause 3, the following clause shall be substituted, namely: —
“(3) No p
rocess for the arrest or imprisonment of the President shall issue
from any court during his term of office.” 
(3) for clau
se 4, the following clause shall be substituted, namely: —
“(4) No c
ivil proceedings in which relief is claimed against the President,
shall be instituted during his term of office in any court in respect of any 
act done or purporting to be done by him in his personal capacity, whether 
before or after he entered upon his office as President, until the expiration 
of two months next after notice in writing has been delivered to the 
President, or left at his office stating the nature of the proceedings, the 
cause of action therefor, the name, description and place of residence of 
the party by whom such proceedings are to be instituted and the relief 
which he claims.” 
5 
10 
(4) after clause 4, the following new clause shall be inserted, namely: —
“(5) No c
riminal proceeding shall be instituted or continued against the
Governor of a State, in any court during his term of office for any act done 
by him in the discharge of his public duty or functions.” 
15 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
T
he Constitution of India states that the executive power of the State 
vests in the Governor. The Governor being a nominal head of the State is 
bound by the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers of the State. The 
Governor is appointed by the President of India, on the recommendations of 
the Union Cabinet. The Governor serves at the pleasure of the President. The 
Governor is therefore an unelected figurehead of the State Government.  
A
rticle 361 confers immunity from civil and criminal prosecution on the 
President and the Governor. The treatment of the Governor on par with the 
President of India is fallacious since the President of I ndia is elected by an 
electoral college comprising elected representatives of the Houses of 
Parliament and the Legislatures of the States. Therefore, the President is a 
democratically elected head of the Union, whereas the Governor is a mere 
appointee. In fact, Article 157 only prescribes the most basic qualifications for 
appointment as Governor. Thus, equating the President and the Governor in 
matters of immunity is undesirable.  
T
hat apart, the Governor is bound by the aid and advice of the Council 
of Ministers of the State. The Chief Minister of the State does not enjoy 
complete immunity from prosecution. He can be prosecuted after obtaining 
sanction. Similarly, there should be a provision to prosecute the Governor for 
criminal offences after obtaining the sanction of the President, who appoints 
him. The Chief Minister of a State does not enjoy any immunity from civil 
proceedings. There is no reason why a Governor   should get immunity from 
civil prosecution for civil wrongs or damages caused by him. Thus, it is 
undesirable to place the Governor at a better position than the democratically 
elected Chief Minister of the State, who enjoys the confidence of the 
Legislature of the State.  
 A
llegations of corruption, sexual offences, inciting violence etc. have 
been made against some Governors. The idea that a person, howsoever high, 
be beyond the reach of Courts and the justice administration system is a 
colonial relic and cannot be part of a democracy administered by a written 
Constitution and the rule of law. If Governors misuse their office to provoke 
breach of peace or act against public interest, they must face the legal 
consequences.  
T
he immunity under Article 361(1) to the Governor from answering to 
any court for the exercise and performance of his official duties is sufficient 
protection to ensure that a Governor does not answer cases filed against his 
official decisions personally. However, the immunity need not extend to 
criminal offences or civil wrongs committed by a Governor in his personal 
capacity. Absolute immunity to an unelected figure is antithetical to our 
constitutional morality and basic structure. 
It is t
herefore, proposed to amend article 361 to achieve the above 
objectives. 
        
Hence, this Bill. 
P. W
ILSON

4 
AN
NEXURE 
EX
TRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
  *     *      
   *      *          *     *     *     
361. (1) The P resident,  or the Governor or Rajpramukh of a State, shall not be
answerable to any court for the exercise and performance of the powers and 
duties of his office or for any act done or purporting to be done by him in the 
exercise and performance of those powers and duties: 
          Provided that the conduct of the President may be brought under review 
by any court, tribunal or body appointed or d esignated by either House of 
Parliament for the investigation of a charge under article 61:  
           Provided further that nothing in this clause shall be construed as 
restricting the right of any person to bring appropriate proceedings against the 
Government of India or the Government of a State. 
(2) No cri
minal proceedings whatsoever shall be instituted or continued against
the President, or the Governor of a State, in any court during his term of office.
(3) No pr
ocess for the arrest or imprisonment of the President, or the Governor
of a State, shall issue from any court during his term of office.
(4) No civ
il proceedings in which relief is claimed against the President,or the
Governor  of a State, shall be instituted during his term of office inany court in
respect of any act done or purporting to be done by him in his personal capacity,
whether before or after he entered upon his office as President, or as Governor
of such State, until the expiration of two months next after notice in writing has
been delivered to the President or the Governor, as the case may be, or left at
his office stating the nature of the proceedings, the cause of action therefor, the
name, description and place of residence of the party by whom such
proceedings are to be instituted and the relief which he claims.
Protection of President  
and Governors and 
Rajpramukhs.
 *         *         *         *     *      *      *     

RAJYA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
_______ 
(Shri P. Wilson, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)―057―06.02.2024. 