AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. TX of 2001
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. The Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001. Short ttle.
2. In clause (J) of article 19 of the Constitution, after sub-clause (g), the following Amendment of
5. shall be inserted, namely:— . article 19.

“(h) every citizen shall have the right to work for earning his livelihood and the
State shall provide adequate facilities for such employment including self-employment
commensurate with the particular citizen’s ability, attainment and other related

circumstances.” .
10 3. For article 24 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, Substitution of
namely:— new article for

article 24.


Prohibition of
employment of
children in fac-
tories ete. and
provision for
free and com-
pulsory educa-
tion for chil-
dren.

2

“24 (7) No child below the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work in
any factory or mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment.

(2) Every child shall be provided free and compulsory education until completion
of the age of fourteen years.”

4, In Article 243G, after clause (b) the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:

“(¢) the setting up of a fund under the control of the Panchayat out of which
viable schemes as may be’approved by the Panchayat to provide work and
employment including self-employment as generated under provisions of sub-
clause (४) of clause (Z) of article 19,

(d) Every panchayat shall have a branch of the Gramin Bank and the Fund set
up under clause (c) shall be handled by such branch. The Finance Commission
constituted under article 243-I shall assess and quantify the size of the fund, the
amount of contribucion to be made by the State and the Gram Panchayat and upon
quantification of the amount, the State and the Panchayat shall credit the fwad with
the requisite amounts by end of June every year.

(e) The Panchayat shall encourage formation of small cooperatives with a view
to providing work to citizens living within its jurisdiction.

(f) Every Gram Panchayat shall have small scale industries as may be approved
by the State Government to be located and made functional within six months from
the date of enactment to provide working opportunities to the citizens living in the
Panchayat.

5. The State legislatures shall enact appropriate legislation to give effect to
this Act.

10

15

20


‘ STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The resolution’ 6f-the people of India to constitute India into a Sovereign Socialist
Sccular Democratic Republic securing to all its citizens Justice, Liberty and Equality
along with promotion of fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and
integrity of the Nation, made half a cerftury back, has not yet materialised. The Indian
polity has not been able to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the
people. Inequality in status, facilities and opportunities not only amongst individuals but
also amongst groups of people prevails as before. The right to work has not been secured
to the citizens and public assistance has not yet been provided in cases of unemployment,
old age or sickness, The State has not been able to provide a living wage to the working
folk. .

The State has failed to promote to any significant extent the educational and economic
interests of the weaker sections of the people, and in particular, of the scheduled castes,
the scheduled tribes and the backward classes to bring them into common national stream
and as a result of this failure, the divide remains and the nation has not forged ahead as
envisaged in the Preamble.

The Bill seeks to amend some provisions of the Constitution for rectifying these
deficiencies and bring about the desired changes without any further delay.

RANGANATH MISRA


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to set up a fund for supporting implementation of the
fundamental right to work may involve monetary contribution, the extent of which would
be determined by the State Law to be made.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Ranganath Misra, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6194RS—31 01 2001.