1
Short title and
commencement.
THE INDIAN FOREST (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Forest Act, 1927.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Forest (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In sub-section (3) of section 68 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927,—
(a) the words “and is in receipt of a monthly salary amounting to at least one
hundred rupees” shall be omitted;
(b) for the words “fifty rupees”, the words “ten thousand rupees” shall be
substituted;
Amendment of
section 68 of
Act 16 of
1927.
Bill No. IX of 2012
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

2
(c) after sub-section (3), the following shall be inserted, namely:—
'(4) In Scheduled Areas, the Forest-officer shall, before exercising the
powers vested under this section, obtain and record the views of the Gram Sabha
concerned.
Explanation. — In this sub-section, the expressions,—
(a) "Gram Sabha" means a body consisting of persons registered in
the electoral rolls relating to a village comprised within the area of
Panchayat at the village level;
(b) "Scheduled Areas" means the areas to which the provisions of
clause (1) of article 244 and the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution apply.’.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indian Forest Act, 1927 (16 of 1927) has been enacted to consolidate the law
relating to forests, the transit of forest-produce and the duty leviable on timber and other
forest-produce.
2. Section 68 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 contains provisions for compounding of
offences.  It inter alia, —
(a) confers power upon a Forest Officer, appointed by the State Government, to
accept  from any  person against  whom a  reasonable suspicion exists  that he  has
committed  any  forest-offence, (other  than an offence specified in section 62 relating
to punishment for wrongful seizure or section  63 relating to penalty for counterfeiting
or defacing marks on trees and timber and for altering boundary marks) a  sum of
money by way of compensation for the offence which such person is suspected to
have committed;
(b) when  any   property  has  been  seized  as  liable  to confiscation, to  release
the  same on  payment of  the value thereof as estimated by such officer.
Sub-section (2) of the aforesaid section 68 further provides that the suspected  person,
if  in custody, shall,  on  the payment of such sum of money, or such value, or both, as the
case may  be, be discharged on  the payment of such sum of money, or such value, or both,
as the  case may  be, and the property,  if any, seized shall be released, and  no further
proceedings shall  be  taken  against  such person or property.
3. Sub-section ( 3) of aforesaid section 68 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 provides
that, —
(i) a  Forest-officer referred to above for the purpose of compounding of offence
should not be inferior  to that of a Ranger and is in receipt of a monthly salary
amounting to at least one hundred rupees,  and
(ii) the  sum of  money accepted as compensation under clause ( a) of sub-
section (1) shall in no case exceed the sum of fifty rupees.
4. The monthly salary limit of a Forest Officer specified in sub-paragraph ( i) of the
preceding paragraph empowered to compound aforesaid offences has become redundant
and it is therefore proposed to omit  salary limit from aforesaid sub-section (3).
5. The  sum not exceeding rupees fifty accepted as compensation as mentioned in
paragraph (ii) of the preceding paragraph fixed in 1927 is very less.  It is also proposed to
revise the said limit from fifty rupees to ten thousand rupees.
6. It is also proposed to insert a new sub-section (4) in section 68 of the Indian Forest
Act, 1927 so as to make it mandatory for the Forest-officer, to obtain and record the views
of Gram Sabha before compounding the offence so as to ensure the transparency in
compounding of the offences and participation of the people at Gram Sabha level.
N
EW DELHI; JAYANTHI NATARAJAN.
The 15th  February, 2012
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN FOREST ACT, 1927
(16 OF 1927)
* * * * *
68. (1) * * * * *
(3) A Forest-officer shall not be empowered under this section unless he is a Forest-
officer of a rank not inferior to that of a Ranger and is in receipt of a monthly salary amounting
to at least one hundred rupees, and the sum of money accepted as compensation under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall in no case exceed the sum of fifty rupees.
* * * * *
Power to
compound
offences.
4

GMGIPMRND—4642RS(S3)—21-03-2012.
RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Forest Act, 1927.
————
(Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan, Minsiter of State (Independent Charge)
in the Ministry of Environment and Forests)