THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA (ESTABLISHMENT OF A
PERMANENT BENCH  AT THIRUV ANANTHAPURAM)  BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court of Kerala at
Thiruvananthapuram and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the High Court of Kerala (Establishment of a Permanent
Bench at Thiruvananthapuram) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the High Court of Kerala at
Thiruvananthapuram.
3.  Such  Judges of the High Court of Kerala, being not less than three in number, as the
Chief Justice of the High Court of Kerala may from time to time nominate, shall sit at the
permanent bench referred to in Section 2, in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for
the time being vested with the High Court of Kerala in respect of cases arising in the districts
of Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam and Pathanamthitta in the State of Kerala.
Bill No. IX  of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 1ST APRIL, 2022
Constitution,
jurisdiction
and powers of
the
Permanent
Bench.
Short title and
commencement.
5
Establishment
of a Permanent
Bench of High
Court at Thiru-
vananthapuram.
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Kerala was formed on November 1st, 1956. Since then, there has been a
constant demand that a permanent Bench of the High Court be set up at Thiruvananthapuram,
being the capital city of the State.
2. The right of access to justice to every citizen has been enshrined in the Constitution
of India. Justice at the door step has been the focus of every Government, and yet the
demand for establishment of a permanent bench at Thiruvananthapuram has not been
materialised so far.
3. If a Bench of the High Court of Kerala is established at Thiruvananthapuram, it
would greatly benefit the Government, the Government servants, various institutions, the
lawyers based in and around the city of Thiruvananthapuram and the people at large. They
would be able to pursue their cases in the High Court at significantly lower expenses.
4. Since the capital of the State is in Thiruvananthapuram and the High Court is
currently located at Ernakulam, the State Government has to face practical inconveniences in
dealing with matters connected with the High Court as officials have to travel to Ernakulam
frequently resulting in substantial burden on the State exchequer and causing loss of time.
5. This Bill, therefore, seeks to establish a permanent Bench of the High Court of Kerala
at Thiruvananthapuram.
JOHN BRITTAS
2

MGIPMRND—32RS(S3)—04.04.2022.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court of Kerala at
Thiruvananthapuram and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri  John Brittas, M.P .)