1
THE DELHI HOTELS (CONTROL OF ACCOMMODATION) REPEAL
BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to repeal the Delhi Hotels (Control of Accommodation) Act, 1949.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Delhi Hotels (Control of Accommodation) Repeal Act,
2014.
2. The Delhi Hotels (Control of Accommodation) Act, 1949 is hereby repealed.
Short title.
Repeal of Act
24 of 1949.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. IX of 2014
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Delhi Hotels (Control of Accommodation) Act, 1949 was enacted with a view to
providing for the control of accommodation in certain notified hotels in the Union territory of
Delhi. This Act was enacted immediately after the country attained independence as the
requirement of such an Act was felt necessary on account of shortage of Government
administered hotels and guest houses at that time. This Act was operational in the initial
years of independent India and as the Government constructed or owned more hotels and
guest houses, the requirement of the Act progressively declined.
2. This Act empowers the Director of Estates, which is presently an attached office of
the Ministry of Urban Development, to secure accommodation for the Government officials
or other persons for whom accommodation is required, by passing a written order and served
on the owner or manager of the hotel and declare that a percentage of the accommodation in
the hotel as may be specified in the order, not exceeding 25% of the total accommodation
therein, to be controlled accommodation for the purpose of this Act. This Act provides that
the Director of Estates may, by written order, direct the Manager of a hotel to book for the use
of any Government allottee specified in the order, any controlled accommodation or part
thereof in such hotel and thereupon the manager of the hotel shall forthwith comply with the
order and shall accept the Government allottee so specified as resident in such accommodation
or part thereof, as the case may be, and shall allow him to occupy the same for such period as
may be specified in the order and for such further period or periods as the Director of Estates
may, from time to time, direct, subject to the payment of the usual charges to be specified in
the order of the Director of Estates.
3. The present utility of the Act has been examined keeping in view the availability of
the regular or transit or guest accommodation for Members of Parliament and officials of the
Government. At present, the provisions of the Act are not invoked by the Director of Estates.
The arrangement for transit accommodation for the newly elected Members of Parliament is
made in the State Guest Houses and India Tourism Development Corporation hotels only.
Therefore, it is proposed to repeal the Delhi Hotels (Control of Accommodation) Act, 1949.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
KAMAL NATH
N
EW DELHI;
The 11th February, 2014.
2

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to repeal the Delhi Hotels (Control of Accommodation) Act, 1949.
————
(Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of Urban Development)
GMGIPMRND—4384RS(S-3)—13-02-2014.