1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
 further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution  (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. For article 343 of the Constitution, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"343. The national language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script."
3. In article 348 of the constitution, in clause (1),—
"(i) in Sub-clause (a), after the words all the proceedings in the Supreme Court
and in every High Court the words shall be both in Hindi and English be inserted.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of Article 343.
National lan-
guage of the
Union.
Bill No. IX of 2016
Amendment
of Article 348.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON THE 26TH FEBRUARY, 2016
5

2
(ii) for sub-clause (b), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"(b) the authoritative texts—
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved
in either House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the
Legislature of a State,
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State
and of all Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a
State, and
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under this
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a
State,
shall be in the Hindi language.
5
10

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the British period, in order to establish their sway over India and for their administrative
convenience, British imposed English on the people of India. This is nothing short of an
irony that even after sixty-nine years of independence linguistically we continue with that
colonial mindset. After independence, our constitution makers had expressed the mass
sentiment towards Hindi through the Constitution. Keeping the linguistic diversity in mind,
an arrangement was made for using English for official purposes for the next 15 years.
Alongside, in the Constitution, President was entrusted with the power to constitute Official
Language Commission to resolve the language related issues and promotion of Hindi.
Thereafter, commission was constituted, committees were formed with umpteen numbers of
reports and several orders were issued and attempts to implement the provisions of Offcial
Language Commission were made. But, eventually, the expected results could not be achieved.
Activities being undertaken in this Offcial Language remain a mere formality and no concerete
effect can be seen on the ground. Due to government policies, English evolved repidly as
offcial language whereas the Hindi, the language of the masses remained neglected.
It is unfortunate that English remains the primary language for judicial, parliamentary
and other administrative functions. Even today, we are not in a position to preserved and
promote our rich language. Whereas, the language of all the rich countries are continuously
flourshing and we are backtracking in the level of our own language. Hindi is the only
language that can unite this diverse nation in one strand. The utmost need of the hour is to
initiate the rise and evolution of as a rich language as Hindi. It is necessary to take a concrete
initiative in this direction so that Hindi language can get its due respect. To attain this we
cannot get expected results only from the Constitutional Commission and Official Language
Commission, but what we need today is to entrust the status of national language upon
Hindi and make a way for its evolution.
Hence the Bill.
 VIVEK  GUPTA

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
*** *** *** ***
PART  XVII
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
CHAPTER 1.—LANGUAGE OF THE UNION
343. (1) The official language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script.
The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union shall be the
international form of Indian numerals.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause ( 1), for a period of fifteen years from the
commencement of this Constitution, the English language shall continue to be used for all
the official purposes of the Union for which it was being used immediately before such
commencement:
Provided that the President may, during the said period, by order authorise the use of
the Hindi language in addition to the English language and of the Devanagari form of
numerals in addition to the international form of Indian numerals for any of the official
purposes of the Union.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, Parliament may be law provide for the use,
after the said period of fifteen years, of—
(a) the English language, or
(b) the Devanagari form of numerals,
for such purposes as may be specified in the law.
*** *** *** ***
CHAPTER III.—LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT, HIGH COURTS, ETC
348. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, until
Parliament by law otherwise provides—
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court,
(b) the authoritative texts—
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in either
House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of a State,
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of all
Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a State, and
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulation and bye-laws issued under this Consti-
tution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State,
shall be in the English language.
*** *** *** ***
Official
language of
the union.
Language to be
used in the
Supreme Court
and in the
High Court and
for Acts, Bills,
etc.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4605RS(S3)—26-02-2016.