Bill No. IX of  2020
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"21B. The State shall provide unemployment benefits to all involuntarily
unemployed graduates of the age of twenty-one to sixty years in such manner as the
State may, by law, determine."
Insertion of
new article
21B.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD DECEMBER, 2021
Right of
graduates to
unemployment
benefits.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Constitution of India, in one of the Directive Principles of State Policy contained
in article 41, has made a provision for the State to make effective provisions, within its
economic capacity and development, for securing right to work, education and to public
assistance in cases of unemployment amongst others.
Despite increasing levels of education and broadening the scope of education, we
haven't been able to provide for an effective mechanism to reduce unemployment in the
country. Unemployment amongst the graduates still persists even after 70 years of the
adoption of this provision.
Unemployment is the worst form of social injustice and the graduates are the biggest
hopefuls when it comes to jobs. India is a welfare state and therefore, needs to ensure basic
financial and other support to involuntarily unemployed graduates as may be determined by
the State through a separate law.
Hence, this Bill.
V . VIJAYASAI REDDY
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for unemployment benefits to the unemployed graduates
of the country. This Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. In respect of subjects falling under the jurisdiction of Central Government. However,
it is not possible to access the actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at this stage.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1315RS(S3)—07-12-2021.