THE CHILDREN BELONGING TO THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND
THE SCHEDULED TRIBES (RESERV ATION AND COMPULSORY
DISPLAY OF SEATS BY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS)
BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for reservation and compulsory display of seats for the children belonging to
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for admission in educational
institutions and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Children Belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes (Reservation and Compulsory Display of Seats by Educational Institutions)
Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) "educational institution" means a Government school or a Government aided
school or a private school or an institution, by whatever name called, offering education
upto primary or secondary or senior secondary level; and
Short title,
and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. IX of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 24TH  APRIL, 2015
5
10

2
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(iv) "Scheduled Castes" and "Scheduled Tribes" shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in clauses (24) and (25) of article 366 of the constitution
of  India.
3. There shall be reserved such number of seats in each class for children belonging to
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every educational institution, as the
appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
4. (1) Every educational institution shall compulsorily display the seats reserved in
each class for children belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
(2) The seats reserved under sub-section (1) shall be displayed outside the main gate
and at every exit point of the institution in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) No child belonging to the Scheduled Caste or the Scheduled Tribe, if he fulfills the
eligibility conditions as prescribed under this Act, for admission shall be denied admission in
any educational institution.
5. If any educational institution violates the provisions of this Act, the head or the
chairperson of the management of such institution, as the case may be, by whatever name
called, shall be subject to such disciplinary action as may be prescribed and shall also be
liable to a fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees.
6. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
8. (1) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to minority educational institutions.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) [of session 8,] shall prevent a minority educational
institution in extending the provisions of this Act to such institution voluntarily.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Reservation
of seats for
children
belonging to
the Scheduled
Castes and the
Scheduled
Tribes.
Penalty.
Compulsory
display of
seats reserved
in each class
for children
belonging to
the Scheduled
Castes and the
Scheduled
Tribes.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not to
apply to
minority
educational
institutions.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has been observed that the children belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes are denied admission in the schools and other institutions for reasons of
non-availability of seats. In spite of various measures taken by the Government from time to
time to ensure that no child belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes is
denied admission in schools or institutions, a number of students are left out from admission
process for several reasons. It has, therefore, become necessary that a legislation be brought
forward to provide for statutory reservation of seats in each class for children belonging to
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and to fix the responsibility of the head of
the school or institution concerned to display these reserved seats to facilitate admission of
such children in a transparent manner. In case, the head of the school or instituiton of the
chairperson of the management of the school fails to display the seats reserved on each
class or denies admission to such eligible children, disciplinary action may be initiated
against him in addition to a fine of not less than rupees fifty thousand.
Hence this Bill.
P.L. PUNIA
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation and compulsory display of seats for the children belonging to
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for admission in educational
institutions and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri P.L. Punia, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—557RS(S3)—27-04-2015.