Bill No.  IX of  2010
Short title,
extent and
commencment.
THE FREE AND QUALITY SCHOOL EDUCATION TO
ECONOMICALLY WEAK CHILDREN BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for free and quality education to the children of economically weaker section of
the country and reserve seats for these children in  public schools and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Free and Quality Education to Economically Weak
Children Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
 (3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “economically weaker sections" means persons living below the poverty line
as per the norms established by the Central Government.
(c) "quality education" means the education norms established by the public
schools;
(d) "school education" means education to children upto the age of eighteen
years or Higher Secondary level, whichever is earlier;
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010

2
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(f) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 shall have the meanings
respectivelly assigned to them in that Act.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as possible formulate a National Policy
for providing reasonable and sufficient reservation in the public schools, and free and
quality school education to the children belonging to economically weaker sections in the
country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the National Policy
may provide for,—
(a) arrangement of free and quality school education to every child belonging to
economically weaker sections in the country;
(b) thirty per cent reservation to the children of economically weaker sections in
the public schools in order to impart free and quality education to them;
(c) awareness of the guardians of the children belonging to economically weaker
sections regarding the facility of reservation available in the public schools;
(d) establishment of a regulatory agency to monitor this system so that only the
children of economically weaker sections are enrolled against the reserved seats in the
public schools and get free education;
(e) such other measures as the Central Government may deem necessary of
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
4. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the National policy
framed under section 3 of this Act.
5. The appropriate Government shall, from time to time make surveys to identify
economically weaker children in the state.
6. The appropriate Government shall also set up schools in its territorial jurisdiction
for  providing quality education to poor children to economically weaker children.
7. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
auxiliary fund with and initial amount of rupees one thousand crore for the purposes of this
Act and thereafter, after due appropriation by law in the Parliament in this regard, shall
from time to time contribute to this fund along with the State Governments in such ratio as
may be prescribed for providing free and quality education to the children of poor or
economically weaker sections.
(2) Money obtained by way of donations, as charity, aid or in other form from individuals,
corporate bodies, financial instituions etc. shall also form the corpus moeny of the fund.
8. It shall be the bounden duty of the head of each family or karta  of the family of the
children of poor or economically weaker sections, to send every child of the family to school
for receiving the education, as the case may be, in the prescribed normal age of schooling
of such children.
9. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 8 shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees or with both.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
National
policy for
reservation in
public schools
for the
economically
weaker
children in
the country.
Appropriate
Government
to implement
the policy.
Establishment
of auxiliary
fund.
Head of the
family to send
compulsorily
their children
to school for
education.
Appropriate
to make
surveys to
identify poor
children.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules.
Appropriate
to set up
schools.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has been observed that in the name of imparting education to the children of the
poor or economically weaker sections in the country, the public schools obtain land from the
Government at throwaway prices, but almost close their doors for these children. The situation
is that most of the seats available for these children remain vacant whereas the fact is that the
provisions related to providing seats in the public schools for the children of the poor or
economically weaker sections, at present are insufficient. Therefore, in order to impart quality
and free education to the children of the poor or economically weaker sections in the country,
provision should be made more stringent to provide for more such seats available in the
public schools.
Equality of opportunity is laid down in the preamble of our Constitution. Article 15 of
the Constitution prohibits discrimination on the ground of religion, caste, sex, place of birth
or class. Article 21 provides for "right to education". Under the directive principles of State,
article 41 of the Constitution provides for right to education. Article 45 provides for free and
compulsory education to the children. In the context of said Constitutional provisions, with
a view to ensuring quality and free education to the children of the poor or economically
weaker sections in the country, this Bill proposes to provide for thirty per cent reservation
for such children in the public schools functioning in the private sector and setting up of a
regulatory tribunal that may ensure its proper monitoring.
Hence this Bill.
PRABHAT JHA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of this Bill provides that appropriate Government shall implement the National
Policy for providing free and quality education to the children of economically weaker sections.
Clause 6 provides for setting up of schools for providing quality school education. Clause 7
provides for establishment of a fund for carrying out the purposes of the Act. If enacted, the
Bill will involve expenditure for the Consolidated Fund of India. Currently, it is difficult to
estimate the actual expenditure to be involved therein. But it is estimated that a sum of rupees
Five Hundred Crore may involve from Consolidated Fund of India per annum.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purposes
of this Bill. The rules relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free and quality education to the children of economically weaker section of
the country and reserve seats for these children in public schools and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto
————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2342RS(S5)—03.05.2010.