THE JUTE GROWERS AND WORKERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to provide for the remunerative prices for the raw jute to the jute growers fixed on the
basis of cost of production of jute under the Minimum Support Price Scheme
of the Government, compulsory purchase of raw jute by Government,
agencies, compulsory insurance of Jute crops free of cost by
 the Central Government and certain welfare measures to be
undertaken by the Central and concerned Governments
 of the States for the jute growers and jute workers
 engaged in jute related works and for matters
 connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Jute  Growers and Workers (Welfare) Act,  2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill No. L  of  2014
Short title,
extent and
Commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "fund" means the Jute growers and Workers Welfare Fund established under
Section 4;
(c) "jute grower" means any person who cultivates Jute and obtains fibre
therefrom;
(d) "jute worker" means any person engaged in jute related works as a  wage
earner, whether in cash or kind for his livelihood and includes a person engaged
through a contractor or middleman etc.;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained  in any other law for the time being in  force,
the Central Government shall in  consultation with the concerned Governments of the States
fix and declare remunerative prices of raw jute under the Minimum Support Price regime on
the basis of cost of production of jute before every sowing season.
(2) While fixing the remunerative prices of  juteunder sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government shall take into account the following factors, namely:—
(a) Cost incurred by jute growers in sowing, growing and harvesting of jute and
obtaining its fibre;
(b) Cost incurred on seeds, fertilizers or manure, insecticides and pesticides;
(c) Cost incurred on labour;
(d) Maintenance cost of the field;
(e) Cost incurred on transportation of raw jute to the market or yard or mandi or
factory, as the case may be;
(f) Climatic conditions and occurrence of natural calamity; and
(g) Any other contingency expenditure incurred by Jute growers.
(3) The appropriate Government shall give wide publicity to the remunerative prices
fixed for raw jute under this Act through print and electronic media and the village Panchayats.
(4) The agencies of appropriate Government shall purchase the raw jute from the jute
growers at the prices fixed by the Central Government in case the jute growers fail to sell their
raw jute in the open market.
(5) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to keep a watch on the dubious
activities of jute traders and middlemen during the immediate post harvest period to ensure
that prices of raw jute do not fall as a result of speculation and take such measures, as it may
deem necessary to protect the interests of Jute growers.
(6) The entire jute crop and the yield thereof shall be compulsorily insured free of cost
by the Central Government against natural calamities, fall in the yield of jute, fall in the prices
of raw jute and such other eventualities as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government, shall, by notification in the official Gazette establish
the Jute Growers and Workers Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act with initial corpus
of rupee thirty thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government by due appropriation
made by law by Parliament in this behalf andthereafter the Central and concerned State
Governments shall contribute to the Fund to such extent and in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Fund may also receive moneys from corporate houses, financial institutions,
individuals and bodies in the form of contributions or donations.
 Definitions.
Fixation of
remunerative
price of raw
jute.
Establishment
of Jute
Growers and
workers
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. (1) The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) to provide financial assistance to jute growers for purchasing seeds, manure,
fertilizers, pesticides, insecticides etc. for low yield of jute or loss of crop due to natural
calamities, fire, wild life etc.;
(b) to pay compensation to the next of kin of jute grower or jute worker, as the case may
be in the event of his death;
(c) to pay insurance premium on behalf of the jute growers;
(d) to provide free healthcare facilities for the jute growers and jute workers and their
families includingmaternity facilities to the female members of the families.
(e) to provide education including technical, medical, higher education, Information
Technology and V ocational training to the children of Jute growers and Jute workers free of
cost;
(f) to provide financial assistance to the jute growers and jute workers in the event of
their disability; and
(
g) for such other purposes as the appropriate Government may deem fit and necessary
for the purposes of this Act.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the appropriate Government shall, —
(i) maintain district-wise register of all the jute growers and jute workers with such
particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(ii) make provisions for payment of old age pension to the jute growers and jute
workers.
6. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
7. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
8. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
laws for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
9. The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Utilization of
Fund.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of West Bengal is the major Jute producing State of the nation followed by
Bihar. Though it is grown in some other States also but in small quantities mainly for local
consumption. Jute fibre which is also known as golden fibre, used to hold a glorious position
in our country. Even today  jute is one of the main commercial crops of the country. Jute fibre
is used to make bio-degradable, eco-friendly and cheap bags known as gunny bags used to
keep wheat and other agricultural produce including sugar. Earlier almost every product
used to be filled in jute bags but with coming of polymer synthetic bags in the market now
jute bags are used only for foodgrains.
Of late jute growers in West Bengal and other parts of the country are facing various
problems and they are not getting remunerative prices for their produce. Jute cultivation is
becoming non-profitable for the growers due to various factors such as increase in the prices
of jute seeds, fertilizers, manure, insecticides and pesticides and other inputs. Due to high
investment involved in cultivation of jute, jute growers take loans on very high interest rates
and unable to repay the loan becoming debt ridden and distressed. Since jute is a commercial
crop insurance facility is not available to the jute growers and the growing use of synthetic
fibre bags is adding to the miseries of jute growers. In some cases their financial condition or
getting into debt trap is compelling many of them to take extreme step of committing suicide.
Ours is a welfare state and therefore it is the responsibility of the Central Government
to ensure the welfare of the Jute growers and their families. The Central Government should
fix remunerative prices of Jute and implement various welfare measures for them and for the
jute workers who are dependent on the jute crops for their employment and livelihood. Their
condition is also pitiable because of the plight of jute growers. The Central Government has
to establish a Welfare Fund for the jute growers and jute workers to meet their various needs
which will make them feel that our welfare State will take care of them.
Hence this Bill.
KANWAR DEEP SINGH
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Jute Growers and Workers
Welfare Fund with the initial corpus of rupee thirty thousand crore to be provided by the
Central Government. Clause 6 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide
requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is expected that it may involve rupee five
thousand crore as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupee one thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATAED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the remunerative prices for the raw jute to the jute growers fixed on the
basis of cost of production of jute under the Minimum Support Price Scheme
of the Government, compulsory purchase of raw jute by Government,
agencies, compulsory insurance of Jute crops free of cost by
 the Central Government and certain welfare measures to be
undertaken by the Central and concerned Governments
 of the States for the jute growers and jute workers
 engaged in jute related works and for matters
 connected therewith and incidental thereto.
—————
(Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3786RS(S3)—18-12-2014.