1
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS
BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for social security benefits to
undertake regular review of core social security benefits provided by the
Government to the Citizens and for matter concept therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parialment in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called The National Commission for Social Security Benefits
Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short Title,
Extent and
Commencement.
Bill No. L of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 26TH JULY, 2019
5

2
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
National
Commission
for Social
Security
Benefits.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the National Commission for Social
Security Benefits;
(b) “Commission” means the National Commission for Social Security Benefits
constituted under Section 3;
(c) “comprehensive report” means a report submitted by Sub-Commission after
every five years with audit findings and proposed recommendations, regarding the
social security benefit under Section 6;
(d) “member” means a Member of the Commission or Sub-Commission thereof;
and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(f) “social security benefits” means schemes, policies and Acts of the
Government of India for socio-economic upliftment of its citizens as specified in the
Schedule;
(g) “Sub-Commission” means the Sub-Commission for a specific Central
Government scheme, policy or Act, constituted under section 6;
CHAPTER II
N
A TIONAL COMMISSION FOR SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette constitute
a Commission to be known as the National Commission for Social Security Benefits to
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this
Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, nominated by the Central Government from amongst persons
of ability, integrity and standing who has at least fifteen years of professional work
experience committed to the cause of promoting socio-economic development across
communities;
(b) five members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst
persons of ability, integrity and standing who have professional experience in
promoting socio-economic development across communities, with at least one member
each from amongst persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes,
respectively;
4. (1) The Chairperson and every member shall hold office for the term, not exceeding
five years, as may be prescribed by the Central Government in this behalf.
(2) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of Chairperson or a
member referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 3 if that person—
(a) is found to be of unsound mind by a court of competent jurisdiction;
(b) becomes an undischarged insolvent;
(c) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment by a court of competent
jurisdiction for an offence which in the opinion of the Central Government involves
moral turpitude.
(d) is found not to possess the requisite qualifications and experience, as may be
prescribed in this behalf;
(e) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;
(f) is, without taking leave from the Commission, absent from three consecutive
meetings of the Commission; and
Term of
office and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(g) in the opinion of the Central Government has so abused the position of
Chairperson or member so as to render his continuance detrimental to public interest:
Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause until that person has
been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(3) A vacancy caused under sub-section (2), shall be filled within one month from the
date of occurrence of the vacancy.
(4) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or any member, whether
by reason of his death, resignation of removal, such vacancy shall be filled up by the Central
Government by making a fresh appointment and the member so appointed shall hold office
for the remainder of the term.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and functioning shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall provide suitable officers and employees to the
Commission for its efficient fursting under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of officers and employees shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Commission shall appoint Sub-Commissions for each social security benefit,
as specified in the Schedule to this Act;
(2) Each Sub-Commission shall consist of :
(a) a Sub-Commission Head, with experience in the field of the particular social
security benefit the Sub-commission has been constituted for, to be nominated by the
Commission.
(b) three members from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing who
have professional experience in working with the particular Social Security benefit
with at least one member each from amongst persons belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, respectively to be nominated by the Commission;
(3) The Commission shall have powers to remove a member from a Sub-Commission
on any grounds as specified in Sub-Section (2) of Section 4.
(4) The allowances payable to members appointed to the Sub-Commissions shall be
decided by the Commission.
CHAPTER III
F
UNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION AND SUB-COMMISSIONS
7. (1) The Sub-Commissions for each social security benefit, shall audit the respective
schemes, policy or Act, as the case may be, and recommend changes with respect to
remunerations, eligibility, outreach, exclusions, scale by performing the following functions,
namely—
(a) undertaking research studies and evaluating effectiveness for procedural
improvements;
(b) making policy suggestions to the Central Government to ensure that interests
of the beneficiaries are taken care of;
(c) undertaking consultations with civil society organisations, government
officials and intended beneficiaries in their research;
(d) undertaking non-partisan research or call for special studies and investigations
into reasons for and problems arising out of, exclusion from social security schemes;
(e) making recommendations to Central Government for effective implementation
of policies and schemes; and
(f ) such other functions as may be assigned by the Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Officers and
employees of
the
Commission.
Power to
constitute Sub-
Commissions
of the
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commission
and Sub-
Commissions.
45

4
(2) Each Sub-Commission shall submit a comprehensive report after every five years
to the Central Government, laying down audit findings and proposed recommendations.
(3) The Commission shall monitor the fucntioning of the Sub-Commissions through:
(a) setting up and dissolving Sub-Commission;
(b) ensuring non-partisan character of Sub-Commissions;
(c) seeking and disbursing funds for Sub-Commissions from the Central
Government.
8. (1) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary and shall meet at such time
and place as the Chairperson may think fit.
(2) The Sub-Commission shall meet as and when necessary and at least biannually
with no more than eight months elapsing between two meetings.
(3) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure and the procedure of the Sub-
Commissions.
CHAPTER IV
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
9. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf provide to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as the Central
Government may think fit for being utilized for the purpose of this Act.
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions
under this Act, including further transfers to Sub-Commisions, and such sums shall be
treated as expenditure payable out of grants under sub-section ( 1).
10. The Central Government shall cause the reports by the Sub-Commissions to be
laid, as soon as may be, after the reports are received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
11. The Chairperson, the Members, Officers and the other employees of the
Commission, including those of the sub-Commissions, shall be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
12. The Central Government shall consult the Commission or the Sub-Commissions on
all major policy matters affecting particular social security schemes.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely—
(a) additional eligibility criteria for appointment as the Chairperson or member of
the Commission or the Sub-Commission;
(b) salaries and terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and members of
the Commission and the Sub-Commissions;
Meetings of
the
Commissions
and Sub-
Commission.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Comprehensive
reports to be
laid before
Parliament.
Chairperson,
members and
staff of the
Commission
and Sub-
Commissions
to be public
servants.
Central
Government
to consult the
Commission
and Sub-
Commissions.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

5
(c) additional ground for removal of the Chairperson or members from the
Commission or Sub-Commissions.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive session and if before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modificiation in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10

SCHEDULE
(See Section  2 and Section 6 )
(1) National Social Assistance Program
(2) National food Security Act
(3) Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Program
(4) Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana
(5) National Health Mission
(6) National Education Mission
(7) Pradhan Mantri Jan Aarogya Yojana
6

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has been one of the fastest growing large economies of the world, experiencing
double digit growth rates and development  across various sections of the society. Almost
every scholar would agree with how some benefits of India's spectacular growth have reached
the poorest, the extent of which has been questionable, through a large number of Central
Government policies and schemes targeted towards the socio-economically deprived.
National Social Assistance Program (NSAP), Public Distribution Systems (PDS),
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA), Integrated Child Development Services
(ICDS). National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) are few or the developmental policies by the
Central Government. These have provided benefits such as pensions, employment, food
grains, education and healthcare to the most underprivileged communities such as the poor,
unemployed rural population or the disabled or the old, or children and the medically ill,
moving them above on ladders of socio-economic well-being.
While crucial and highly valued by the beneficiaries, many characteristics of the schemes
have been repeatedly said to be inadequate by scholars and common people Central
Government's contributions as pensions under NSAP have remained constant for over a
decade now to Rs. 200 per month: 35 kgs. of rice/wheat per family under the National Food
Security Act has been found to be inadequate for large families. Anaganwadi and ASHA
workers have been organising themselves for strikes and demonstrations to demand payments
of Rs. 18,000. whereas the government has agreed to increase it to only Rs. 4.500; and so on.
There is clearly, a gap between various metrics of operation of these schemes: eligibility,
outreach exclusions, scale, in terms of what the stakeholders should be entitled to and what
they actually receive.
This Bill attempts to set up a Commission which shall conduct various audits of
individual benefits through its Sub-Commissions, and give recommendations, every five
years, for suitable alignment of the policies in order to cater to the intended beneficiaries and
other stakeholders effectively.
Hence this Bill.
RITABRATA  BANERJEE
7

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute a National Commission for Social Security
Benefits, which will further appoint Sub-Commissions in accordance with Clause 6. Clause 9
provides that the Central Government shall provide grants to the Commission. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India would be involved. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees
two hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
8

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
9

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for social security benefits to
undertake regular review of core social security benefits provided by the
Government to the Citizens and for matter concept therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ritabrata Banerjee, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2360RS(S3)—02-08-2019.