THE GIRL CHILD (FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION)
BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory education to every girl child whose parents are living
below poverty line and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Girls (Free and Compulsory Education) Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the State Government
and in all other cases the Central Government;
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
Bill No.  L  of  2010
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 19TH AUGUST, 2011

2
(b) ‘‘education’’ means education of all types including technical, Medical and
any higher education;
(c) ‘‘girl child’’ means a female who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
(d) ‘‘institution’’ means a technical educational institution or Medical educational
institution or universities;
(e) “person living below poverty line” means a person whose income from all
sources is less than rupees three thousand per month;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) “school” means an educational institution imparting education.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide free and compulsory education to
every girl child whose parents are living below poverty line and are ordinarily residing in
its territorial jurisdiction.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide to every girl child born of parents
living below poverty line, the following facilities:—
(i) free education up to all level including technical, Medical and all types of
higher education;
(ii) free stationery items like books, note-books, writing material;
(iii) free school uniform;
(iv) free hostel facility and meal during school time; and
(v) stipend at the rate of one hundred rupees upto primary level, two hundred
rupees up to middle level and five hundred rupees per month upto higher secondary
level and to provide full financial help at technical, Medical and university level
education.
4. The appropriate Government shall establish and maintain or cause to be established
or maintained such primary, middle or higher secondary schools and technical institutions
and Universities within its territorial jurisdiction as the appropriate Government may
deem necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.
5. It shall be the responsibility of every parent to get his girl child admitted to a school
or institution for receiving education and the parent shall not in any manner restrain the girl
child from attending the school or institution till she completes her education.
6. No person shall employ a girl child in a job which prevents her from attending school
for receiving education.
7. Any person including a parent, who for any reason prevents, restrains or otherwise
obstructs a girl child from receiving education in a school or institution, shall be liable to
simple imprisonment which may extend to one year.
8. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Free and
compulsory
education to
girl child.
Appropriate
Government
to establish
and maintain
schools.
Responsibility
of parents.
Girl child not to
be employed in
job.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The ability to read and write is an essential element of human capability. Literacy is the
first step towards acquiring tools of learning and opening the doors for knowledge and
information. Education expands opportunity for girls, empowers them to resist oppression
and to claim their right.
In our country, girls belong to weaker and vulnerable section of the society. Although
many steps have been taken to improve their condition, however, nothing concrete, has
been done. Even today, girls are not treated equally and are subject to discrimination by their
parents. They are kept away from school and are forced to assist their mothers in household
affairs and are deprived of childhood joys. In various states, child marriage is still in practice
and parents are forcing girl child to get married as they feel that their girl child is not safe after
attaining the age of ten.
It is appropriate time to take stock of the situation and to ensure that girls belonging to
poor families are given free and compulsory education. They should also be provided with
facilities like free stationery items, free uniform, writing materials, hostel facilities and transport
facilities, etc. to encourage them to get education. This will not only help in eradication of
illiteracy from the country but will also help the girls to grow and compete with their male
counterparts and are not subjected to harassment.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI  REDDY
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free and compulsory education and other facilities to
every girl child whose parents are living below poverty line by the appropriate government.
Clause 4 provides for establishment and maintenance of schools and institutions by
appropriate government. The Central Government will bear the expenditure incurred in respect
of Union territories and the State Governments will bear the expenditure incurred in respect
of their States out of their respective consolidated funds.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen hundred crore per
annum is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees eighteen hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—1358RS(S3)—19-08-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory education to every girl child whose parents are living
below poverty line and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P.)