 AS INTRODUCED IN THE R AJYA SABHA
 ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. L of 2024 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
A 
BILL 
 further to amend the Constitution of India. 
         BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic 
 of India as follows: - 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It s
hall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Insertion of new 
Part XIV-B. 
Enforcement 
Commission. 
2. After Part XIV -A of  the Constitution, the following new Part shall be
inserted, namely, –
“PART XIV-B "
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO ECONOMIC OFFENCES 
" 323C.  (1) There shall be a Commission, which sh all serve as a 
specialized economic laws enforcement and intelligence agency with the 
primary objective of enforcing laws concerning economic offences and 
related matters, to be known as   Enforcement Commission. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
Parliament, the Commission shall consist of    an Enforcement
Commissioner, Regional Enforcement Commissioners (for various
regions) and Zonal Enforcement Commissioners (for various zones).
(3) The Enforcement Commissioner shall be appointed by the President
by warrant under his hand and seal   based on the recommendation of a
Selection Committee consisting of—
(a) the Prime Minister - Chairperson;
(b) the Chief Justice of India – M emb er; and
(c) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the People –
Member.
Explanation. — For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that where the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People 
has not been recognized as such, the Leader of the single largest group 
in opposition to the Government in the House of the Peopl e shall be 
deemed to be the Leader of Opposition. 
(4) The Regional Enforcement Commissioners and the Zonal
Enforcement Commissioners shall be appointed by the President on the 
recommendation of the Enforcement Commissioner.   
(5) The Enforcement Commissioner shall hold office for a fixed term
of three years and shall not be eligible for reappointment:
   Provided that the Enforcement Commissioner shall not be 
removed from his office except in like manner and on the like grounds 
as a Judge of the  Hight Court and the conditions of service of the 
Enforcement Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after 
his appointment. 
(6) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the
conditions of service and tenure of office of the Reg ional and Zonal 
Enforcement Commissioners shall be such as the President may by rule 
determine. 
(7) The President or the Governor of a State, shall, when so requested
by the Enforcement Commission, make available to the Enforcement
Commissioner or to a Regional or Zonal Enforcement Commissioner,
such officer and staff as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of
the duties conferred on the Commission by clause (9).
(8) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 

3 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
(9) It shall b e the duty of the Commission to ensure enforcement of the
extant laws pertaining to economic offences in the country covering, but
not limited to —
(a) investigating  suspected contraventions of foreign exchange laws
and regulations to ensure  orderly functioning of foreign exchange
market in India;
(b) investigating offences related to money laundering including the
identification, tracing, and confiscation of assets derived from
proceeds of criminal activities and to provisionally attach the
property and ensure prosecution of the offenders and confiscation of
the property by the Special Court;
(c) deter fugitive economic offenders from evading the process of
law in India by staying outside the jurisdiction of Indian courts by
investigating their cases and attaching the properties of such fugitive
economic offenders, who have escaped from India warranting arrest
and provide for the confiscation of their properties to the Central
Government;
(d) adjudicate show -cause notices issued under extant f oreign
exchange regulations laws and impose penalties on those adjudged
to have contravened the law;
(e) monitoring foreign exchange regulations to prevent smuggling
activities and sponsor cases of preventive detention with regard to
contraventions of foreign exchange laws and regulations;
(f) rendering cooperation to foreign countries in matters related to
money laundering and restoration of confiscated assets; 
(g) inquire into specific complaints with respect to violation of laws
pertaining to economic offences;
(h) monitoring the implementation of all existing Central laws
pertaining to economic offences and advise the Central Government
for modification of the extant provisions to keep pace with changed
scenarios;
(i) preparing and presenting to the President, annually and at such
othe
r times as the Commission may deem fit, reports regarding the
enforcement of laws pertaining to economic offences containing
therein recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by
the Union or any State for the effective implementation of such laws;
and
(j) to discharge such other functions in relation to the implementation 
and enforcement of all laws and regulations related to economic
offences in the country as the President may, subject to the
provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
(10) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each
House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action
taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the
Union and the reasons for the non -acceptance, if any, of any of such
recommendations.
(11) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter
with which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report
shall be forwarded to the Governor of  the State who shall cause it to be
laid before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum

4 
explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non -
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations. 
(12) The Enforcement Commission shall, while investigating any matter 
referred to in sub -clauses (a) to (f) or inquiring into any complaint
referred to in sub-clause (g) of clause (9), have all the powers of a civil
court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters,
namely:
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any 
part of Indian and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any docume nt;
(c) receiving evidence of affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court
or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
documents; and 
(f) any other matter which the President may by rule, determine.
5 
10 
15 
Amendment of 
the Seventh 
Schedule. 
 3. 
         In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in List I—Union List, 
after entry 8, the following entry shall be inserted, namely: — 
“8A.  Enf orcement Commission.” 20 

5 
ST
ATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 Presently, the Enforcement Directorate (ED) holds extensive 
jurisdiction and possesses significant powers to investigate and 
prosecute economic offenses in India. However, various issues 
regarding its autonomy and independent functioning continue to persist 
today.  The Enforcement Directorate’s extensive powers in investigating 
economic crimes have been criticized for being misused, with minor 
offences being brought under the purview of the Prevention of Money 
Laundering 
Act, 2002 (PMLA).  Reports indicating an alleged 
disproportionate focus on opposition leaders in ED investigations 
underscore the need for impartiality and transparency in its functioning.  
Concerns have been raised about the Enforcement Directorate's 
expanded scope and potential misuse of its powers, leading to calls for 
enhanced oversight and accountability.  The appointment of acting 
directors and the prevalence of prolonged vacancies in key positions 
further raise concerns about stability and impartiality within the agency. 
The process regarding selection of cases to be investigated by the 
Enforcement Directorate has raised concerns about   transparency in its 
functioning, and allegations of bias against opposition parties. 
Moreover, despite numerous in vestigations, conviction rates remain 
low, undermining the effectiveness and credibility of the Enforcement 
Directorate. Recent judicial pronouncements have upheld the 
Enforcement Directorate's powers but have also highlighted the need for 
re-evaluation and scrutiny of its actions. 
Therefore, it is imperative to establish an independent 
constitutional body, namely , the   Enforcement Commission, with the 
primary objective of enforcing laws concerning economic offences. This 
shall ensure its autonomy, impartiality, and accountability, safeguarding 
it from undue influence or interference.  By enshrining its status in the 
Constitution, it is aimed to uphold the principles of justice, transparency, 
and the rule of law, thereby strengthening India's democratic institutions 
and governance framework.  
The Bill also proposes a Selection 
Committee consisting of the Prime Minister, Chief Justice of India and 
the Leader of the Opposition in the House of People (Lok Sabha) for 
selection of the head of the Commission, further bolstering transparency 
in the functioning of the Commission. 
Th
e Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
FAUZ IA KHAN 

RAJYA
 SABHA 
________ 
A 
BILL
 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
__________ 
(Dr. F
auzia Khan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB (E)‒039‒10.02.2025 