THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2009.
1.  (2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In Article 275 of the Constitution, in clause (1) before the existing first proviso, the
following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as
Grants-in-aid of the revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as may be
necessary to enable that State to meet the expenditure on the implementation of various
developmental works, welfare schemes and poverty alleviation programmes undertaken
by that State in the larger public interest and is unable to implement such works,
schemes or programmes, as the case may be, due to severe financial crisis being
experienced by that State:
Provided further that a sum of rupees ninety thousand crore shall be allocated as
Grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of Uttar Pradesh as one time grant for
undertaking development works, poverty alleviation programmes and welfare schemes
Bill No.   L  of  2009
Short title
and commen-
c ement.
Amendment
of article
275.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010

2
in the backward, poverty stricken and drought prone areas of Bundelkhand and other
parts of the State and a sum of rupees thirty thousand crore per annum shall be
allocated as recurring expenditure for such purposes and such amount shall be charged
on and paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India to the State of Uttar Pradesh.”

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Recently, Bundelkhand region of country’s most populous State Uttar Pradesh was at
the centre stage of both the print and electronic media for various tenable and untenable
reasons. Unfortunately, mother nature has not been kind to the region and it has turned out
to be one of the worst drought-hit regions of the country. This has resulted in severe
poverty, hunger, illness and backwardness of the region resulting in mass exodus, suicides
and deaths due to various reasons. These problems can only be overcome with the joint
efforts of the State Government, Central Government and the people of Bundelkhand. Similar
is the plight of some other parts of the State like eastern Uttar Pradesh which are economically,
educationally, industrially and socially backward and underdeveloped areas in the State and
are faced with numerous problems such as consistent failure of crops, severe unemployment,
lack of industrial development due to very poor infrastructure, lack of educational and
healthcare facilities. Lack of healthcare facility has resulted in steep increase of various
diseases particularly vector borne diseases like malaria, Japanese encephilitis, dengue, etc.,
water-borne diseases, TB, cancer and other diseases. There is lack of educational facilities
too. As a result, poverty looms large in this region and areas. Frequent droughts and crop
failures in these areas hit the economy of these areas and of the State very hard.
Present State Government is doing its level best to bring progress and prosperity in
Bundelkhand, eastern and other parts of the State through various poverty alleviation
programmes and welfare measures but all this will require huge Central assistance. Accordingly,
the State Government had demanded a special package of rupee ninety thousand crores for
implementation of relief and rehabilitation programmes in Bundelkhand and such other areas
and for the implementation of various development projects and welfare schemes for the
povery-stricken, dalit, backward people of Uttar Pradesh. Thereafter, special funds to the
tune of thirty thousand crore rupees will be required every year for these very purposes.
Article 275 of the Constitution provides for payment of Grants-in-Aid of the revenues
of various States who are in need of financial assistance for various developmental purposes.
To enable the Central Government to release the requisite funds to Uttar Pradesh amendment
of this very Article has become absolutely necessary.
Hence  this Bill.
AKHILESH DAS GUPTA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that a sum of Rupees ninety thousand crore will be
allocated to Uttar Pradesh as one time grant and Rupees thirty thousand crore every year as
recurring expenditure to the State for implementation of various developmental works and
welfare programmes. Therefore, if the Bill is enacted it will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India as referred to above.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*** *** *** *** *** ***
275. Grants from the Union to certain States— (1) Such sums as Parliament may by
law provide shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India in each year as grants-in-aid
of the revenues of such States as Parliament may determine to be in need of assistance, and
different sums may be fixed for different States.
*** *** *** *** *** ***
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2318RS(S5)—03.05.2010.