Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE WOMEN WORKERS (EQUAL PAY AND WELFARE) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to provide for equal pay to women workers and their welfare and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Women Workers (Equal Pay and Welfare) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Bill No. L of  2016
5
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 2016

2
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) "women worker" means a woman worker engaged in any shop, establishment,
industry, factory or agricultural operations or any other work where physical labour is
required.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every woman worker shall be paid equal pay for equal work performed by her as compared to
a male worker.
4. Every person who is the owner or the in-charge of any establishment, industry,
factory or activity, where woman workers are engaged shall provide the following facilities
for such workers at the place of work:—
(i) Creche including mobile creche facilities;
(ii)  rest rooms;
(iii) separate toilets;
(iv) drinking water; and
(v) health care facilities.
5.  Every woman worker shall be entitled to half an hour rest after every three hours of
work performed by her with lunch break for one hour.
6. The appropriate Government shall appoint inspectors to inspect the facilities
provided by employers to women workers at work place and ensure compliance of the
provisions of this Act.
7. Whoever, contravenes the provisions of,—
(i) section 3 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees five lakhs
and the licence of such employer or the establishments shall also be cancelled.
(ii) sections 4 and 5, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees
ten lakhs.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as aforesaid, the
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being applicable to equal pay for equal work.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Equal pay for
equal work.
Facilities to be
provided to
the women by
employer.
Mandatory
rest to women
workers.
Appointment
of Inspectors.
Penalty.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has been observed that women workers are not paid equal wages for equal work
done by them as compared to their male counterparts and are given less wages though, the
concept of equality enshrined in the preamble has also found expression as a fundamental
right in article 14 to 16 of the Constitution but in practice, it is not being equally administered.
This has resulted into discrimination against women workers. At times, they are asked to
acknowledge the receipt of full wages. Though the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 is in place,
it is not complied with. Moreover, women workers are not getting adequate facilities at their
work places. At some places, there are no toilets or drinking water facilities for them. The
infants of these workers have to be taken care of but there are no creche facilities. There are
no proper health facilities or rest rooms for women workers. Due to biological reasons,
women workers have to take rest after performing work for some period, say, three hours. At
present, there is no law providing for facilities to women workers at their work places.
Therefore, it is proposed to provide for a comprehensive legislation to make way for equal
wages to women workers and provision of certain facilities to them at their work places.
Hence this Bill.
SASIKALA  PUSHPA

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for making certain facilities to women workers at their work
places. Some of the organisations under the Government have also to provide these facilities.
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the appointment of Inspectors to inspect the facilities
provided by the employers. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees nine hundred crore
per annum and a non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill provides for framing of rules for carrying out the provisions of the
Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislative power is of
a normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for equal pay to women workers and their welfare and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Smt. Sasikala Pushpa, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3639RS(S3)—02.12.2016.