AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. L of 2025  
THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS 
AND SENIOR CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
com
mencement. 

2
Amendment 
of section 24. 
Exposure and 
abandonment 
of senior 
citizen. 
2. For section 24 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens Act, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following
shall be substituted, namely:—
“24. Whoever, having the care or protection of a senior citizen, 
intentionally abandons such senior citizen, thereby failing to provide 
necessary care, safety, and basic needs, shall be deemed to have 
committed the offence of abandonment, and shall be punishable with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees, or with 
both.” 
5 
10 
56 of 2007. 
Insertion of 
new sections 
24A to 24D. 
Administrative 
penalty 
through 
Maintenance 
Tribunal. 
3. After section 24 of the principal Act, the following new sections shall be
inserted, namely:—
“24A. (1) In addition to the criminal penalties provided under 
section 24, the Tribunal shall have the authority to impose financial 
maintenance obligation as an administrative remedy. 
(2) Where the person liable for maintenance has any regular
source of income, wh ether from salaried employment, business, 
professional practice, consultancy, pension, rental income, or any other 
means, the  Tribunal may, either upon receipt of a complaint from the 
senior citizen or their authorised representative, or on its own motion  
direct  such person or their employer, or any person responsible for 
disbursing such income, through a written order issued in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed, to deduct up to twenty per cent. of 
the monthly gross income and deposit the same di rectly into the bank 
account(s) of the senior citizen(s) as interim or permanent maintenance.  
(3) In cases, where both parents are alive and are eligible to
receive maintenance, the Tribunal shall ensure that the amount 
deducted is equally divided and tran sferred into the individual bank 
accounts of each parent, unless the Tribunal directs otherwise based on 
specific needs or circumstances. 
(4) The deduction and direct transfer shall continue until the
Tribunal modifies, cancels, or varies the order based on changed 
circumstances. 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Complaint 
mechanism 
and redress. 
24B. (1) Any senior citizen, family member, neighbour, social 
worker, or Non- governmental Organisation may file a complaint of 
abandonment before the Tribunal, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) The Tribunal shall ensure that a hearing is conducted within a
period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the complaint and the 
final decision is issued within ninety days thereof. 
(3) An appeal against any order passed under section 24 or 24A
may be filed before an Appellate Tribunal designated by the State 
Government, and such appeal shall be disposed of within sixty days 
from the date of filing of such appeal. 
35 
40 
Penalties for 
non-
compliance. 
24C.  Where the salary, pension, business income, or any other 
regular income deduction order issued under section 24A is not 
implemented within thirty days from the date of its issuance — 
(a) in the case of salaried employment or pension, the
employer or pension disbursing authority, as the case may be, 
shall be liable to a penalty of one thousand rupees for each day of 
default; and 
(b) in the case of self-employment, business income,
professional income, or any other income controlled directly by 
the person liable, such person shall be liable to pay a penalty of 
one thousand rupees for each day of default. 
45 
50 
55 

3
24D. All complaints involving senior citizens who have attained 
the age of seventy-five years or above shall be disposed of on a 
priority basis within a period of forty-five days from the date of 
receipt of such complaint." 
Special  
p
rotection for 
persons above 
seventy-five years 
of age. 

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007, was 
enacted to provide effective provisions for the maintenance and welfare of parents 
and senior citizens. However, incidents of abandonment continue to rise, 
necessitating stronger deterrents and a more robust enforcement mechanism. 
This Bill seeks to strengthen the punishment for abandonment and empower 
the Maintenance Tribunal to order direct financial maintenance through income 
deductions. It also establishes a clear complaint mechanism, an appellate process, 
penalties for non-compliance, and special provisions for senior citizens above 
seventy-five years of age. 
The proposed amendments aim to reinforce the dignity, security, and well-
being of senior citizens by providing accessible remedies and strict accountability 
for those charged with their care. 
Hence, this Bill. 
SWATI  MALIWAL.

5 
 
  ANNEXURE 
THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR CITIZENS ACT, 2007    
(53 OF  1972) 
 
  
  *                               *                               *                            *                             *    
 24. Whoever, having the care or protection of senior ci tizen leaves, such senior citizen 
in any place with the intention of wholly abandonin g such senior citizen, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three months or fine which may extend to five thousands rupees or with both.  
 
*                               *                               *                            *                             * 
 
 Exposure and 
abandonment of 
senior citizen. 
 
    
  

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
 to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007. 
____________ 
(Ms. Swati Maliwal, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–355–08.12.2025. 