AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. L of 2000
THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2000

A

BILL

to provide for measures and methods for the control of population and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (4) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

5 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;

10 (b) "dispensary" includes every dispensary including clinic run by the
appropriate Government or any local authority or cooperative society, social
organizations, societies who engage qualified medical personnel;

(c) “hospital” includes every hospital whether run by appropriate Government
or by any local authority, or with the aid or grant of such Government or local
15 authority or Medical Colleges providing medical services;

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions


Two Children
norms

Disincentives
for not adopt-
ang small fam-
tly norms

Government to
frame schemes

(d) “local Authority” means all the Municipal Corporations, Municipal
Councils, Committees, Zila Parishads, Blocks, Panchayats etc. or any other authority
as established by law;

(९) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.

3. No person shall procreate more than two living children after a period of onc

year from the date of the commencement of this Act.

4. (1) Every person and his spouse who having two living children, after a period of

one year from the date of the commencement of this Act procreates children, such person
shall,—

(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in the election laws not be eligible
to contest clection to the Parliament/State Legislatures or local authorities in case
procreation takes place after election, he/she will stand disqualified;

(9) not be allotted any house under any housing scheme launched cither by
the appropriate Government or any local authority or any public sector financial
institution or Housing Board or authority etc.;

(c) not be entitled to become a member of any society under the Cooperative
Societies Act, 1912 for the purpose of allotment of a house or a plot or a piece of
Jand for construction of a house;

(व) not be entitled to avail of any loan or facility of any kind from the Banks,
Financial Corporations or other Financial Institutions under the control of appropriate
Government;

(०) not be entitled for ration card or to draw ration, subsidised kerosene oil or
any item from any Fair Price Shop under the Public Distribution System and shall
also not be entitled to be beneficiary of any Government subsidy in any form in any
sector;

(f) not be eligible for appointment in any Government establishment/office or
public sector undertaking or an autonomous body owned or controlled by the
Government or any local authority;

(2) Employment in Government, Public Sector, Autonomous Body and local

authority, establishments on relaxed or concessional conditions will be restricted to first
two children only.

5. The Central Government may or State Government may with the approval of the

Central Government, frame schemes for the purpose of further providing or regulat-
ing:—

(a) facilities to be provided by Government and Private Hospitals and Dis-
pensarics for assisting in restricting procreation to two children per couple;

(b) procedure for maintaining record of the number of children procreated by
a couple;

(c) incentives and rewards to couple who do not exceed two children, in the
form of cash rewards, preference/concession in educational institutions at school
and University levels including medical and Technical Institutions;

(d) placing reasonable restrictions on couples or their children in matters of
Government employment and concessional facilities with regard to cases where a
couple has more than two children;

(e) Involvement of media, NGOs, women’s organisations and panchayat in-
stitutions so as to reach the poor, disadvantaged or other socially deprived or under-
privileged groups;

10

20

25

30

35

45


(f) easy access to condoms, pills and other birth control devices in panchayat
offices, rural post offices and through helath and rural development workers.

6. (1) No employee of the appropriate Government or ofa public sector undertaking
under the control of such Government or autonomous body or any of a local authority
shall be entitled to any increment or promotion in servive if after the commencement of
this Act, he procreates after two living children.

(2) LTC facilities to employees of appropriate Government or PSUs or au-
tonomous bodies or local authorities shall be restricted to first two children.

(3) If any employee or spouse of the appropriate Government or pulic sector
10 undertaking or autonomous body or any local authority undergoes an operation for
birth control after having two living children, he shall be entitled to incentive equiva-

lent to his one month’s basic salary and preference in promotion.

7. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to those having more than two living
children on the date of the commencement of this Act or having not more than two chil-
15 dren after a period of one year from the date of commencement of this Act.

8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by
Parliament, provide adequate funds for the implementation of this Act.

9. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the official gazette, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act, and of schemes under this Act.

Special provi-
sions for Gov-
ernment em-
ployees

Exemption,

Central Govern-
ment to provide
funds for the am-
plementation of
the Act

Power to make
tules


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Rate of population growth in the country has assumed alarming proportion. During
the last five decades, the population of the country has increased by 3 times. India’s
population was 33 crores only in 1951 when India attained independence; it is over one
hundred crore today. The average increase is over 1.5 crore per year.

This tremendous increase in population offsets all benefits of development that
take place in the country. Therefore elementary essential services and basic facilities
have not been provided to all the people residing in the country.

Crores of people are living in sub-human conditions in slums and most of them are
seen defecating in the open. This abhominable practice is leading to insanitary conditions
which are the source of spreading bacteria and breeding germs adversely affecting the
health and well-being of the people residing in the neighbourhood. Standard of living is
reciprocal. Even if one is leading a very protected life, but if neighbourhood is dirty, he is
bound to fall ill. That is so because germs are no respector of the status of the person
whom they attack.

The problem of the increasing population adds to the problem of unemployment.
The number of the unemployed in the country as registered in the employment exchanges
are overwhelming; out of whom many lakhs are graduates. The number of the unem-
ployed must be more on two counts. Firstly, not all the unemployed get themselves regis-
tered; and secondly, only persons upto the age of 25 years are registered in the employ-
ment exchanges as after that age, they are not eligible for government services. Moreover
the crimes in the country particularly related to robberies and extortions, are increasing
because the young employed are desperately in need of money to feed themselves.

Merely making people self-conscious about the need to have a small family has not
produced the desired results of restricting the population growth. Hence, it has become
imperative that a scheme of incentives and disincentives should be formulated in the form
of an Act. This could help in restricting the population growth. Needless to emphasize
that if the population is not controlled, the country is doomed to disaster, And if the
population keeps on increasing, most metropolitan and big cities would become unliveable
with multitudes of men and women moving about as if there were big railway platforms.

The unprecedented increase in population has made most cities run in two direc-
tions; authorized and unauthorized constructions because there is acute shortage of dwelling
units. The result is that like the bad penny driving out the good penny, the unauthorized
constructions are overtaking the authorized ones. This process has made the people anti-
planning and even green areas are becoming a concrete jungle of haphazard and ugly
growth. Unauthorised constructions have also led to corruption at all levels.

The Bill seeks to provide for different measures and methods for population
control.

RAJIV SHUKLA


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 8 provides that Government shall provide funds to the genuine NGOs to
work in rural areas for family planning. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees ten crores may in-
volve as recurring expenditure per annum.

No non-recurring expenditure will involve as all the measures suggested are of
administrative nature and they are a part of the existing Governmental apparatus. Further
the reward suggested for sterilization and giving Nirodh to men and Mala to women
(Both contraceptives) free of cost are already a part of Government of India’s family
welfare programme.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made will relate to matters of details only,
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for measures and methods for the control of population and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Rajiv Shukla, M.P.)

MGIP(PLUJMRNO—2449RS—08-08-2000,