1
THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In sub-section ( 2)  of Section 4 of Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, for the
words “at the rate of fifteen days’ wages” the words “at the rate of thirty days’
wages” shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LI of  2012
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON
THE 23RD NOVEMBER, 2012
Amendment of
Section 4 of Act
39 of 1972.
5

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The sub-section (2) of Section 4 of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 provides
for payment of gratuity to the employees at the rate of fifteen days’ wages based on
the rate of wages last drawn for every completed year of service. In today’s world of
high prices and inflation, the gratuity of fifteen days wages for every completed year
is too meager. At such a small rate, a person cannot get enough amount for post
retirement settlement. It should therefore be atleast at the rate of thirty days’ salary
for every completed year of service.
The Bill proposing amendments to Section 4 of the Act seeks to achieve the
aforesaid objectives.
Hence this Bill.
RAMA CHANDRA KHUNTIA

3
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to revise the rate of gratuity from fifteen days’ salary
per completed year of service to thirty days’ salary for every completed year of
service, to all the employees employed on wages in any establishment, whether it is
public or private. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of
about rupees one thousand crore will be involved. No non-recurring expenditure is
likely to be involved.

4
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  PAYMENT  OF  GRATUITY  ACT, 1972
(ACT NO. 39 OF 1972)
*** *** ***
4. Payment of gratuity.—(1) Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the
termination of his employment after he has rendered continuous service for not less
than five years,—
(a) on his superannuation, or
(b) on his retirement or resignation, or
(c) on his death or disablement due to accident or disease.
*** *** ***
(2) For every completed year of service or part thereof in excess of six months,
the employer shall pay gratuity to an employee at the rate of fifteen days wages based
on the rate of wages last drawn by the employee concerned.
*** *** ***

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
————
(Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3514RS—26.11.2012.