1
THE WOMEN (RESERV ATION IN SERVICES)  BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of posts and appointments for women in services under the
Central Government and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Women (Reservation in Services) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LI  of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 2016

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(c) "services" means the service in connection with the affairs of the Central Government
and includes the service in any public sector undertaking or enterprise of any authority
under the control of the Central Government.
(a) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(b) "public sector undertakings or enterprises" includes all public sector undertakings,
enterprises, Banks and financial institutions wholly owned or managed by the Central
Government or in which fifty-one per cent. shares are held by the Central Government.
3.  There shall be reserved thirty-three per cent. of all appointments and posts in
services for women.
4.  The Central Government shall make such provisions relating to relaxation in eligibility
conditions, as may be prescribed, for appointment of women in services.
5.  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Reservation
for women in
services.
Relaxation in
eligibility
conditions.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India's economic liberalization and rapid growth over the past two decades have helped
expose people to more liberal views about women. As a result, more women are stepping out
of traditional roles. Female doctors, lawyers, police officers and bureaucrats are common and
are now everyday sight in cities. Yet women make up only twenty-two per cent of the work
force and though seventy-nine per cent of rural women work in agriculture and more than
ninety per cent are in the informal sector with little social protection or land ownership.
In India, women are so deeply engrossed in family affairs and burdened with such
heavy domestic responsibilities that in spite of their capabilities, education and aptitude,
most of them are unable to enter into Government services on time. Women have only
marginal representation in services connected with the affairs of the Union. They are capable
of efficiently carrying out various responsibilities connected with the assignments.
It is welcome step that in Gujarat, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh thirty three posts are
reserved for females in all Government services. This will help end gender bias and prove to
be a great leap towards women empowerment. In order to create a level playing field for all its
citizens, women may be provided with preferential precedence and reservation in Government
services is expected to considerably increase opportunity for women.
In a bid to boost women's empowerment it is proposed that women get due
representation in Government services, it is necessary to reserve thirty-three per cent of all
post and services under the Central Government, including public sector undertakings and
enterprises; for women by  providing them relaxation in matters of age limit, requisite
educational qualifications, experience and other conditions of eligibility.
Hence this Bill.
SASIKALA PUSHPA
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of  the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of posts and appointments for women in services under the
Central Government and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3641RS(S3)—02.12.2016.