THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 206 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), after the words "which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both", the words
"and the property so concealed or transferred or delivered shall be recovered from the
person or whom it has been transferred" shall be inserted.
3. In section 207 of the principal Act after the words "which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both", the words "and the property so concealed or transferred or
delivered shall be recovered from the person or whom it has been transferred" shall be
inserted.
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No.  LI  of 2013
Amendment
of section
206.
Amendment
of section
207.
45 of 1860.
5
10
[AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 11TH JULY, 2014]

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
People involving in fraudulent activities are increasing in our country. The  law enforcing
agencies in the country have intensified their vigilance in finding out the people who are
engaged in such activities. Common men are the most affected persons due to such type of
fraudulent activities. Most of them lose their money which is earned by them through hard
work. These small savings of the common people are looted by the dishonest people to pile
up their wealth. As and when they come under the scanner of the law enforcing agencies,
they merely produce evidence or documents in their favour to show that they have not
amassed any wealth from the common man. And if they are convicted, they will only be
awarded imprisonment by the court without forfeiture of properties that they have built by
means of fraudulent practice. There is an urgent need that our law should be made more
specific to provide for attachment or recovery of the property amassed by use of unfair
means along with the punishment specified in the law.
Hence this Bill.
K.N. BALAGOPAL
2

3
Powe
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
(ACT NO. 45 OF 1860)
*******
206. Whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or delivers to any person any
property or any interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein
from being taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which has been
pronounced, or which he knows to be likely to be pronounced, by a Court of Justice or other
competent authority, or from being taken in execution of a decree or order which has been
made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a Court of Justice in a civil suit, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine, or with both.
207. Whoever fraudulently accepts, receives or claims any property or any interest
therein, knowing that he has no right or rightful claim to such property or interest, or practices
any deception touching any right to any property or any interest therein, intending thereby
to prevent that property or interest therein from being taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction
of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or which he knows to be likely to be
pronounced by a Court of Justice or other competent authority, or from being taken in
execution of a decree or order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely to be
made by a Court of Justice in a civil suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
*******
Fraudulent
removal or
concealment
of property to
prevent its
seizure as
forfeited or in
execution.
Fraudulent
claim to
property to
prevent its
seizure as
forfeited or in
execution.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
—————
(Shri K. N. Balagopal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1087RS(S4)—11-07-2014.