1
THE MICRO, SMALL  AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
 to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (Amendment)
Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, (hereinafter
referred to as the Principal Act)—in section 2, in clause (n), for the words "a micro or small
enterprise" the worrds "a micro, small or medium enterprise" shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LI of  2018
27 of 2006. Amendment
of  Section 2.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019

2
3. In the principal Act, in Chapter V , for the heading the following heading shall be
substituted, namely:—
"DELAYED  PAYMENTS  TO  MICRO,  SMALL  AND  MEDIUM  ENTERPRISES"
4. In the principal Act after section 15 the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"15A. The refundable earnest money deposit given to any buyer by any supplier
for a tender bid shall be refunded back if the bid is unsuccessful, on or before the date
agreed upon between buyer and the supplier in writing or, where there is no agreement
in this behalf, within 45 days from the day the bid has been rendered unsuccessfull."
5. In the principal Act, in section 16, after the words and figures "as required under
section 15", the words and figures or "15A" shall be inserted.
6. In the principal Act, for section 19, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"19. No application for setting aside any decree, award or other order made
either by the Council itself or by any institution or centre providing alternate dispute
resolution services to which a reference is made by the Council, shall be entertained by
any Court unless the appellant has deposited with it seventy-five per cent, of the
amount in terms of the decree, award or, as the case may be, the other order in the
manner directed by such court:
Provided that nothing in the section shall apply to any application if the appellant
is a supplier.
Provided further that pending disposal of the application to set aside the decree
award or order, the court shall order that such percentage not lesser than thirty-five
percent under any circumstance, of the amount deposited shall be paid to the supplier,
as it considers reasonable under the circumstances of the case, subject to such
conditions as it deems necessary to impose should be”.
7. In the principal Act in section 21 in sub-sectin ( 3), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Provided that no act or proceedings of the Micro and Small Enterprises
Facilitation Council shall be invalid merely by reasons of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Council; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the
Council; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the merits
of the case."
8. In the principal Act, after section 21, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"21A. The Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council shall have the same
powers as are vested in a civil court under Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying
a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(i) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any defendant or
witness and examining the witness on oath,
(ii) the discovery and production of any document or other material object
producible as evidence,
(iii) the receiving of evidence on affidavits, and
(vi) any other matter which may be prescribed."
Amendment
of heading of
chapter V .
Insertion of new
section 15A.
Amendment of
section 16.
Amendment of
section 19.
Amendment of
section 21.
Insertion of a
new section
21A and 21 B.
Power of the
Micro and
small
exterprises
facilitation
council.
Refund of
earnest
money
deposit.
Application
for setting
aside decree,
award or
order.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
40

3
"21B. Where any amount is due from any person under an order made by the
Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council, the person entitled to the amount
may make an application to the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council and
such Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council may issue a certificate for the
said amount to the Collector of the district (by whatever name called) and the Collector
shall proceed to recover the amount in the same manner as arrears of land revenue.".
9. In the principal Act, in section 27, after sub-section (1) namely:—
"(2) Where a buyer contravenes the provisions of section 15 or 15A, he shall be
punishable—
(a) in the case of the first conviction, with fine which may extend to rupees ten
thousand;
(b) in the case of second or subsequent conviction, with fine which shall not be
less than rupees ten thousand but may extend to rupees one lakh; and
(c) The proceeds collected under sub-section ( 2) shall be transferred to the
National Small Industries Corporation."
Recovery of
amounts due.
Amendment
of section 27.
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) are the bedrock of the Indian economy.
After agriculture sector, MSMEs are the largest employment providers in the country and
hence form the backbone of the Indian economy. The significance of MSMEs can be
underscored by its substantial manufacturing output, accounting for about one-third of the
country's total manufacturing output.
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Industry, Rajya Sabha in its 245th Report,
on Review of the Implementation of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act,
2006 apprehended that decline in the filing of fresh cases may be due to dwindling faith in the
efficacy of the existing mechanism. It also reiterated its earlier recommendation contained in
its 176th Report that arrangements should be made to give Councils the powers to enforce
their awards. The Committee recommended to the Ministry to assess whether enjoining the
Industrial Facilitation Council (IFC) with the provisions of Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996, has actually rendered the existing mechanism ineffective and to devise more effective
provisions for IFC.
This Bill aims to revitalize the Industrial Facilitation Councils relating to the issue of
delayed payments to MSMEs and by equipping them with powers conferred to a civil court.
This will help the MSMEs in recovering their dues swiftly.
Hence this Bill.
MAHESH  PODDAR
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT ACT, 2006
(27 of  2006)
* * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(n) "supplier" means a micro or small enterprise, which has filed a memorandum
with the authority referred to in sub-section (1) of section 8, and includes,—
(i) the National Small Industries Corporation, being a company, registered
under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
(ii) the Small Industries Development Corporation of a State or a Union
territory, by whatever name called, being a company registered under the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
(iii)  any company, co-operative society, trust or a body, by whatever
name called, registred or constituted under any law for the time being in force
and engaged in selling goods produced by micro or small enterprises and
rendering services which are provided by such enterprises;
* * * * *
CHAPTER V
D
ELAYED PAYMENTS TO MICRO AND SMALL ENTERPRISES
15. Where any supplier supplies any goods or renders any services to any buyer, the
buyer shall make payment therefor on or before the date agreed upon between him and the
supplier in writing or, where there is no agreement in this behalf, before the appointed day:
Provided that in no case the period agreed upon between the supplier and the buyer in
writing shall exceed forty-five days from the day of acceptance or the day of deemed
acceptance.
16. Where any buyer fails to make payment of the amount to the supplier, as required
under section 15, the buyer shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any agreement
between the buyer and the supplier or in any law for the time being in force, be liable to pay
compound interest with monthly rests to the supplier on that amount from the appointed day
or, as the case may be, from the date immediately following the date agreed upon, at three
times of the bank rate notified by the Reserve Bank.
* * * * *
19. No application for setting aside any decree, award or other order made either by the
Council itself or by any institution or centre providing alternate dispute resolution services
to which a reference is made by the Council, shall be entertained by any court unless the
appellant (not being a supplier) has deposited with it seventy-five per cent. of the amount in
terms of the decree, award or, as the case may be, the other order in the manner directed by
such court:
Provided that pending disposal of the application to set aside the decree, award or
order, the court shall order that such percentage of the amount deposited shall be paid to the
supplier, as it considers reasonable under the circumstances of the case, subject to such
conditions as it deems necessary to impose.
Definitions.
Liability of
buyer to make
payment.
Date from
which and rate
at which
interest
payable.
Application
for setting
aside decree,
award or order.
5

6
21. (1) The Micro and Small Enterprise Facilitation Council shall consist of not less
than three but not more than five members to be appointed from amongst the following
categories, namely:—
(i) Director of Industries, by whatever name called, or any other officer not
below the rank of such Director, in the Department of the State Government having
administrative control of the small scale industries or, as the case may be, micro, small
and medium enterprises; and
(ii) one or more office-bearers or representatives of associations of micro or
small industry or enterprises in the State; and
(iii) one or more representatives of banks and financial institutions lending to
micro or small enterprises; or
(iv) one or more persons having special knowledge in the field of industry,
finance, law, trade or commerce.
(2) The person appointed under clause (i) of sub-section (1) shall be the Chairperson
of the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council.
(3) The composition of the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council, the manner
of filling vacancies of its members and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their
functions by the members shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
27. (1) Whoever, intentionally contravenes or attempts to contravenue or abets the
contravention of any of the provisions contained in sub-section (1) of seciton 8 or sub-
section (2) of section 26 shall be punishable—
(a) in the case of the first conviction, with fine which may extend to rupees one
thousand; and
(b) in the case of second or subsequent conviction, with fine which shall not be
less than rupees one thousand but may extend to rupees ten thousand.
(2) Where a buyer contravenes the provisions of section 22, he shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than rupees ten thousand.
* * * * *
Composition
of Micro and
Small
Enterprises
Facilitation
Council.
Penalty for
contravention
of section 8 or
section 22 or
section 26.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
.
————
(Shri Mahesh Poddar, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—827RS(S3)—24-06-2019.