THE EMPLOYMENT BILL, 2008
A
 BILL
to provide employment or for means and resources for self-employment to atleast one
adult member of every family and matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-nineth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Employment Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires, "family" includes wife, husband
and minor children.
3. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to provide employment to atleast one
adult member of every family.
4. Every person who has been provided with a job under section 3 shall not involve
himself in any activity other than his employment for financial or other gains.
Short title and
extent.
Definition.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD JULY, 2009
Bill No. LII of 2008
Central
Government
to provide
employment.
No person to
be involved in
any activity
other than
employment.
5

2
5. The Central Government shall evolve a process ensuring periodical promotions to
all its employees on the basis of tests and their performance.
6. The Central Government shall provide employment to the dependent of an
employee, who had been provided with a job under section 3, after his retirement from service.
7. The Central Government shall provide credit, subsidy and all other facilities or
resources for self-employment to a family, where it is not possible to provide employment to
atleast one member of that family.
8. The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
Promotion on
basis of
performance.
Job to
dependents.
Resources for
self-employ-
ment.
Power to
make Rules.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In India, poverty is one of the biggest problems. Even after fifty-nine years of
independence, we have not been able to contain the poverty. Although our country has
progressed in many fields, yet it has failed to improve the standard of living of the people.
There may be many reasons for poverty.
It has been observed that income of a small family as compared to its income in the
year 1965 has not improved. There are a large number of families where there is not even a
single earning member and most of them earn their livelihood by working as labourers,
domestic servants, bonded labours, etc. Majority of population lives below poverty line.
Our country being a welfare State should take necessary steps to improve the lot of the
people and formulate schemes and plans to eradicate poverty from the country.
With this in view, it is proposed to make a positive step towards eradicating poverty.
It is proposed that at least one adult member of every family should be provided with
employment and where it is not possible to provide employment, the Government should
encourage those who desire to set up their own business and improve their capability of
increasing production, like weavers, shoe makers etc. so that they become self-sufficient
and the family should be given all necessary facilities for decent and reasonable living.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
T. SUBBARAMI  REDDY
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide employment to
one adult member of every family. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall
provide credit, subsidy and all other facilities or resources for self-employment to a family
where it is not possible to provide employment. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India in implementing the provisions of the Bill. It is likely to
involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of one hundred crore is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation
of Legislative power is of a normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide employment or for means and resources for self-employment to atleast one
adult member of every family and matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2538RS(S5)—03.07.2009.