THE CHILDREN (RIGHTS, DEVELOPMENT AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to provide for the basic rights to ensure all-round development and for welfare measures
for children particularly,  from poorer sections of the society and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Children (Rights, Development and Welfare) Act,
2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill NO. L of 2009
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD MAY, 2010
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

2
2. In this Act, unless the Context otherwise requires,
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "child" means a male or female below the age of eighteen years;
(c) "Fund" means the National Child Development and Welfare Fund established
under section 4;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every child irrespective of gender shall have the right to,—
(a) post natal care upto three years of birth including medicare, immunization
and other necessities;
(b) creche facilities if both the parents are employed;
(c) freedom of childhood for which no child shall be admitted for schooling in
any manner whatsoever before completion of five years of age;
(d) access to playing, games, children parks, indoor games, etc.;
(e) quality education from nursery to senior secondary education, scholarship
and vocational training of his choice;
(f) comprehensive healthcare;
(g) nutritious meals and diets;
(h) against exploitation, not to work in any factory, establishment, eateries such
as hotels dhabas, etc.;
(i) to learn arts, fine arts, Information Technology through Computer education,
literatures, etc.;
(j) protection against physical exploitation, forcing into begging and petty crimes,
rag picking and other unlawful activities; and
(k) free transport facilities, etc.,
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall be implemented by the appropriate
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
4.  (1) The Central Government shall, as son as may be, for the purposes of this Act,
by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a fund to be called the National Child
Development and Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of rupees two thousand crore to be
operated by the competent Authority to be appointed by the Central Government in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Fund established under sub-section (1) shall consist of all receipts from:—
(a) the Central and State Governments in such proportions as may be prescribed;
(b) the institutions and organizations which may be financial or otherwise;
(c) body corporates, both of public and private sectors; and
(d) individuals, associations, partnerships and other in the form of contributions
or donations
5. (1) On the commencement of this Act, child labour in any form, whatsoever, shall
stand abolished and every working child shall stand free and discharged from any obligation
to render any work for any employer or establishment, as the case may be.
(2) After the commencement of this Act,—
(a) no person shall either employ any child or compel any child to render any
forced or bonded labour for himself or for any establishment;
Definitions.
Rights of a
child.
Establishment
of the
National Child
Development
and Welfare
Fund.
Abolition of
child labour.

3
(b) no parent or guardian of a child shall pledge his child to anybody for any
work; and
(c) any custom or tradition or any contract, agreement or other instrument by
virtue of which any child is required to do any work or render any service as a worker
shall be void abinitio and inoperative.
6. (1) Child abuse in any form whatsoever is hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section "child abuse" includes Physical abuse
like rape, digital rape, touching of body parts, sodomy and similar other acts committed on a
child.
7. Whoever,—
(a) employs or compels any child to render labour in any form shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but may extend to
five years and also with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees;
(b) commits child abuse shall be punishable with life imprisonment and also with
fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, every
offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non bailable.
9. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person
who, at the time offence was committed was in charge of and was responsible to the company
for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company shall be deemed to
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
11. The provision of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Prohibition of
child abuse.
Penalty.
Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.
Offences by
Companies.
1 of 1974.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Children are the future citizens of every nation including ours and only the healthy,
educated and well-trained children can become good citizens in future. However, in our
country majority of the children belong to underprivileged segment where they do not have
access to nutritious diet, healthcare, quality education and sports facilities due to poverty of
their parents. There is equally a large number of children who are orphans, vagabond, rag
pickers, petty criminals, run away and neglected ones who are exploited in all possible ways
and harassed in the society. Even concerned for two square meals these children become
disease prone. Many of these unfortunate once are made to work for hours together. Despite
law banning child labour, the children can be seen working in every nook and corner of the
country be it a tea stall, dhaba, hotel, shop or other establishment. In fact, at the age when
they have to play, learn and enjoy their childood they are made to work many a time as
boneded  labourers.
It is, therefore, necessary to have a law providing for rights of children and for providing
basic eduational, sports, health and other facilities free of cost so as to ensure all round
development of the children so that they grow as responsible and good citizens of the
country.
Hence this Bill.
AKHILESH DAS GUPTA
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Child Development
and Welfare fund with an initial corpus of rupees two thousand crore. Clause 10 of the Bill
makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enactd, will involve expenditure from the consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five thousand crore may involve as
recurring expenditure per annum.
As sum of rupees ten thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the basic right to ensure all-round development and for welfare measures
for children particularly, from poorer sections of the society and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2322RS(S-5)—03.05.2010.