AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
 
Bill No. LI of 2024 
THE COACHING INSTITUTES (ACCOUNTABILITY AND 
REGULATION) BILL 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for establishment of an Authority to regulate coaching 
institutes across the country for the oversight and accountability 
of  such institutes, to ensure that they provide a conducive  
learning environment while safeguarding the mental 
 and emotional   health of students, to provide 
 for liability of the coaching institute in case  
of suicide committed by the student and  
for matters connected therewith 
 or incidental thereto 
    BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
 India as follows: — 
   5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coa ching Institutes (Accountability
and Regulation) Act 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short  title  and 
commencement. 

  2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central
Government;
(b) "Authority" means the Coaching Institutes Regulatory
Authority established under Section 3 of this Act.
(c) ‗coaching institute‘  means any educational institution or
establishment, established either before or after the
enactment of this Act, whether  instituted, run, or
administered by an individual, partnership, trust, society,
company, or any ot her legal entity,  that provides coaching
or tutoring services to students, for any study programme
or academic support and enhancement to students at
school, college, and university level or for preparing them
for appearing in competitive examinations to gain
admission into higher education or any professional course
including engineering or medical or for appearing in any
examination conducted by any Government or private
establishment for the purpose of securing employment;
Explanation– for the purpose o f this definition, the 
term ‗coaching institute‘ shall not include any school, 
institute, college, or university, established or 
recognized by the appropriate Government; 
(d) ‗competitive examination‘ refers to any examination
conducted for admission into educ ational institutions or for
recruitment to government or private sector jobs; and
(e) ‗student‘ refers to any individuals enrolled or receiving
coaching services from a coaching institute  as defined in
sub-section (c).
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Establishment 
of  the 
Coaching 
Institutes 
Regulatory 
Authority 
(CIRA). 
3. (1)  The Central Government shall, within a period of one
year from the date of commencement of this Act, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, establish an 
Authority to be known as the Coaching Institutes 
Regulatory Authority to exercise the powers conferred 
upon and to perform the functions assigned to it, under 
this Act. 
(2) The Authority shall have its headquarters in New  Delhi
and offices in every State and Union territory.
(3) The Authority shall consist of: —
(i) a Chairperson, to be nominated by the Central
Government, from amongst the Members of the
Authority;
(ii) not less than seven Members, to be appointed by
the Central G overnment, with at least one
member each being a , –
(a) person with extensive professional expertise
in the field of education;
(b) person with extens ive professional expertise
30 
35 
40 
45 

  3 
 5 
 10 
 15 
 20 
in  the field of mental health; 
(c) representative of coaching institutes;
(d) representative of parents studying in
coaching institutes; and
(e) representatives of students undertaking
coaching from coaching institutes.
(4) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such number
of officers and staff headed by a Secretary, who shall be
the Member Secre tary to the Authority, for the efficient
discharge of its functions under this Act.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, the term of office
and other terms and conditions of service of the
Chairperson and Members of the Authority  as well as
those of the o fficers and staff thereof including the mode
of their recruitment and requisite qualifications and
experience shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(6) The Authority shall observe such procedure in the regulation
and transaction of its  business, as may be prescribed by the
Central Government, from time to time.
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
4. The Authority shall perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely, –
(i) creating and maintaining a database of coaching  
institutes across the country in co-ordination with 
the appropriate Government;
(ii) conduct the process of registration of coaching  
institutes across the country as stipulated under 
section 5 of this Act in co-ordination with 
the appropriate Government;
(iii) formulating guidelines and regulations for the 
effective functioning  of coaching institutes, ensuring 
adherence to standards of teaching, infrastructure,  
and student welfare;
(iv) formulating a code of conduct to be adhered by the 
coaching institutes, which shall include but not be 
limited to issuance of directions regarding 
maintenance of proper records by the institutes,  
norms regarding ideal strength of a classroom, time  
schedule of classes, support systems for students, 
basic infrastructure, and such other requirements to 
be fulfilled by the coaching institutes, as may be 
prescribed from time to time;
(v) monitoring and assessing coaching institutes to 
ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act by 
conducting regular inspections and audits;
(vi) act as a national-level grievance redressal authority in 
matters related to violation of the provisions of this 
Duties and 
functions of the 
Authority. 

  4 
Act and rules and regulations issued thereunder by 
coaching institutes by receiving complaints  from 
students, parents, or any concerned individuals in this 
regard, with provisions for their redressal; 
(vii) investigating cases relating to student suicides to
understand the reasons behind the same including the
role or negligence on the part of the coachi ng
institute, if any, and if found guilty, initiate
appropriate action against the coaching institute as
stipulated under sections 7 and 8 of this Act;
(viii) Initiating suo-moto investigations into matters
related to offences committed by any coaching
institute as defined under section 6 of this Act;
(ix) collaborating with mental health organizations and
experts to develop programmes and initiatives aimed
at addressing student stress, anxiety, and mental
health issues within coaching institutes and
monitoring their s trict implementation in coaching
institutes;
(x) advise the appropriate Government on  such matters
arising out of the administration of this Act or  as may
be referred to it by the appropriate Government, from
time to time; and
(xi) such other functions, as it may c onsider necessary,
for implementation of the provisions of this Act and
any other matters incidental to the above functions.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Compulsory 
registration of 
Coaching 
Institutes. 
5. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may by
notification in the Official Gazette appoint, no person or
establishment shall run a coaching institute without prior registration
with the Authority.
(2) The procedure for application for registration including the
conditions to be fulfilled by the coaching institutes to be eligible for
registration, the form and manner of application; the tenure of
registration and renewal of registration on ex piry thereof shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(3) Any person or establishment running a coaching institute before
the commencement of this Act shall apply to the Authority within
such period from the date of commencement of this Act, as may be
determined by the Authority and in such form, manner and subject to
fulfilment of such conditions as may be prescribed.
30 
35 
40 
Suspension and 
Revocation of 
Registration. 
6. Without prejudice to any other penal or legal action that m ay be
taken for violation of the relevant law, the registration of a coaching
institute may at any time be suspended or revoked, if the Authority
after due process is satisfied that the coaching institute has
contravened any of the provisions of this Act o r violated any of the
prescribed terms and conditions, subject to which the registration was
given.
45 

  5 
        Provided that, no such order shall be passed by the Authority 
without giving the coaching institute a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard. 
 5 
 10 
 15 
7. A coaching institute shall be liable for the suicide of a student
undertaking coaching therefrom, if it is established beyond doubt by
the Authority after due process that the suicide was committed a
result of, –
(a) undue academic pressure exerted by the staff or management
of the coaching institute creating an excessively stressful
environment for the student;
(b) negligence in addressing complaints or grievances raised by
the student regarding academic pressure or harassmen t or undue
stress;
(c) failure to provide adequate counselling or mental health
support services to the student; and
(d) any other action or omission by the coaching institute that
contributed to mental distress of the student leading to the suicide.
Liability of 
Coaching 
Institutes for 
student suicides. 
 20 
 25 
8. (1) Any coaching institute that is held liable for a student suicide as
per the provisions of section 7  of this Act, shall be punishable with
imprisonment or with fine or with both.
(2) Any coaching institute who contravenes or acts in violation of any
of the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made
thereunder shall be punishable for the first offence with suspension of
its registration for such period, as may be  specified by the Authority,
and for second or subsequent offence, with revocation of its
registration leading to permanent cessation of operations, or closure
and seizure of assets in cases of severe or repeated non -compliance,
as may be determined by the  Authority based on the severity and
frequency of offence.
Offences and 
Penalties. 
46 of 2023. 
 30 
 35 
9. Any offence committed under this Act shall be cognizable and triable
by a court not inferior to that of a Metropolitan M agistrate or the
Court of a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class exercising
jurisdiction under the Bharatiya  Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, in
the area where the coaching institute is situated , shall try any offence
under this Act.
Cognizance of 
Offences. 
 40 
 45 
10. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed,
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the
conduct of the business of the company,  as well as the company,
shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
      Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall render any such 
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), where an
offence under this Act has  been committed by a company, and it is
Offences by a 
Company. 

  6 
proved that the offence was committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, manager, secr etary or other officer shall also be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section— 
(a) ―company‖ means anybody corporate and includes a firm or
other association of individuals; and
(b) ―director‖, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
5 
10 
Authority to 
have powers of 
Civil Court. 
11. The Authority shall, while investigating  any matter referred to it
under clauses (vi), (vii) and (viii) of section 4, have all the powers of
a Civil Court trying a suit and, in particular in respect to the
following matters, namely, –
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
from any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from
any court or office;
(e) issuing Authority for the examination of witnesse s and
documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
15 
20 
Appropriate 
Government to 
consult the 
Authority. 
12. The appropriate Government shall consult the Authority on all
policies related to coaching institutes across the country.
25 
Duty of State 
Governments. 
13. Every State Government shall be responsible for the implementation
and enforcement of the provisions of this Act within its respective
jurisdictions, establish and maintain necessary administ rative and
regulatory infrastructure and cooperate with the Authority in the
implementation and enforcement of this Act.
30 
Central 
Government to 
provide 
adequate funds 
to the 
Authority. 
14. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law on this behalf, grant such su ms of money to
the Authority, as it may think fit, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act. 35 

  7 
 5 
 10 
15. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as
may be prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority as audited and certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or an y other person
appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
thereon, shall be forwarded annually by the Authority to the Central
Government which shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may be
after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
Accounts and 
Audit. 
 15 
 20 
 25 
16. (1) The Authority shall prepare every year, in such form and within
such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an
annual report giving a true and full account of its activities d uring the
previous year and forward the same to the Central Government,
which shall cause it to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received,
before each House of Parliament.
(2) Where the report or any of its part is related to any of the issues
connected with the State Government, a copy of such report shall be
forwarded to the Governor of that State, who shall in turn, cause to be
laid before the State legislature concerned, such report along with an
explanatory memorandum concerned with the action ta ken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations related to the State, if
any, and reasons for not accepting any of the recommendations made
therein, within a period of one year from the date of receipt of such
report.
Annual Report of 
the Authority. 
17. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in
force.
Act not in 
derogation of any 
other law. 
 30 
18. The provisions of this Act and rules made there under shall  have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in
any other law for the time being in force.
Act to have an 
overriding effect. 
 35 
19. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may make such order or give such direction,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be
necessary or expedient for removing such difficulty.
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
 40 
 45 
20. (1) The Central Government may, by notific ation in the Official
Gazette, make rules, for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Authority, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
regulations, for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(3) Every rule and every regulation unde r this section shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and
if, before the expir y of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
Power to make 
rules and 
regulations. 

  8 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 5 
Repeal and 
Savings. 21. Any provisions inconsistent with the provisions of this Act shall be
repealed, and all actions taken previously shall be saved.

  9 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
  The coaching industry in India has burgeoned into a pervasive 
phenomenon, with reports suggesting revenue skyrocketing from 
24,000 crore rupees in 2015 to 58,088 crore rupees presently, and 
projections indicating further growth to 1,33,995 crore rupees by 
2028. What was once considered a temporary solution has evolved 
into a lifelong commitment for students, beginning as early as age five 
and persisting for decades, perpetuating across generations. 
Approximately, 7.1 crore students are enrolled in tuitions, leading to 
concerns about the erosion of childhood and the escalation of stress 
levels due to relentless academic pressure. The increase in student 
suicides, exemplified by 26 reported cases in Kota alone in 2023, 
underscores the immense pressure faced by school children.  
  The Department of Higher Education, under the Ministry of 
Education, has highlighted issues such as inadequate facilities, and 
questionable teaching methodologies prevalent in coaching institutes. 
The rise of "dummy schools" affiliated with coaching centres, where 
physical attendance is not mandatory, has further exacerbated 
regulatory challenges. Families often uproot themselves and incur 
substantial debts to relocate to coaching hubs in pursuit of perceived 
educational quality, contributing to social and financial strains. There 
is an urgent need for comprehensive regulation to safeguard student 
well-being and ensure the integrity of the education system. A large-
scale survey is warranted to study the industry comprehensively, 
particularly its impact on school-level education where even 
kindergarten children are reliant on private tuitions.  
   In light of the same, the proposed regulation aims to establish a 
Regulatory Authority for overseeing and regulating coaching institutes 
across the country and formulating stringent guidelines and oversight 
mechanisms to mitigate adverse fallouts due to the stress and anxiety 
to perform well generated by coaching institutes while promoting a 
balanced and nurturing learning environment for students. 
Hence, this Bill. 
FAUZIA KHAN 

  10 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
     Clause 3 of  the  Bill  provides  for  the  establishment  of  the 
Coaching Institutes Regulatory Authority and appointment of a 
Chairperson and Members as well as officers and staff of the Authority 
and provides for the salaries and allowances payable to them.  
Clause 14 provides for the provision of adequate funds to the 
Authority by the Central Government. 
The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted, would involve both recurring 
and non-recurring  expenditure from  the Consolidated  Fund  of  India. 
However, at this  juncture,  it is  difficult  to  estimate  the  actual 
expenditure likely to be involved. 

  11 
 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
  Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
make issue orders to remove difficulties.   Sub-clause (1) of Clause 
20 empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the provisions  of  the  Bill, whereas, sub-clause  (2)  empowers  the 
Coaching Institutes  Regulatory Authority  to  make  regulations  for 
carrying out  the  purposes of the  Bill.As  the rules,  regulations and 
orders will relate  to matters  of  detail  only,  the delegation  of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for establishment of an Authority to regulate coaching 
institutes across the country for the oversight and accountability 
of  such institutes, to ensure that they provide a conducive  
learning environment while safeguarding the mental 
 and emotional   health of students, to provide 
 for liability of the coaching institute in case  
of suicide committed by the student and  
for matters connected there with 
 or incidental thereto 
________ 
( Dr. Fauzia Khan., M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)‒037‒10.02.2025