Bill No. LI of 2014
THE COMPULSORY PROMOTION, UTILISATION, SUPPLY AND ACCESS OF
RENEWABLE  ENERGY  BILL,  2014
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. National Renewable Energy Policy.
4. Establishment of National Committee on Renewable Energy.
5. Renewable energy resource assessment.
6. National energy capital accounting.
7. Cross-Sectoral application of Renewable energy.
8. National Clean Energy Fund.
9. Establishing State Clean Energy Fund.
10. Commercialisation of Renewable Energy.
11. Land Allocation.
12. Database of Land Banks.
13. Transmission and related infrastructure.
14. Renewable Energy Obligations.
15. Renewable Energy Certification.
16. Financing provisions for private sector.
17. Private Sector Mandatory Investments in Renewable Energy.
18. Rural Energy Supply.
19. Establishment of District Committee.
20. Electrification from Renewable energy sources.
21. Off-grid Renewable Energy access fund.
22. Enhancing the capacity of State nodal agencies.
23. Central Monitoring Committee.
24. Government to provide funds.
25. Power to remove difficulty.
26. Power to make rules.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH FEBRUARY, 2015

1
THE COMPULSORY PROMOTION, UTILISATION, SUPPLY AND ACCESS OF
RENEWABLE  ENERGY BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to provide for the formulation of  a comprehensive renewable policy in the country and
taking stock of energy resources of the country to facilitate sustainable and affordable
energy planning ensuring access to rural and urban areas, at district, state and
national level, by building a strong institutional structure for renewable
energy projects and monitoring of small energy systems to set up strong
financial  and infrastructural systems that enable investments and
mandating public and private sector companies to compulsorily
use or promote renewable energy and for all matters
connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
WHEREAS the Kyoto Protocol, ratified by India on the 26th day of August, 2002, in
order to promote sustainable development adopts measures to research on, and promotion,
development and increased use of, new and renewable forms of energy and of advanced and
innovative environmentally sound technologies;
A
ND WHEREAS the United Nations, in its resolution 58/210 adopted by the General
Assembly to which India is a signatory as on the 23rd day of December, 2003, recognizes the
need for increased usage of renewable energy resource, more efficient use of energy, greater
reliance on advanced energy technologies, including advanced and clearner technologies,
which could meet the growing need for energy services in the longer term to achieve
sustainable development;
Bill No. LI  of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH FEBRUARY, 2015

2
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give effect to the said protocol and the
resolution.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fixfth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Promotion, Utilisation, Supply and
Access of Renewable Energy Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for coming into force
of different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that
provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Commission" means the Central Regulatory Commission or
the State Regulatory Commission or the Joint Commission, as the case may be;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Central Nodal Agency" means the Union Ministry for New and Renewable
Energy ;
(d) "National Committee" means the National Committee on Renewable Energy
constituted under section 4;
(e) "Prescribed" means prescribed by order under this Act;
(f) "renewable energy sources" means renewable sources such as small hydro,
wind, solar including its integration with combined cycle, biomass, bio fuel
cogeneration, urban or municipal waste and such other sources as recognized or
approved by Ministry for New and Renewable Energy;
(g) "State Nodal Agency" means the department of a State Government
responsible for managing, co-ordinating and facilitating all operations related to
renewable energy sources Ministry to New and Renewable Energy;
3. (1) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, shall
within one year from the commencement of the Act:—
(i) formulate a National Renewable Energy Policy in accordance with the
country's objectives and commitments, so as to;
(a) specify national renewable energy targets in terms of total renewable
energy generation for the next twenty years with a five yearly break-up of the
targets;
(b) define and set renewable energy quota; and
(c) set up a review panel to review the progress of the policy provision,
targets and issues annually;
(ii) issue, by notification in the Official Gazette, changes in the targets laid
down under sub-section (1) on the advice of the National Committee;
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament during the session immediately following the issue of notification; and
(3) The targets changed under sub-section (2) above will supersede all other National
or State targets currently prevailing.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
National
Renewable
Energy Policy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within two months of the coming into force
of this act, constitute a Committee to be known as the National Committee on Renewable
Energy for the purposes of advising the Government on all matters related to renewable
energy including those referred to in or arising from the implementation of this Act.
(2) The National Committee shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a person having special knowledge in the field
of renewable energy development and climate change issues to be nominated by
Central Government.
(b) one member each,  representing the Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission and the State Electricity Regulatory Commission;
(c) at least two members having judicial background to be nominated by the
Central Government;
(d) one member to be nominated by the Central Government representing the
Union Ministry of New and Renewable Energy;
(e) one member to be nominated by the Central Government representing the
Bureau of Energy Efficiency; and
(f) two members representing the non-governmental organizations working in
the field of renewable energy and climate change to be nominated by the Central
Government.
(3) The Chairman and members of the National Committee shall be nominated by
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The appropriate Government may, if its considers necessary, appoint one or more
persons having specialized knowledge and experience in the field of renewable energy and
climate change as ad-hoc members of the National Committee.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the chairperson and members of the committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. The appropriate Government shall implement such measures to assess the availability
of renewable energy resources in the country by:
(i) conducting comprehensive technical assessment, including ground validation
of renewable energy potential as part of an integrated approach to scaling up renewable
energy;
(ii) updated, reliable and good quality resource data to be more available for all
renewable energy technologies to all potential investors to help them assess the
viability of projects.
6. The appropriate Government, within one year from the enactment of this Act, shall
initiate a comprehensive exercise in economic terms on valuation, consumption and addition
of the complete national energy (renewable and non-renewable) resources of components
that are generative of income, goods or services.
7. The appropriate Government shall endeavour for integration of renewable energy in
various infrastructure and development programs and schemes of the Government through
the following names:
(i) Ministry shall have a renewable energy cell to will plan and suggest ways for
energy utilization in all schemes and programs of the Ministry, including the energy
consumption of the Ministry itself;
(ii) The renewable energy cell shall ensure direct co-ordination with the Central
Nodal Agency; and
Establishment
of National
Committee
on Renewable
Energy.
Renewable
energy
resource
assessment.
National
energy capital
accounting.
Cross-
Sectoral
Application
of renewable
energy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(iii) Five percent of each Ministry's budget shall be earmarked and utilised for
renewable energy projects.
8. The appropriate Government shall make provisions for utilizing the National Clean
Energy Fund to meet subsidy obligations, thereby relieving the Government's budgetary
resources for other uses.
9. The appropriate Government shall establish separate State Clean Energy Funds to
finance additional subsidy allocations and set up a mechanism to monitor the utilization of
the Fund.
10. The appropriate Governments, in co-ordination with the appropriate Commission,
shall endeavor to develop a self-sustaining market for renewable energy technologies by;
(a) complete commercialization of renewable energy technologies.
(b) phasing out subsidies with clear timelines and plans.
(c) ensuring grid parity for the existing renewable energy technologies for the
next ten years.
11. The appropriate Government shall take measures to provide suitable land for utility
scale renewable energy projects including facilitating the provisions of land banks under the
guidance of the land and revenue department.
12. The appropriate Government shall establish an online repository or database of
land banks of the available land, with all pertinent information including land use, infrastructure
available, location, market access, etc to assist developer for expediting project implementation.
13. The appropriate Government shall establish a strong transmission infrastructure
for timely, affordable evacuation of renewable energy based electricity with minimal losses
by:
(i) planning if the expansion of transmission infrastrcture, for both intra and
inter-states, to bring renewable energy power from distant generating stations to load
centres;
(ii) taking appropriate measures for grid enhancement, stability augmentation
and modern load and grid management to maintain grid stability across the country;
(iii) enhancing the technical capabilities of various regional load dispatch centres
and other key agencies at the State level for plannig and managing renewable energy
and setting up of forecasting tools along with software to facilitate the managing of
intermittency, supply and demand management.
14. (1) The appropriate Commission shall ensure the compliance of the renewable
energy obligations as specified in the Electricity Act 2003 by:—
(a) a trajectory for Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO) targets starting at five
percent in 2010 and increasing by 1% in every successive year;
(b) determining a mechanism for calculating the penalty for non-RPO compliance
that imposes increased penalty and stricter regulations; and
(c) ensuring the timely and firm implementation of the penalty mechanism through
State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs).
(2) The appropriate Government shall set Renewable Generation Obligation targets for
Central and State generators of conventional thermal power plants to commission renewable
energy projects, such that,
(a) renewable generation obligation shall be the amount of renewable energy
that conventional thermal power plant developers have to mandatorily generate during
a specified period;
National
Clean Energy
Fund.
Establishing
State Clean
Energy Fund.
Commerciali-
sation of
Renewable
Energy.
Land
Allocation.
Database of
Land Banks.
Transmission
and Related
Infrastructure.
36 of 2003
Renewable
Energy
Obligations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(b) an obligation and target show be set as a percentage of the total conven-
tional power generated by the developer; and
(c) the Renewable Generation Obligation target for power producers should be
increased by 0.5 percent in every successive year.
15. The appropriate Commission shall promote the obligated entities to use the current
Renewable Energy Certificate mechanism for meeting their RPO targets by—
(a) defining Renewable Energy Certificates in a comprehensive manner;
(b) promoting Government Organisations, Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs)
and private companies to undertake voluntary purchase of RECs; and
(c) introducing purchase as a specific activity under the list of Corporate Social
responsibility activities.
16. The Centre and the State Governments shall ensure availability of adequate funding
options, incentives and financing means for renewable energy projects to attract private
sector investments and the financial instruments shall also be promoted to mobilise funds
from institutional and retail investors.
17. (1) The appropriate Government shall specify a percentage of electricity supply to
be drawn from renewable energy sources as mandatory for private sector companies and the
private companies shall use any of the following mechanisms to meet their renewable energy
requirements;
(a) setting up captive renewable energy power plants;
(b) purchasing electricity generated from renewable energy sources from third
party generators;
(c) Purchasing Renewable Energy Certification to meet their renewable energy
requirements, in case they are unable to source the actual renewable electricity; and
(d) allocating a percentage of corporate social responsibility funds under
Companies Act 2013 for renewable energy installations.
(2) The appropriate Government shall introduce a penalty mechanism for companies
that are not abiding sub-section ( 1) of section 17 including monetary penalty, increased
targets in successive years and withdrawal of financial benefits and amount so collected
shall be contributed to the state clean energy funds.
(3) The state energy departments to be made responsible for monitoring compliance
for these targets.
(4) the appropriate Government shall publicly recognize private sector companies
outperforming their renewable energy obligation targets and incentivize them through various
schemes and rebates.
(5) the appropirate Government shall also give priority to products from such companies
in case of usage or consumption in Government projects and schemes.
(6) the appropriate Government shall make it mandatory for Special Economic Zones,
industrial clusters and upcoming or proposed projects that are to be set up, to meet a
percentage of their energy requirement, if not entirely, by utilizing clean and renewable
energy.
(7) the grants and benefits to non-governmental individuals or bodies, by the
Government, shall be linked to their utilization of clean and renewable energy for meeting
requirements of the energy component of their projects.
(8) the appropriate Government shall, at the time of clearance of proposed and ongoing
projects, ensure that all avenues of utilizing clean and renewable energy resources have
been exhausted before issuing an appropriate certification.
Renewable
Energy
Certification.
Financing
provisions for
private
sector.
Private
Sector
Mandatory
Investments
in Renewable
Energy.
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
18. The appropriate Government, within the ambit of this Act, shall include a detailed,
time bound plan for ensuring energy access and supply to un-served and underserved rural
areas and people with the help of clean and renewable energy sources, by;
(a) mapping the household level electrification and energy supply status in the
entire country within six months of enactment of this Act.
(b) undertaking a micro scale resource assessment at the district and village
level, under the supervision of State Energy Departments and the resource information
to be compiled and made avialable in the public domain in official and local languages.
19. (1) The appropriate Government, within one year of the enactment of this Act, shall
constitute district level committees for renewable energy promotion and development. which
shall consist of the following members:—
(i) a Chairperson, who shall, either be a Member of Parliament and if he is not
available an officer of District Magistrate level, appointed by the State Government;
(ii) A Deputy Chairperson, having such qualification and experience, as may be
prescribed to be nominated by the appropriate Government;
(iii) an expert scientist having enough professional experience and profound
knowledge in the field of renewable energy, to be nominated by the appropriate
Government;
(iv) five members representing the State Government, having knowledge in the
field of energy service; and
(v) at least two members from non-Governmental Organisatiion working in the
field and stakeholders from the industry;
(2) The member of the District Committee shall be nominated by State Government in
such manner a may be prescribed by State Govt.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the chairperson, deputy chairperson and members of the district committee shall be such
as may be prescribed.
(4) The District Committee shall carry out the following functions:
(i) prepare a comprehensive plan for ensuring enegry supply for development
through local renewable energy sources in the district;
(ii) carry out participatory appraisal of the plan though public hearing and
meetings;
(iii) submit the plan to the State Government including the requirements of
grants, assistance and aid for the implementation of the plan;
(iv) pursue the State Government for appropriate allocation and timely release of
the funds and other support required for renewable energy development at the district
level; and
(v) implementation and monitoring of the planned activities for renewable energy
development at district level.
(5) All decisions of the District Committee shall be made on the basis of majority vote,
with the Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson having the right of veto.
20. The appropriate Government shall make it compulsory to promote renewable energy
based electrification in rural areas and shall take the following steps for the purpose—
(a) take cognizance of the local renewable energy plan;
(b) promote innovative business models and support local entrepreneurs through
appropriate incentives as may be prescribed by the Central Government; and
(c) ensure that all Regional Rural Banks mandatorily allocate a certain percentage
of their funds for lending to the off grid renewable energy systems.
Establishment
of District
Committee.
Electrification
from
Renewable
Energy
sources.
Rural Energy
Supply.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
21. The appropriate Government shall create an off-grid Renewable Energy Access
Fund to receive funds from sources such as, grants made by international donors, including
a portion of the State Clean Energy Funds, and the proceeds of such funds shall  be used for
setting up off-grid renewable energy systems in rural areas.
22. The appropriate Government shall undertake programs to enhance the capacity of
State nodal agencies to implement various policies and initiatives at the state level and
various other skills gap in the sector shall be systemically addressed by developing partnership
models among the industry, institutions, and the government.
23. The appropriate Government shall carry out strict monitoring of the renewable
energy programs being implemented by;
(a) establishment of a monitoring committee, within three months of the
implementation of the Act, consisting of the Secretary, Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy two members with such members and in such manner as may be prescribed by
Government ;
(b) the Committee, within six months of implementation of this act, shall devise a
comprehensive monitoring plan for the Central, State and District level;
(c) initiate an online monitoring system of centralized and decentralizes renewable
energy installations; and
(d) the committee shall make quarterly report about the progress.
24. The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after the appropriation
made by the Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
25. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or give such
direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for the removal of any difficulty.
26. The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may be
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Offi-grid
Renewable
Energy access
fund.
Enhancing
the capacity
of State
Nodal
agencies.
Central
Monitoring
Committee.
Power to
Remove
Difficulty.
Government
to provide
Funds.
Power to
Make Rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India faces a major challenge of energy, with conventional resources hard-pressed;
power for all remains a distant dream. Recording a 76% increase in electric power consumption
over the past decade, electricity generation has been unable to keep pace with the rapid
industrialization, economic growth and growth in population. With two decades of increase
in the deficit of power supply and an extremely low per capita consumption of electricity,
India is struggling to meet increasing power demand and the demand is expected to rise
significantly in the future.
From the total power generation capacity of 254 GW, 70 per cent is generated from
thermal alone as againt the admissibly low, 12 per cent genration from renewable and clean
sources of energy. Most of the capacity enhancement is in coal based power plants. An
increasing decline in capacity utilisation in power plants by 13 percentage points from 78 per
cent to 65 per cent in the last 5 years along with the 700 per cent. increase in coal coupled with
the quality and monopoly of coal along with allocation of limited fuel among competing
sectors, it has become a necessity for India to look at renewable, new and clean sources of
energy.
Renewable Energy project take lesser time and are easier to implement as compared to
large scale projects. Moreover, clean and renewable energy will do away with the need of
importing coal and save the country's foreign exchange. The Government should encourage
the use of the clean and renewable energy because the initial costs are slightly higher than
conventional options, which is why people do not adapt to it easily, hence this Bill will guide
energy choice of people towards and environment friendly, clean and renewable energy
rather than the conventional which damage the environment.
Realizing the importance of renewable energy, the Government of India has initiated
plans and policies over the years to promote renewable energy in the country. As a result,
deployment of renewable energy in the country has gained significant momentum today.
However, several issued such as lack of private financing, enforcement and compliance for
renewable purchase obligation, lack of comprehensive renewable energy policies, rapid
mechanism for setting standard industrial norms and monitoring the minimum compliance by
organisations act as some of the key barriers to its growth. Rural electrification, participation
by private players (33 per cent. of the generation capacity in 2014 was from the private sector
expected to rise to 52 per cent. by 2017) and research on, and promotion, development and
increased use of, clean and renewable forms of energy remains avenues for the country to
explore and enhance.
Therefore, a comprehensive legislation aimed at removing these barriers and accelerating
the development of renewable energy technologies at both National and State level is thus
necessary. Building a strong institutional framework for utilization and development of
renewable energy in the country is critical to embark on low carbon sustainable and inclusive
development. Clean and Renewable Energy is no longer an option but the need of the hour.
Hence this Bill.
VIVEK  GUPTA
8

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of this Bill establishes the National Committee on Renewable Energy, Cluase
5 is with regard to a comprehensive renewable energy resource assessment in the country,
Clause 9 deals with establishing Clean Energy Fund in States, Clause 12 creates an online
repository of lank banks available in the public domain, Clause 13 is with regard to creating
transmission and related infrastructure from distant sources, Clause 18 maps energy access
for rural energy supply and Clause 19 establishes the district committee, Clause 21 creates an
Off-grid Renewable Energy access fund and Clause 23 establishes a central monotoring
committee. These would involve direct expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
Clause 24 of the Bill makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite
funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. The recurring and non-recurring expnditure on this count cannot be estimated at
this stage, but has to be worked out by Central Government while implementing the provisions
of the Act.
9

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 26 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government, in consultation with the
State Governments, to make necessary rules for making rules, for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
10

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the formulation of  a comprehensive renewable policy in the country and
taking stock of energy resources of the country to facilitate sustainable and affordable
energy planning ensuring access to rural and urban areas, at district, state and
national level, by building a strong institutional structure for renewable
energy projects and monitoring of small energy systems to set up strong
financial  and infrastructural systems that enable investments and
mandating public and private sector companies to compulsorily
use of promote renewable energy and for all matters
connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
—————
(Shri Vivek Gupta,, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4851RS(S3)—27.02.2015.