THE POLITICAL PARTIES (MAINTENANCE AND AUDITING
OF ACCOUNTS) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for preparation, maintenance and auditing of annual accounts of political
parties and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Political Parties (Maintenance and Auditing of
Accounts) Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. LI of 2010
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH AUGUST, 2010

2
(a) "Commission" means the Election Commission of India constituted under
article 324 of the Constitution;
(b) "political party" means an association or body of individual Citizens of India
registered with the Commission as political party in accordance with the provisions
contained in section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Every political party shall prepare and maintain annual accounts of all its receipts,
expenditure and other relevant records in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The accounts of every political party shall be audited by an auditor authorised to
audit the accounts of a company under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.
4. (1) Every political party shall submit its annual certified copy of the audited accounts
together with the audit report thereon to the Commission within such time, as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Commission shall cause the annual certified copy of the audited account
together with the audit report thereon of each political party to be published in such manner,
as may be prescribed.
5. If any political party contravenes the provisions of this Act, the Commission may,
after giving a reasonable opportunity to the concern political party,—
(i) withdraw its recognition, if it is a political party recognised by the Commission
under the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968; or
(ii) withdraw its registration as a political party, for such period, as may be
prescribed.
6. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, after consulting the Commission, by order to be published in the Official
Gazette make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
7. The provisions of this Act shall apply notwithstanding anything contained to the
contrary in any other law for the time being in force.
8. The Central Government may, in consultation with the Commission, by notification
in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Maintenance
and auditing of
accounts of
political
parties.
Submission
and publica-
tion of audit
report.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
43 of 1951.
38 of 1949.

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Representation of the People Act, 1951, provides that every candidate at an
election, either to the House of the People or to the Legislative Assembly of a State, shall
keep a separate account of all his expenditure incurred in connection with the election but
there is no provision providing for maintenance and auditing of accounts of political parties.
Since huge amount of money is playing a major role in wining elections. It is high time that a
law providing for maintenance and auditing of accounts of political parties be brought
forward. Such a legislation will not only help free and fair elections by discouraging use of
money power to disturb the free and fair elections but will also give a right to the people of
the country to know from where the money comes to a political party and where it goes.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
MOHAN SINGH

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Commission shall cause the annual certified copy
of the audited accounts together with the audit report thereon of each political party to be
published in such manner, as may be prescribed. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure
of about rupees twenty lakh per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—4365RS(S3)—27-08-2010.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for preparation, maintenance and auditing of annual accounts of political
parties and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P .)