1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words ''sixty-two years'', the
words ''sixty-five years'' shall be substituted.
3. In article 224 of the Constitution, in caluse (3), for the words ''sixty-two years'', the
words ''sixty-five years'' shall be substituted.
Short title and
commencement.
5
Bill No. LI of 2019
Amendment to
article 217.
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
Amendment to
article 224.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The persistent problem of backlog of cases in the higher judiciary — the High Courts
and Supreme Court is a matter of grave public concern. As per recent statistics, there are
58,669 cases pending before the Supreme Court and about 45 lakh cases pending before the
High Courts. It is a well known adage that justice delayed is justice denied. There are several
factors which contribute to the inability of our higher judiciary to effectively tackle the
backlog of cases. One of the chief causes of delay in disposing cases is the large number of
vacancies in High Courts across the country. As per the Department of Justice, as on 01.11.2019,
out of a total sanctioned strength of 1079 Judges across 26 High Courts, 424 positions are
vacant. This situation is further worsened by the fact that when judges retire, appointment of
new judges in thier places is not immediate. The Memorandum of Procedure for appointment
of Judges states that the process of filling up of vacancies must commence six months prior
to the expected date of retirement of High Court Judges, so that the vacancy is immediately
filled upon retirement of a judge. However, due to various reasons, this process is not
completed on time leading to large number of vacancies as stated above.
2. One of the ways in which this situation can be ameliorated is by increasing the age
of retirement of High Court Judges from 62 to 65 years. When the Constitution was originally
enancted, article 217 (1)  fixed the age of retirement of High Court Judges as 60 years.
Subsequently, within 13 years, it was  realized that the human body and mind does not
become so incapacited at the age of 60 that Judge must retire at that age. Hence, by virtue of
the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, the age of retirement was increased to
62 years. From 1963 onwards, the age of retirement has remained at 62. Over the past five
decades, advancement in science and technology, medicine, better  infrastructure and lifestyle
has allowed Indians in other walks of life to be efficient, functional and work well up to the
age of about 75 years.
3. In fact, in the year 2018, 25 retired Chief Justices and Judges of various High Courts
were designated as Senior Advocates by the Supreme Court and in the year 2016, 26 such
retired Chief Justices  and Judges of the High Court were designated as Senior Advocates by
the Supreme Court. This shows that the Judges upon retirement are keen on continuing to
work in the legal field in one capacity or the other. This is due to two reasons:
(i) The mind of an intellectual who has worked tirelessly as a Judge of the High Court
cannot remain idle at the age of 62 when much energy, enthusiasm and zeal is still
left to contribute.
(ii) Judges need to continue to work in order to maintain a good standard of living,
since their pensions are not entirely sufficient to maintain themselves and their
families in urban cities.
4. In these circumstances,  the time has come to increase the age of retirement of
Judges of the High Court from 62 to 65 years. This would not only help the judicial system
but also the public at large, specifically the litigants before the Courts. The judicial system
would be greatly benefited because a person who has a wealth of experience under his or her
belt by virtue of a long tenure in the High Court would continue to serve the High Court for
a further period of 3 years. undoubtedly, the experience of the Judge would mean than he or
she is better suited to perform the functions of a Judge than a newly elevated Judge of the
High Court. The wealth  of judicial experience gained over a decade or so in the High Court
cannot be replaced by a newly elevated Judge. Longer tenures also ensure  impartiality of
Judges — an oft raised criticism is that Judges begin looking for post-retirement jobs in the
last year of their service. This can be removed by extending their tenure by a further three
2

3
years. Similarly, the litigant public is also benefited, since the occurrence of vacancies would
be less frequent and consequently, there would be Judges to hear and dispose cases. Such
a move would also benefit the Government of the day, since the Government would not be
frequently embroiled with the process of appointment of new Judges.
5. In 2000, The National Commission to review the working of the Constitution (NCRWC)
also known as Justice M.N. V enkatachaliah Commission was set up by the then NDA
Government. The said Commission submitted its report in the year 2002. One of the
recommendations of this Commission was to increase age of retirement Judges of the
High Court to 65 years. In 2010, the constitution (114th Amendment) Bill was tabled to
increase the age of High Court Judges to 65 years. However, this Bill could not be passed.
6. Internationally, the age of retirement of Judges is well above the current age of
62 years in India. The age of retirement of Judges is developed countries with good medical
facilities and infrastructure is around 70. The USA, Austria and Greece, have lifetime tenure
for Judges of its Supreme Court and Federal Courts. In the U.K., the age of retirement is
presently 70, though there have been calls to increase it to 75. In Belgium, Denmark, Ireland,
the Netherlands, Norway and Australia, the retirement age  for judges is 70 years. Judges in
Canada and Germany retire at 75 and 68, respectively. Although India is a developing country,
the Government provides Judges of the High Court with staff car, housing and sufficient
facilities like office assistants, domestic assistants, etc. Therefore, our Judges are definitely
in a position to continue serving as Judges of the High court till the age of 65 years.
7. Apart from this, the Hon'ble Law Minister has also informed the Parliament that the
Hon'ble Chief Justice of India has also sent a proposal to the Government to increase the age
retirement of High Court Judges to 65 years.
8. In view of the above, the instant bill proposes to increase the age of retirement of
High Court Judges by amending  the constitution article 217 (1) and 224 (3).
9. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
P. WILSON

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments
Commission referred to in article 124A, the Governor of the State, and, in the case of
appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court, and
shall hold office, in the case of an additional or acting Judge, as provided in article 224, and
in any other case, until he attains the age of sixty two years:
Provided that—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign
his office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the manner
provided in clause (4) of article 124 fro the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court;
(c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appointed by the President
to be a Judge of the Supreme Court or by his being transferred by the President to any
other High Court within the territory of India.
* * * * * * *
224. (1) If by reason of any temporary increase in the business of a High Court or by
reason of arrears of work therein, it appears to the President that the number of the Judges of
that Court should be for the time being increased, the President may, in consultation with the
National Judicial Appointments Commission, appoint duly qualified persons to be additional
Judges of the Court for such period not exceeding two years as he may specify.
(2) When any Judge of a High Court other than the chief Justice is by reason of
absence or for any other reason unable to perform the duties of his office or is appointed to
act temporarily as Chief Justice, the President may, in consultation with the National Judicial
Appointments Commission, appoint a duly qualified person to act as a Judge of that Court
until the permanent Judge has resumed his duties.
(3) No person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High Court shall hold
office after attaining the age of sixty-two years.
4
Appointment
and
conditions of
the office of a
Judge of a
High Court.
Appointment
additional and
acting Judges.

MGIPMRND—4344RS—11-12-2019.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P. Wilson, M.P .)