 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. LI of 2025 
THE SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the segregation and re-cycling of municipal solid waste, 
use of re-cyclable waste in waste-energy plants for generation 
 of energy and transportation of non-recyclable waste  
into landfills and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental 
 thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Solid Waste Management Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, th e
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 
(b) "large manufacturing facility" means any manufacturing
facility with an investment of more than rupees twenty crore; 
(c) "municipal authority" means Municipal Corporation,
Municipal Committee, Municipality, Nagar Palika, Nagar Nigam, 
Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council including Notified Area 
Committee (NAC) or any other local body constituted under the 
relevant statutes and entrusted with the responsibility of 
management and handling of municipal solid wastes; 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this
Act; 
(e) "segreagate" means separation of municipal solid wastes
into organic, inorganic, bio -degradable, non-biodegradable, 
recyclable and non-recyclable waste and hazardous wastes; 
(f) "waste-energy plants" means plants where solid waste is
treated using different techniques to produce any form of energy; 
and 
(g) "waste generating unit" means any entity, ho usehold or
large manufacturing facility where waste is generated and which 
require waste disposal. 
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
20 
Duty of waste 
generating unit 
and large 
manufacturing 
facility. 
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that every waste generating
unit within its jurisdiction segregates waste before its disposal.
(2) In case of large manufacturing facility, the owner or the in -charge of
the facility shall, as the case may be―
(a) ensure that the waste is segregated, re -used and re -cycled
at source; and 
(b) undertake transportation of re -cyclable waste to waste-
energy plants and the  non-recyclable and non -biodegradable waste 
to the notified landfills, as the case may be. 
(3) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the waste generating
units are liable to pay for the waste generated by them that is sent to the
landfills on the basis of the weight of the waste in such manner as may be
prescribed.
25 
 
30 
 
35 
Duty of the 
municipal 
authority. 
4. It shall be duty of the municipal authority to—
(a) collect the segregated waste from the waste generating
units; 
(b) ensure that the segregated waste collected and transported
is not mixed with any other waste or any material, to the extent that 
mixing would hamper its re-use, re-cycle, further treatment or its use 
in waste-energy plants; 
(c) undertake treatment of orga nic waste through bio -
degradation such as vermin composting, mechanical composting, by 
window method or any other suitable method as approved by the 
Central Pollution Control Board or the State Pollution Control 
Board, as the case may be; and 
(d) transport the non- recyclable waste, non -biodegradable
waste to the notified landfills. 
40 
45 
50 

3 
5. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished wit h
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months and with fine
which may extend to rupees twenty thousand.
Penalty. 
 
5 
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State
Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central Government 
to provide  funds. 
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law, for the time being in force.
Act not in 
derogation of any 
other law. 
 
10 
15 
20 
8. (1) The Central Government in consultation with the State Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
i
s made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive  sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make 
rules. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Solid waste management (SWM) is a major problem for many urban local 
bodies (ULBs) in India, where urbanization, industrialization, and economic 
growth have resulted in increased municipal solid waste (MSW) generation per 
person. Effective SWM is a major challenge in cities with high population 
density. Ach ieving sustainable development within a country experiencing 
rapid population growth and improvements in living standards is made more 
difficult in India because it is a diverse country with many different religious 
groups, cultures, and traditions. It is estimated that more than ten lakh tonnes of 
waste is generated in our country. The waste is largely composed of bio -waste, 
metals, plastics, paper, food, glass and presently majority of the waste is sent to 
the landfills with only a portion being used in w aste-energy plants or recycled 
or reused. For this every Municipal Corporation should be provided with 
incinerators of different capacities depending upon the waste generated. This 
energy from waste can be used as an alternative to the depleting petroleum 
products and it would also keep the environment safe and clean. Waste is not a 
waste until it is wasted. 
The Bill seeks to ensure that waste from landfills is segregated and 
recycled, reused as input to waste- energy projects. Non- recyclable waste and 
hazardous waste can be dumped in the notified landfills. Proper handling and 
disposal of municipal waste could result in generating employment and serve as 
an opportunity for entrepreneurs in the waste-energy sector. In various countries 
there are laws for proper disposal of waste. 
Hence, this Bill. 
R. GIRIRAJAN.

5 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate 
funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
This Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure 
of about rupees five hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated 
Fund of India.  
A non- recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also 
likely to be involved. 

6 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislation power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the segregation and re-cycling of municipal solid waste, 
use of re-cyclable waste in waste-energy plants for generation  
of energy and transportation of non-recyclable waste  
into landfills and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental 
 thereto. 
___________ 
(Shr
i R. Girirajan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS—PMB(E)―345― 08.12.2025 