1
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)
Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) existing entries 3 to16 shall be renumbered as entries 4 to17 respectively, and
before entry 4 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"3. Bhojpuri."
(ii) after entry 17 as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"18. Rajasthani."
(iii) existing entries 17 to 22 shall be renumbered as entries 19 to 24, respectively.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of Eighth
Schedule.
Bill No. LII  of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2015

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Bhojpuri is an Indo-Aryan language which originated from Sanskrit and like Sanskrit it
is also a scientific language. There are 40 million speakers of this language in India and 50
million worldwide. This is mainly spoken in north Indian states and on different islands of the
world. In geographical & numerical terms Bhojpuri speakers are bigger than Maithili language
which is part of eighth Schedule. Bhojpuri is a historical language which got its name from
Bhojpur in Bihar. Bhojpur was founded by Bhoj Dynasty rulers who came from Ujjain during
medieval times.The origin of the language in India is traced back to 700 AD which is now
more than a thousand years old. World Bhojpuri Day is celebrated on the birth date of
Sant Kabir Das. Bhojpuri is a very beautiful, simple and sweet language whose speakers
numerically are no less than speakers of any other prominent language of India like Bengali,
Gujarati, Marathi etc.
In addition to Bhojpuri, Rajasthani language is also amongst the Modern Indo-Aryan
Languages. It is also a historical language which is spoken in India and worldwide by
millions of people. There are various universities in Rajasthan where teaching arrangements
have been made for this language. It has a glorious past of ancient literature which developed
majorly during Asoka times of Saurashtra Prakrit. The development of Gujarati language,
included in the Eight Schedule has also its close relation with Rajasthani language. All major
ancient historical documents are available in this language and especially its medieval literature
is extremely rich.
Both these historically rich languages have not grown to their true potential because
of the neglect and lack of governmental support. Since they are not recognized by government
and do not find place in Eighth Schedule with other languages as a result their reach is
decreasing day by day. Also due to these reasons both languages have not been part of the
Union Public Service Commission examination and millions of people who having good
knowledge of the language are deprived from giving this examination. This neglect of historical
languages is not good for our rich heritage and culture.
Therefore, it is proposed to recognise the rich historical and cultural significant of
both these languages and immediate provisions should be made in the Eight Schedule of the
Constitution to give them their respectful place what they have deserved from so long.
Hence this Bill.
VIVEK GUPTA
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INIDA
*****
EIGHTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Odia.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
*****

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3384RS(S-3)—07-12-2015 .