1
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new section
377A.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Bill No.  LII of  2023
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. After Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code,1860, the following section
shall
 be inserted, 
namely:-
"377A. Whoever voluntarily harms the dignity or right of a dead person, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
ten years and shall also be liable to fine.".
545 of 1860.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In a recent judgment in Rangaraju and V ajapeyi Vs. State of Karnataka, the Court has
observed that the act of sexual assault on a dead body does not come under any provision
of the IPC. The Court has recommended that the Indian Penal Code, 1860 should be amended
to make necrophilia, i.e., a sexual attraction or act involving a  person engaging in sexual
activities with a deceased body, an offence. The Division Bench passed the order acquitting
the accused from the charges of raping a 25 year old woman after murdering her.
2. The Supreme Court in its various judgments has held that the right to dignity
prevails even after death. In S. Sethu Raja Vs. The Chief Secretary [W.P. (MD) No. 3888 of
2007] decided on 28th August, 2007, the petitioner had brought to the court's attention, the
Supreme Court's stand on right to accord decent burial or cremation to a dead body, as
interpreted from its decision in Ramsharan Autyanuprasi and Another Vs. Union of India
(AIR 1989 Supreme Court 549) in which it held thus,
"13. It is true that the life in its expanded horizons today includes all that give meaning
to a man's life including his tradition, culture and heritage and protection of that heritage in
its full measure would certainly come within the encompass of an expanded concept of
Art. 21 of the Constitution."
3. Further, the apex court, in Pt. Parmanand Katara Vs. Union of India & Ors. [1995 (3)
SCC 248] had observed thus,
"..the word and expression 'person' in article 21, would include a dead person in a
limited sense and that his rights to his life which includes his right to live with human
dignity, to have an extended meaning to treat his dead body with respect, which he
would have deserved, had he been alive subject to his tradition, culture and the
religion, which he professed. The State must respect a dead person by allowing the
body of that dead person to be treated with dignity and unless it is required for the
purposes of establishing a crime, to ascertain the cause of death and be subjected to
post-mortem or for any scientific investigation, medical education or to save the life of
another person in accordance with law, the preservation of the dead body and its
disposal in accordance with human dignity."
4. In Ashray Adhikar Abhiyan Vs. Union of India (AIR 2002 SC 554), the Supreme
Court had upheld the right of a homeless deceased to have a decent burial as per their 
religious belief and the corresponding obligation of the State towards such people.
5. Many countries in the world have laws on necrophilia. In the UK, any kind of sexual
harassment or inappropriate physical conduct with a dead body is against the law, and  
conviction in this case can lead to a jail term of six months to two years or a fine.  
Legislation against necrophilia also exists in Canada, New Zealand and South Africa. In 
C
anada, without using  the word necrophilia, it is mentioned that maximum sentence of 
5 years can be cited for harming the dignity and rights of a dead body. At the same time, in 
New Zealand, a provision has been made for a maximum punishment of 2 years regarding this 
l
aw.
6. It is, therefore, the need of the society that a law for providing punishment for
necrophilia should be made by creating a new offence under Indian Penal Code (IPC).
Hence, this Bill.
A.D.  SINGH
2

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri A. D. Singh, M.P.)
RS–P&PS–PMB(E)–045–12.12.2023