1
Bill No. LII of 2022
THE MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICE GUARANTEE BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to entitle every farmer the right to guaranteed Minimum Support Price for his crops or
agricultural produces and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Minimum Support Price Guarantee Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Commission" means the Commission for Guaranteed Minimum Support
Price constituted under section 7 of this Act;
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2022
Definitions.
5
10

2
Constitution
of the
Commission
for Guaranteed
Minimum
Support Price.
(c) "Comprehensive Cost" or "C2" means the actual cost of production as
provided under sub-section (2) of section 6 of this Act;
(d) "farmer" means a person actively engaged in the economic or livelihood
activity of growing crops and producing other primary agricultural commodities and
will include all agricultural operational holders, cultivators, agricultural labourers,
sharecroppers, tenants, poultry and livestock rearers, fishers, beekeepers, gardeners,
pastoralists, non-corporate planters and planting labourers, as well as persons engaged
in various farming related occupations such as sericulture, vermiculture and
agro-forestry, tribal families or persons engaged in shifting cultivation and in the
collection, use and sale of minor and non-timber forest produce;
(e) "Minimum Support Price" or "MSP" means the price calculated or determined
under section 8 of the Act;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) "trader" means an individual, business, group, or agency that purchases
agricultural produce or crops from the farmers or is engaged in day-to-day buying and
selling of agricultural produce.
3. (1) The Central Government shall within six months from the date of commencement
of this Act, by notification constitute a Commission known as 'Commission for Guaranteed
Minimum Support Price', for carrying out purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall have its headquarter at Delhi:
Provided that the Commission may establish such number of offices in the
States as it deems neessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Commission shall consist of not more than thirty members to be appointed by
the Central Government for carrying out the purposes of this Act in such manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the number of members may be modified by the Central Government,
as and when it deems necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The Commission shall consist of following members:—
(a) at least three Members of Parliament from the Lok Sabha and two Members of
Parliament from the Rajya Sabha;
(b) two members serving as the Vice-Chancellors of Central Universities;
(c) three professors from the domain of agricultural studies or related fields
having at least twenty years of teaching experience;
(d) two former judges of the Supreme Court;
(e) three members from the civil society having at least twenty years experience
in agriculture or rural development;
(f) five members from farmers trade unions—one each representing North, South,
East, West, and the Northeast parts of the country;
(g) three members from the Indian Council of Agricultural Research;
(h) the Union Secretary of the Ministry of Food and Public Distribution;
(i) the Union Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare;
(j) the Union Secretary of the Ministry of Rural Development;
(k) the Union Home Secretary;
(l) the Union Finance Secretary;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(m) the Chairman of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal
Husbandry and Food Processing; and
(n) the Chairman of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Rural Development.
(5) The Central Government shall provide to the Commission such numbers of officers
and staff, as it deems necessary for carrying out purposes of this Act.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
members of the Commission other than the persons who are not drawing salary from the
Consolidated Fund of India or any university fund, shall be as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
4. (1) The Commission shall determine and recommend the guaranteed Minimum
Support Price in the manner specified in section 8 of this Act for each crop or agricultural
produce specified in the list prepared by the Commission under sub-section ( 2) of this
section.
(2) The Commission shall, for carrying out the purposes of this Act, prepare a list of
crops or agricultural produces eligible for guaranteed Minimum Support Price for Kharif
Season and Rabi Season after extensive consultations with stakeholders in such manner as
may be prescribed:
Provided that the list may be updated in every crop season if found appropriate
by the Commission or as the case may be:
Provided further that preparation of the list may not be exclusively for Kharif and
Rabi crop season and list of other seasons or durations may be prepared by the
Commission as the case may be.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) and (2), the Commission
shall work in coordination with the appropriate Government for ensuring guaranteed minimum
support price to farmers, development of agriculture, welfare of farmers, and undertake such
other functions as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall on the basis of recommendation for guaranteed
Minimum Support Price as calculated and determined by the Commission, entitle farmers
with the guarantee of Minimum Support Price for the crops prescribed by the Commission.
(2) The Minimum Support Price, as determined by the Commission, shall be notified by
the Central Government not later than one week of the receipt of recommendation from the
commission in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, upon receiving recommendation for Minimum
Support Price as computed by the Commission under section 8, notify the guaranteed
Minimum Support Prices for agricultural produces, before 15th March of every year for the
Kharif crop season and before 31st July of every year for the Rabi season:
Provided that the dates of such notification may be modified by the Central
Government on the recommendation of the Commission.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Central Government,
upon receiving recommendation of the Commission, shall notify the list of crops for guaranteed
Minimum Support Price before 15th March of every year for the Kharif crop season and
before 31st July of every year for the Rabi season:
Provided that the list may be modified by the Central Government on the
recommendation of the commission:
Provided further that in case the Commission recommends a different list other
than kharif and Rabi season, the same may be notified by the Central Government
within fifteen days of receipt of such recommendation.
Functions of
the
Commission.
Guarantee for
minimum
Support Price
by the Central
Government.
Notification
of Guaranteed
Minimum
Support
Prices.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
7. The appropriate Government shall ensure that government procurement agencies or
traders transfer the payments for crops to farmers through direct bank transfers not more
than thirty days after purchase or procurement of crops:
Provided that in case of delay in payments to farmers for crops by traders or
government procurement agencies as specified under this section, the appropriate
Government shall pay a compensation at a monthly interest rate of eight per cent. to
the farmers.
8. (1) The Commission shall determine and recommend to the Central Government
the Minimum Support Price for agricultural produces, which shall not be less than a profit
margin of not less than fifty per cent. and above the Comprehensive Cost.
(2) The Comprehensive Cost shall include and take into account the following
components:
(a) actual paid out cost, which shall include but not be limited to:—
(i) expenditure on seeds, fertilisers, and chemicals;
(ii) expenditure on hired labour;
(iii) expenditure on fuel, irrigation, machinery, etc;
(b) an imputed value of unpaid family labour that may be determined and fixed by
the Commission;
(c) expenses on rentals;
(d) the interest forgone on owned land and fixed capital assets respectively; and
(e) Any other cost that may be prescribed by the Commission for carrying out
purposes of this Act:
Provided that the components may be modified by the Commission if felt
appropriate from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. Any trader who violates the provision of this Act shall be punishable with—
(a) a penalty of not less than rupees one lakh; or
(b) two hundred per cent. of the losses suffered by the farmer on account of
non-payment of guaranteed Minimum Support Price; or
(c) cancellation of trading licences and banning from getting entitled with any
business dealing with trading in the agriculture sector; or
(d) imprisonment for a period not less than three months which may extend to
two years; or
(e) any one of or more of the penalties mentioned in clauses (b), (c) and (d).
10. The provisions of this Act of any rule or order made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law, or any instrument
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
11. (1) The appropriate Government may make rules for carrying out purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period
of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
Payment for
crops.
Minimum
Support Price.
Offences and
penalties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be, after it is made, before each House of the Legislature where it consists of two
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Agriculture is considered one of the most risky businesses in India. Farmers face risks
from planting crops to finding markets for their agricultural produce, along with a barrage of
risk-related factors including crop production, weather uncertainty, crop prices, credit and
policy decisions. The main reason for price risk is the low remuneration cost, absence of
market and excessive profit making by middlemen. The Minimum Support Price, over the time
evolved as an impressive concept for ensuring welfare of farmers—the minimum price at
which the government is ready to buy the entire quantity of food grains sold by the farmers.
When the price of agricultural products is falling in the market, it becomes the duty of the
Government to protect the interests of farmers by purchasing agricultural products at the
minimum support price.
Farmers in many parts of India are forced to grow certain crops despite its ecological
consequences and risk factors because of the government assurance that it will buy their
whole produce at MSP. However, the absence of a legislative backing has added to the
ambiguity and pushed the impressive idea towards slow death. Legalising MSP would put
the government under a legal obligation to buy every grain of the crops for which MSPs are
announced.
Moreover, as recommended by Government Committees, experts, farmers’unions, etc,
the calculations and way of determining the MSP need to be revised and reformed. There is
a need to revise the All paid out costs (A2) + Family Labour (FL) formula with the
Comprehensive cost (C2) + 50 per cent. of C2 formula as per recommendations of the M.S.
Swaminathan Committee. Comprehensive Cost (C2) is the actual cost of production as it
takes into account for the rent and interest foregone on the land and machinery owned by
farmers, in addition to the A2+FL rate. As per the Swaminathan Committee, the ideal formula
to calculate the MSP should be: MSP=C2+50 per cent. of C2.
A legal guarantee to farmers for Minimum Support Price backed by a binding legislation
is the need of the hour for protecting the primary sector and ensuring welfare of the farmers.
Hence, this Bill.
RAGHAV CHADHA
6

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Section 3 of the Bill provides for the Central Government to constitute a Commission
for ensuring guaranteed Minimum Support Price for agricultural produce procured from
farmers. Section 8 of the Bill provides for ensuring a new mechanism for calculating the
Minimum Support Price on the basis of Comprehensive Cost (C2) incurred. The Bill also
seeks to provide compensation to the farmers in case of delays and failures in payment for
agriculture produce. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees three
lakh crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Section 11 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to entitle every farmer the right to guaranteed Minimum Support Price for his crops or
agricultural produces and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Raghav Chadha, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—875RS—08-08-2022.