Fa Committee.
Powe a 0०6७ कृष्ण seam its of gmiaton psi 294 SAS

7. ता acer Sib-Commines ofthe Commie and ऐड nein °
8B Procedure of the Committee and its Sub-Comminiess.
प्र Secretary and other officers of the Committee.
10. Meetings of the Committee.
11, State Seed Committee.
CHAPTER Ml
REGESTRATION OF KIND AND VARIETIES OF SEEDS, ETC,

12 Maintenance of National Register of seeds of kinds and varieties.
1. Registration of seeds of any kind or variety
14. Procedure for registration.
15, Special provision for registration of transgenic varieties.
16. Cancellation of registration of seeds of kinds and varieties.
1. Notification of cancellation of registration of seeds of kinds und varieties.
18. Fecluron of cera kinds or varieties of seeds from registration
19, Evaluation of performance.
है to farmer,
21. cod produces and sed processing units to be registered.
2 Sced dealers to be registered,
23. Horticulture nursery to be registered.
24, Duties of registration holders of horticulture nursery:
CHAPTERIV
RecuLamon OF SALE OF SHED Ano Seen Crrmincation AOPSSIEY

Regulation of sale of eds of registred Kinds and varies
State Seed Certification Agency:

RR


See

v.

&8 B28

ऊँ क्रय के GE

Accreditation of Seed Certification Agencies.
Grant of certificate by the State Seed Certification Agency.
Revocation of certificate.
Recognition of seed certification agencies in foreign countries.
CHAPTER V
Apreats

CHAPTER V1
SEED ANALYSIS AN SEED TESTING

Central and State Seed Testing Laboratories.
Seed Analysts.
Seed Inspectors.
Powers of Seed Inspectors. *

(CHAPTER VI

छा 0७४० Exrost OF SEEDS

Import of seeds.
Export of seeds,

CHAPTER VIII

(OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENT

Offences and punishment,
Forfeiture of property.
Offences by companies.

CHAPTER IX

Power oF Cen Trai, GOVERNMENT

Power of Central Government to give directions to the State Governments.
Power of Central Government to issue directions to the Committee.
Exemption from registration.

(CHAPTER X

MISCELLANEOUS:
Protection of action taken in good faith.
Power to remove difficulties.
Power of Central Government to make rules.
Power of Committee to make regulations,
Rules and regulations to be laid before Partiament.
Repeal and savings.
THE SCHEDULE,



‘As iermonucen © Rava SABHA

Bill No. L11_ of 2004

THE SEEDS BILL, 2004
A
BILL

to provide for regulating the quality of seeds for sale, import and export and 10, facilizate
prodwction and supply of seeds of quality and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament inthe Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —

CHAPTER I
==
1, (/) This Act may be called the Seeds Act, 2004, Short title,
extent,
दा (2) Itextends to the whole of India. application
, and com
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall apply to— mencement

(a) every dealer; and
(b) every producer of seed except when the seed is produced Py him for his own
use and not for sale.
\e (4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint:



= —

2

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(J) “agriculture” includes horticulture, forestry, cultivation of plantation, &
medicinal and aromatic plants,
(2) “Central Seed Testing Laboratory” means the Central Seed Testing Labo-
ratory established or declared as such under sub-section (1) of section 32;
(J) "Cemtification Agency” means an agency established under section 26 oF
accredited under section 27 or recognised under section 30; wo
(4) "Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Committee;
(5) “Committee” means the Central Seed Committee constituted under sub-
section (/) of section 3;

(6) “container” means a box, bottle, casket, tin, barrel, case, receptacle, sack,
bag, wrapper or other thing in which any article or thing is placed or packed; Ss
(7) "dealer" means a person who carries on the business of buying afié selling,

exporting, of importing seed, and includes an agent of a dealer,
(8) “essentially derived variety", in relation to a variety or an initial variety
means a variety of seeds essentially derived from such initial variety when it—
(a) is predominantly derived from such initial variety, or from a variety that ao
itself is predominantly derived from such initial variety, while retaining the ९९०
pression of the essential characteristics that result from the genotype or combi-
nation of genotypes of such initial variety;
(6) is clearly distinguished from such initial variety; and
(c) conforms (except for the differences which result from the act of deriva- as”
tion) to’such initial variety in the expression of the essential characteristics that
result from the genotype or combination of genotypes of such initial variety,

(9) “export” means taking out of India by land, sea or air;

(70) “extant variety" means @ variety available in India which—

(a) had been notified under section 5 of the Seeds Act, 1966 and remains 3०54 of |

as such on the date of commencement of this Act; or +

(8) isa farmers’ variety #3 defined in ctause (0 of section 2 of the Protec~
tion of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Act, 2001; or

(2) isa variety about which there is common knowledge; or

(d)a variety other than a variety referred to in sub-clauses (०) to (०) and is 357
in the public domain,

(JD) “farmer” means any person who cultivates crops either by cultivating the
land himself or through any other person but does not include any individual, com-
pany, trader or dealer who engages in the procurement and sale of seeds on a commer-
cial basis; ue

(12) “horticulture nursery” means any place, where horticulture plants ure, in
the regular course of business, produced or propagated and sold for transplantation;

(13) “import” means bringing into India by land, sea or air,

(10) "kind" means one ‘of more related species of sub-species of crop plants
cach individually of collectively known by one common name such as cabbage, maize, uw
paddy and wheat,

(15) "member" means a member of the Committee;

S3 of



3

(16) "misbranded" a seed shall be deemed to be misbranded if—

(0 ॥ isa substitute for, or resembles in a manner likely to deceive another
variety of seed under the name of which it is sold, and is not plainly and con-
spicuously labelled so as to indicate its true nature;

s (if) it is falsely stated to be the product of any place or country;

(i) itis sold by a name which belongs to another kind or variety of seed;

(i>) false claims are made for it upon the label or otherwise;

(v) when sold in a package which has been sealed or prepared by, or at the
instance, of the dealer and which bears his name and address, the contents of

\e each package are not conspicuously and correctly stated on the outside thereof
within the limits of variability prescribed under this Act;

(v2) the package containing it, or the label on the package bears any state-
ment, design or device regarding the quality or the kind or variety of seed
contained therein, which is false or misteading in any material particular or if the

डा package is otherwise deceptive with respect to its contents;

(vif) है is not registered in the manner required by or under this Act,

(viii) the fabel contains any reference to registration other than the regis- ५४
tration number,

(80 its label does not contain a warning or caution which may be neces-

ae sary and sufficient, if complied with, to protect buman, animal and plant life and

health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment,

(x) the package containing itor the label on the package bears the name of
2 fictitious individual or company as the dealer of the kind or variety; oF

(xi) itis not labelled in accordance with the requirements of this Act or the

AS mules made thereunder;

ge

=

Yo

us

(17) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette,

(18 ) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act,

(19) "producer" means a person, group of persons, firm or organisation who
grows or organizes the production of seeds;

(20) registered kind or variety”, in relation to any sced, means any kind, or
variety thereof, registered under section 13;

(21 “Registration Sub-Committee” means the Registration Sub-Committee con-
stituted under sub-section (/) of section 7;

(22) “regulation” means 2 regulation made by the Committee under this Act;

(23) "seed" means any type of living embryo or propagule capable of regenern-
tion and giving rise to a plant of agriculture which is true to such type;

(24) "Seed Analyst” means a Seed Analyst appointed under sub-section (1) of
section 33;

(25) "Seed Inspector” means a Seed Inspector appointed under sub-section (/)
of section 34;

(26) “seed processing” means the process by which seeds and planting mate-
rinls are dried, threshed, shelled, ginned or delinted (in cotton), cleaned, graded or
treated,

(270 “spurious seed” means any seed which is not genuine or true to type;

(28)"State Government”, in relation to 8 Union territory, means the administra-
tor thereof,

(29) “State Seed Testing Laboratory", in relation 10 any State, means the State
Sced Laboratory established 06 declared as such under sub-section (2) of section 32
for that State;



|:
of Central Seed
Committee

Composition
of the Com-
mittee

(20) “wansgenic variety” means seed or planting material synthesized or devel
sett min see pe cmon en
Be
(1 "variety" means a plant grouping except micro-organism within 8 single
botanical taxon of the lowest known rank, which can be—

(@) defined by the expression of the characteristics resulting from a given

genotype of that plant grouping;

७9) distinguished from any other plant grouping by expression of at feast

one of the said characteristics, and

() contidered as a unit with regard to its suitability for being propagated,

which remains unchanged after such propagation,
and includes propagating material of such variety extant variety transgenic variety, Farmers
variety and essentially derived variety. sa

CHAPTER Il

‘Tue एकता, Seen Commrrrit, REGISTRATION AND OTHER Sue-COMMITTEES =

3. (1) The Cenral Government shall by notification, constitu, forthe purpose of hi
Act, a Committee to be called the Central Seed Committee,

(2) The headquarters ofthe Central Seed Committe shall be at New Dethi

4. (1) “The Committee shall consist of « Chairperson, members, ex oficio and other
members, to be nominated by the Central Government,

(2) The Secretary tothe Government of India the Department of Agriculture and Co-
operation, Ministry of Agriculture, shall be she Chairperson, ex officio

(3) The Committee shall consist of the following ex officio members, namely:—

(0) the Agriculture Commissioner, Department of Agriculture and Co-operation,
Government of India,
(ip the Deputy Director General (Crop Sciences), ladian Council of Agricultural
Research;
(iii) the Deputy Director General (Horticulture), Indian Counell of Agricultural
Research,

(iv) the Joint Secretary incharge of seeds in the Department of Agriculture and
Co-vperation, Government of India;

(9) the Horticulture Commissioner, Deparment of Agriculture and Co-operation,
Government of India,

(via ‘ive of the Department of Bio-technology, Government of India,
pot below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India;

(vii) a representative of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government
of India, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of tndin.

(4) The Comite shal consist ofthe following other members tobe mminated 0) the
Central Government, namely:>—

(0 the Secretary (Agriculture) from five States, one each ffom three out of We
| =

(ii Director, State Seed Certification Agency from one State which is not repre~

ii) Managing Director, State Seeds Corporation, trom one State which Is not
represented under clause (i) of clause (ii);

(iv) two representatives of farmers;
(रे two representatives of seed industry;

ae

as

3०

Ye

use



=

as

३०

uo

5

(vi) two specialists or experts in the field of seod development.

(5) The Committee may associate with it, in such manner, 08 such terms and for such
purposes as it may deem fit, any person whose assistance o advice it may desire in comply-
ing with any of the provisions of this Act, and a person so associated shall have the right to
take part in the discussion of the Committee relevant to the purposes for which he has been
associated, but shall not have the right to vote and shall be entithed to receive such allow-
ances or fees as may be fixed by the Central Government.

(6) A Member nominated under sub-section (5) shall, unless his seat becomes vacant
earlier by resignation, death or otherwise, be entitled to hold office for two years from the
date of his nomination but shall be eligible for re-nomination provided that the said member
shall hold office only for so long as he holds the appointment by virtue of which his nomina-
tion was made,

(7) Save as otherwise provided, the terms and conditions of appointment of the mem-
bers shall be such as may be prescribed.

(8) A member other than an ex officio member may resign his office by giving notice in
writing to the Central Government and on such resignation being accepted, he shall be
deemed to have vacated his office.

(9) A person shal! be disqualified for being nominated or appointed as a member if

(7 has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in
the opinion of the Ceatral Government, involves moral turpitude; or

(ii) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(i) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court.

(70) No act or proceeding of the Committee shall become invalid merely by reason
of—

(i) any vacancy therein, or any defect in the constitution thereof; or

(ii) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as the Chairperson or &
member of the Committee, of

(iif) any irregularity in the procedure of the Committee not affecting the merits of
the case,

(J1) The Central Government may, at any time, remove from office any member other
than member, ex afficio after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against
the proposed removal.

5. The Committee shall be responsible for and shall have all the powers for the effec-
tive implementation of this Act and shall advise the Central Government and the State
Governments on matters relating to—

(a) seed programming and planning;

(8) seed development and production;

(८) export and import of seeds;

(व) standards for registration, certification and seed testing;
(०) seed registration and its enforcement;

(A) such other matters as may be prescribed.

Powers and
functions of
the Commit-
tee,



: Siete nine

6, The Committee may, by notification, specify—

(गे the minimum limits of germination, genetic and physical purity, and maximum
seed health, with respect to any seed of any kind or variety;

(b) the mark or label on the packet or cantainer to indicate that such seed con-
forms to the minimum limits of germination, genetic and physical purity, and seed डा
रे health specified under clause (a), and other particulars, such as expected performance
| of the seed in'accordance with the information provided by the producer under section
14 which such mark or label may contain.

Registration 7) ‘The Committee shall constitute a Sub-Committee to be called the Registration
wad other Sub- Sub-Committee consisting of a Chairman aad such number of other members, to assist him in le
Commistets the discharge of the functions of the Committee, as may be prescribed.

(4 of the

i pop (2) It shall be the duty of the Registration Sub-Committee—

| fonctions, (a) to register seeds of varieties after scrutinizing their claims as made in the

~ application in such manner as may be prescribed:

ii (5) to perform such other fictions as are assigned to it by the Committee is

\] G) ‘The Committee may appoint 2s many other Sub-Committees including a Sub-

॥ Committee on Seed Certification ‘as it deems fit consisting wholly of the members of the
Committee or wholly of other persons or partly of members of the Committee and partly of
ther persons as it thinks fit to exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be
delegated to them. ae

Procedure of 8. ‘The Committee may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government,

the Commit~ make regulations for the purpose of regulating its own procedure and the procedure of any
teeand its Sub Sub-Committee thereof,

Committees.
Secretary and 9. The Central Government shalt—
ether officers
of the Com- (०) appoint x person to be the Secretary of the Committee; and as
aan (8) provide the Committee with such technical and other officers and employ-
cesins may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the Commit-*
tee under this Act.
Meetings of 10, (1) The Committee shall meet as and when necessary at such time and place and
br ‘Commit shall observe such procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings (including ge
7 the quorum at meetings) ) as may be provided by regulations,
(2) The Chairperson or, in his absence, the Agricultural Commissioner or, in the
| absence of both the Chairperson and the Agricultural Commissioner, any member chosen by
the members present from amongst themselves, shall preside at a meeting of the Committee.
(3) All questions at a meeting of the Committee shall be decided by a majority of votes 9857
of the members present and voting and in the case of an equality of votes, the Chairperson
of, in his absence, the Agricultural Commissioner or, in the absence of both the Chairperson
and the Agricultural Commissioner the person presiding shall have and exercise a second or
casting vote.
[= 11. Every State Government shall establish a State Seed Committee to— ‘e
ee
(@) advise the Committee on registration of regional or local seeds of any kind
or variety;

(6) advise the State Government on registration of seed producing units, seed
processing units, seed dealers and horticulture nurseries;

() maintain, in each district, 8 list of seed dealers, seed producers, seed pro- us
cessing units and horticulture nurseries;



=

(a) seek information from persons engaged in the production, supply, distribu-
tion, trade or commerce in seeds of any kind or variety regarding stocks, prices, sales
and other information in the manner as may be prescribed;

(रो advise the State Government and the Committee on all matters arising out of
oe the administration and implementation of this Act; and
() carry out other functions assigned to, by, ar under this Act.
CHAPTER fl
REGISTRATION OF KINDS AND WARIETIES OF SEEDS, ETC,

12. (J) For the purposes of this Act, a register of all kinds and varieties of seed to be Maintenance
10 called the National Register of Seeds ‘shall be kept by the Registration Sub-Committee of National
wherein all specifications, as may be prescribed, shall be maintained. ar td
(2) Subject to the directions of the Commitee, the Register shall be kept under the and veneties.
control and management of the Registration Sub-Commitce.
(0) The Registration Sub-Committee shall, within such intervals and in such mannes a8
is it thinks appropriate publish thelist of kinds and varieties of seed which have been registered
during that interval

13.07) No seed of any kind or variety shall, for the purpose of sowing or planting by Registration of
any person, be sold unless such seed is registered under sub-section (2) by the Registration seeds of any
Sub-Committee in such manner as may be prescribed. kind ७० variety.

ae (2) Subject to the provisions of sections 14 and 15, the Registration Sub-Committee
may register or refuse to register any kind or variety of seeds on the basis of information
furnished by the producer who develops the variety on the results of multi-locational trials
for such period as may be prescribed to establish the performance of that seed:

Provided that no application for registration shall be refused under this sub-section

as unless the applicant has been given an opportunity to represent his case;

Provided further that seeds of any kind or variety in respect of which a valid registration
exist on the date of commencement of this Act are not required to be registered again under
this section on basis of the information.on the results of multi-location trials.

(3) The Registration Sub-Commimee may grant provisions! | registration to the varieties

ge of seeds which are available in the market on the date of commencement of this Act.

(4)A registration made under this Act shall be valid for a period of fifteen years in the
cate of annual and biennial crops, and eighteen years for long duration perennials,

(5) At the expiry of the period granted under sub-section (री, the kind or variety of

= seeds may be re-registered fora like period by the Registration Sub-Committee on the basis
35° of information furnished by the producer on the results of such trials as may be prescribed
under sub-section (2) to re-establish performance of the kind or variety of seeds,

(6) The Registration Sub-Committee shall have the power to issue such directions to
protect the interests of a producer against any abusive act committed by any third party
Goring the period between the date of filing of application for registration and the date of

Uo decision by the Committee on such application.

14. (1) Every application for registration under sub-section (2) of section 13 shall be Procedure for
made in such form and contain such particulars and be accompanied by such fees as may be tegistration.
prescribed.

@ On receipt of any such application for the registration of « kind or variety of seed,

us the Registration Sub-Committee may, after such enquiry as it deems fit and after satisfying
iteelf that the kind or variety of seed to which the application rebates conforms to the claims
1866 by the importer or by the seller, as the case may be, as regards the efficacy of the kind
br variety of seed afd its safety to human beings and animals, register the kind or variety, as
the case may be, of the seed on such conditions as may be specified by It and allot 8
se registration number thereto and issue a certification of registration.

a”


=
varieties.

Cancetiation
of
registration
of seeds of
hinds and
varieties

Notification
of

of registration
of seeds of
hinds ard
varieties:
Exclusion of
certain hinds
or varieties of
seedy = from
registration.

QB) The Registration Sub-Committee may, having regard to the efficacy of the sveds
and its safety to human beings and animals, vary the conditions subject to which a certificate
of registration has been granted and may, for that purpose, require the certificate holder by
notice in writing to deliver up the certificate to it within such time as may be specified in the
notice.

15. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 14, no seed of any transgenic
variety shall be registered unless the applicant has obtained a clearance in respect of the
same as required by of under the provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986:

Provided that the Registration Sub-Committee may, subject to clearance under the said
Act, grant provisional registration, for a period not exceeding two years on the basis of
information furnished by the producer on the results of mutti-locational trials conducted in
the prescribed manner.

(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (/), the form and manner in which and

the procedure for registration of transgenic variety of seeds and the fee payable thereto shall
be the same as applicable in case of registration under section 13.

16, (7) The Registration Sub-Committee may cancel any registration granted under
section 13 or section 15 on any one of more of the following grounds, namely:-— ;

(a) that the holder of the certificate has violated any of the terms and conditions
of the registration; or

() that the registration has been obtained by misrepresentation or concealment
of essential data, or

{c) that the variety is not performing in accordance with the information furnished
by the producer under sub-section (2) of section 13 or become obsolete or outlived its
utility and be made available for sale in the market in the public interest, of

(d) that prevention of commercial exploitation of such variety of seeds is
necessary—
(0) in the public interest;
(id) 10 protect public order of public morality; ot
(iif) to protect human beings, animals and plant life and health to avoid
serious prejudice to the environment.
(2) No order of cancellation of registration under this section shall be made untess the

holder thereof or the affected person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of
showing cause in respect of the grounds for such cancellation.

17, The Registration Sub-Committee shall notify the cancellation of a registration of
any kind or variety of seed made under section 13, of ३ registration made under section 15
in the Official Gazette.

18. (J) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no registration of any kind or
variety of seeds shall be made under this Act, if prevention of commercial exploitation of
such kind or vatiety is necessary to protect public order or public morality or human, animal
of plant life and health, or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment.

(2) A kind of variety of seed containing any technology, which is harmful, or potentially
harmful, shall not be registered.

Explanation — For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “technology”
includes genetic use restriction technology and terminator technology.

हे?

29 of 196

19

ts

ao

as

3e

3s"

Yo



श्र

# of 196, ०

is

ae

as

=

Ue

पडा

19. The Committee may, for conducting trials to assess the performance, accredit
centres of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, State Agricultural Universities end
such other organizations fulfilling the eligibility requirements as may be prescribed, to conduct
trials to evaluate the performance of any kind or variety of seeds.

20. Where the seed of registered kind or variety is sold to a farmer, the producer,
distributor or vendor, as the case may be, shall disclose the expected performance of such
kind or variety to the farmer under given conditions, and if, such registered seed fails to
provide the expected performance under such given conditions, the farmer may claim
compensation from the producer, dealer, distributor or vendor under the Consumer Protection
Act, 1986,

21.(/) No producer shall grow or organize the production of seed unless he is registered
as such by the State Government under this Act.

(2) No person shall maintain a seed processing unit unless such unit is registered
by the State Government under this Act.

(3) The State Government shall register a producer or seed processing unit if he or it
meets the specifications prescribed by the Central Government in terms of infrastructure,
equipment and qualified manpower,

(4) Every application for registration under sub-section (3) shall be made in such form
and manner and shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.

(5) The State Government may, after making such enquiry and subject to such conditions
as itthinks fit, grant a certificate for maintaining a seed producing or 3 seed processing unit
in such form as may be prescribed.

(6) Every seed producing unit and every seed processing unit shall furnish periodic
returns on the quantity of seeds of different kinds or varieties produced or processed by it to
the Seed Certification Agency in such form and at such time as may be prescribed.

(7) The State Government may, after giving the holder of certificate of registration
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), as the case may be, suspend or cancel the registration
_

(a)-such registration has been obtained by misrepresentation as to a material
particular relating to the specification in terms of infrastructure, equipment or availability
of qualified manpower, or -

(8) any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder has been
contravened. ‘

22, (1) Every person who desires to carry on the business of selling, keeping for sale,
offering to sell, bartering, import or export or otherwise supply any seed by himself, or by any
other person on his behalf shall obtain a registration certificate as a dealer in seeds from the
State Government.

(2) Every applicant for dealership under sub-section (/) shall be required to furnish
information about seed stocks, sales and other related information as may be prescribed,

(3) Every application for registration under sub-section (1) shall be made in such form
and manner and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.

(4) The State Government may, after making such enquiry and subject to such conditions
as it thinks fit, grant a certificate of registration as a dealer in seeds in such form as may be
prescribed.

(5) Every dealer registered under this section shall furnish to the State Government
such information and returns regarding seed stocks, seed lots, expiry date of seed lots and
other relajed information as may be prescribed.

Evalustion of
performaace

Compensation
10 farmer.

Seed
producers and
seed

processing

nits to be
registered

Seed dealers 10.
be registered



= कमगााय

है —
suspend of cancel a certificate granted under this section if—

(०) such registration had been obtained by misrepresentation of any material

fact;
(७) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made
. thereunder.
Norticulvere 23. (1). No person shall conduct af carry on the business of horticulture hursery for
pursery ७ be any of the purposes of this Act unless such nursery is registered with the State Government.
(2) Every application for registration under sub-section (1) shall be made in such form
‘and contain such particulars and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.
Duties of 24, Every person who is a holder of a registration of a horticulture nursery under
— section 23 shall—
horticelture (a) keep a complete record of the origin or source of every planting material and
बाज, performance record of mother trees in the nursery;

(0) keep a layout plan showing the position of the root-stocks and scions used
in raising the horticulture plants;

(c) keep a performance record of the mother trees in the nursery;

(d) keep the nursery plants as well as the parent trees used for the production or
propagation of horticulture plants free from infectious or contagious insects, pests or
diseases affecting plants; and

(२) furnish such information to the State Government on the production, stocks,
sales and prices of planting material in the nursery as may be prescribed.

CHAPTERIV
REGULATION OF SALE OF SEED AND Seno CrxviFICATION AGENCIES
Regulation of 25. No person shall himself, or by any other person on his behalf, carry on the business

कक of selling, keeping for sale, offering to sell, bartering, import or export or otherwise supply
13320. any kind of seed of any registered kind or variety unless—

५54 (a) such seed is identifiable as to its kind or variety;
(8) such seed conforms to the minienum limit of germination and genetic, physical
purity, maximum seed health specified under clause (a) of section 6;
(e) the container of such seed bears in the prescribed manner, the mark or
label bearing the correct particulars thereof, specified under clause (6) of

section 6;
(8) the container of such seed, in the case of transgenic varieties, bears a
declaration to this effect; and
(e) he complies with such other requirements as may be prescribed.
State Seed 26. The Committee may, in consultation with the State Government, by notification,
Certification —_ establish a State Seed Certification Agency for the State to carry out the functions entrusted
४२५ to the State Seed Certification Agency by or under this Act.
Accreditation 27, (1) The Committee may, in consultation with the State Government and the State
of Sed Seed Committee, accredit—
Certification
Agencies (a) organizations to carry out certification, on the fulfilment of such criteria, as
may be prescribed, or

(4) individuals or seed producing organisations to carry out self-certification, in
such manner as may be prescribed.

ढ़

as

3s

We

Ms



==

us

(2) The accredited organisations, individuals and seed producing organisations shall
be subject to such inspection and control of the Committee, the concerned State Government
and State Seed Certification Agency, as may be prescribed.

(3) The accreditation may be withdrawn by the Committee, for reasons to be recorded
in writing and after giving to the concemed organisathon or individual, as the case may be, &
reasonable opportunity of being heard,

238, (1) Any person selling, keeping for sale, offering to sell, bartering or otherwise
supplying any seod of any registered kind or variety may, if he desires to have such seed
certified by the State Seed Certification Agency, apply to that Agency for the grant of 8
certificate for the purpose.

(2) Every application under sub-section (/) shall be made in such form, shall contain
such particulars and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.

(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the State Seed Certification
Agency may, after such enquiry as it thinks fit and after satisfying itself that the seed to
which the application relates conforms to the prescribed standards, grant a certificate in
such form and on such conditions as may be prescribed:

Provided that such standards shall not be lower than the minimum limit of germination,
genetic and physical purity specified for that seed under clause (a) of section 6.

29. If the State Seed Certification Agency is satisfied, either on @ reference made to it
in this behalf or otherwise, that—

(a) the certificate granted by it under section 28 has been obtained by
misrepresentation as to an essential fact; or
(8) the holder of the certificate has, without reasonable cause, failed to comply
with the conditions subject to which the certificate has been granted or has contravened
any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder,
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the certificate may be
liable under this Act, the State Seed Certification Agency may, after giving the holder of the
certificate an opportunity of showing cause, revoke the certificate,
30. The Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Committee and by
notification, recognise any seed certification agency established in any foreign country, for
the purposes of this Act.

CHAPTER V
APPEALS

31. (1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Registration Sub-Committee under
section 14, section 16 of section 27 or of the State Seed Certification Agency under section
28 of section 29 may, within thirty days from the date oa which the decision is communicated
to him prefer an appeal to such authority (hereinafter referred to as the appellate authority)
35 the Central Government may think fit to constitute;

Provided that the appellate authority may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the
said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause
from filing the appeal in time.

(2) An appeltate authority shall consist of a single person or three persons as the
‘Central Government may think fit, to be appointed by that Government.

(3) The form and manner in which an appeal may be preferred under sub-section (1),

the fee payable for such appeal and the procedure to be followed by the appellate authority
shall be such as may be prescribed,

Grant of
certificate by
the Stave Seed
Certification
Agency.

Revocation of
certificate


| Coetral and
| Susie Seed

Testing

‘ Powers of Seed

_——

(४) Onvreceipt of an appeal preferred under sub-section (1), the appellate authority

“hall, after giving the appellant and the other party an opportunity of being heard, dispose of

the appeal as-expeditiously as possible.
CHAPTER VI
SUED ANALYSIS AMD SEEDS TESTING s

37, (7) “The Central Government may, by notification, establish a Central Seed
‘Testing Laboratory or declare any seed testing laboratory as the Central Seed Testing
Laboratory to carry out the functions entrusted to the Central Seed Testing Laboratory by
or under this Act in the prescribed manner,

(2) Thee State Government may, in consultation with the Committee, and by notification, 1o
estatilish one ormore State Seed Testing Laboratories or declare any seed testing laboratory
In the Government or non-Government sectoras a State Seed Testing Laboratory where
analysis of seedof any kind or variety shall be carried out, under this Act, in the prescribed
manner,

13) Every Seed Testing Laboratory referred to in sub-section (/) shall buve as many =
‘Seed Analysts as the Central Government may consider necessary.

(4) Every Seed Testing Laboratory referred to in sub-section (2) shall have ns manny
Sced Anntysts as the State Government may consider necessary.

33. (1) In case of the Central Seed Laboratory, the Central Government and in other
cases the State Government may, by notification, appoint such persons as the concerned ae
Government thinks fit and having the prescribed qualifications to be Seed Analysts and
define the local limits of their jurisdiction.

(2) Every Central Seed Testing Laboratory established or dectared under sub-section
(J) of section 32 and every State Seed Testing Laboratory established o¢ declared under sub-
section (2) of that section shall have as mary Seed Analysts as the Central Government or as
the State Government, as the case may be, specify.

34, (7) The State Government may, by notification, appoint such persons as it thinks

fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Seed Inspectors and define the areas within
which they shall exercise jurisdiction.

(2) Every Seed Inspector shall be subordinate to such authority as the State Government Zo
may specify in this behalf.
35. (1) The Seed Inspector may—
(a) take samples of any seed of any kind or variety from—
(0 any person selling such seed; or

(४) any person who is in the course of conveying, delivering or preparing Ze
to deliver such seed to a purchaser or a consignec; or

(iti) « purchaser of a consignee after delivery of such seed to him;

(6) send such sample for analysis to the Seed Analyst of the area within which
such sample has been taken;

(c) enter and search, at all reasonable times, with such assistance, if any, as he Yo
considers necessary, any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under
this Act has been or is being committed and order in writing the person in possession
of any sced in respect of which the offence has been or is being committed, not to
dispose of any stock of such seed for a specific period not exceeding thirty days or,
uniless the alleged offence is such that the defect may be removed by the possessor of us
the seed, seize the stock of such seed;



|=

(d) examine any record, register, document or any other material object found in
any place mentioned in clause (2) and seize the same if he has reason to believe that it
may furnish evidence of the commission of an offence punishable under this Act; and

(¢) exercise suctrother powers as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes

5 of this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder.

(2) The power conferred by this section includes the power to break-open any container
in which any seed of any kind or variety may be contained or to break-open the door of'any
premises where any such seed may be kept for sale:

Provided that the power to break-open the door shall be exercised only after the owner

f© or any other person in occupation of the premises, if he is present therein, refuses to. open.
the door on being called upon to do so,

(3) Where the Seed Inspector takes any action under clause (a) of sub-section (1), he
shall, as far as possible, call not less than two independent and respectable persons. to be
Present at the time when such action is taken and take their signatures on 3 memorandum to

1S be prepared in such form and manner as may be prescribed.

Jof 1974 (4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or in relation to the State ‘
of Jammu and Kashmir, the provisions of any corresponding law in force in that State, shall,
$0 far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any
search or seizure made under the authority of warrant issued under section 94 of the said
2© Code, or, as the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of the said law,

CHAPTER VIL
IMPORT AND EXPORT OF SEEDS
36. (1) All import of seeds— Import of

(a) shall be subject to the provisions of the Plant Quarantine (Regulation of
32s Import into India) Order, 2003, or any corresponding order made under section 3 of the
2 of 1914 Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914;

(6) shall conform to minimum limits of germination, genetic and physical purity,
(=

(c) shail be subject to registration as may be granted on the basis of information
3e furnished by the importer on the results of multi-locational trials for such period as
may be prescribed to establish agronomic performance.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, permit to import an unregistered
variety in such quantity and subject to fulfilling such conditions as may be specified in that
notification for research purposes.

3“ 37. The Central Government may, on the advice of the Committee, restrict, by Export of
notification, the export of seeds of any kind or variety if it is deemed that such export may 4
adversely affect the food security of the country, or if it is felt that the reasonable requirements
of the public will not be met, or on such other grounds as may be prescribed.

CHAPTER VIII
4 OFFENCES AND PUNESHOMENT
38. (1) [fany person— Offences and
(०) contravenes any provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder; or

(6) imports, sells, stocks or exhibits for sale or barter or otherwise supplies any
seed of any kind or variety deemed to be misbranded; or


| =

() imports, sells, stocks or exhibits for sale of barter, or otherwise supplies any
seed of any kind or variety without a certificate of registration; or

(०) obstructs the Committee, Registration Sub-Committee or Seed Certification
Agency of Seed Inspector or Seed Analyst or any other authority appointed or duly
empowered under this Act in the exercise of its powers or discharge of their duties 5
under this Act or the rules made thereunder,

he shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five thousand
rupees but which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees.

(2) If any person sells any seed which does not conform to the standards of physical

) purity, germination or health or does not maintain any records required to be maintained 0
under this Act of the rules made thereunder he shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine

Mies | which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty-five

| thousand rupees,

| (3) U any person furnishes any false information relating to the standards of genetic

|| purity, misbeands any seed or supply any spurious seed or spurious transgenic variety or /57
| sells any non-registered seeds he shall, on conviction be punishable with imprisonment for

| aterm which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand-rupees
|

I

| or with both.
] Forfeiture of 39, When any person has been convicted under this Act for the contravention of any

propesty, of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, the seed in respect of which the 20
\| contravention has been committed shall be forfeited to the Central Government.

14 Offences by 40. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
| ५७62 person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to

f the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shalt
| be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 25
punished accordingly:

| § Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person

| liable to any punishment under this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without

| his knowledge and that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under
| this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable 35
कि to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Explanation —For the purpose of this section

| (9) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other

association of individuals; and
(0) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partnet in the firm. प्र
CHAPTER IX
pete

Power of 41. The Central Government may give such directions to any State Government as
Contral may appear to the Central Government to be necessary for carrying into execution in the
oe State any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder. ue
directions to
the State



|=
inh directions on questions of policy asthe Cental writing 10 45 issue

from time to time. Sections e
5 (The decison ofthe Cel Government wheter aqumstion nt of PONY SE Commits
shall be final,

sa. 7) Nesting in ti Ac sal eit tego te fa 10 v8 aa Exemption
ee i ied patna, ep tt sl oO
sce 9 rd ae wh dom tcl हम
fie] ping ma arn ry psd dr cn te) जे

MisceLLANEOUS .

au. No sit rosecetion o other legal proceeding sal ie agin he 00१08 3०. Protection of
oy acTg whch ood ath dove ned 0b Gene ue 8 A action taken

७ good faith
|= Power 10.
2e one ee err, pubes in the ical Gasset sce PO 2 remove
Government ma) ovo of hi Act as may appar ob aces लि removing ४० itSiculties.
difficulty:
provided that wo order shail be made under his section afr the expiry गए YEAS
from the date of commencement of this Act.
25 cayevery oxder made under wissen babe ai before cach Howse of PINS

ae: (0) पर Central Goveronnt may, by netBetion, make rae ४० cay out 0० Power of
provisions of this Act. Central
Government
(2) in parc, nd without rjc to the generality fhe oxeping POW ASR to moke
rules day provide for all 0 any ofthe following maters, namely — wn.
3° (athe rerms ad conditions of ppoinment of menbers ofthe Commies ४0%
sub-section (7) of section 4;
(hy the maners ta be prescribed under clause () of section 5;
(ete mer of ter members who sales the Chseperon of Aerio?
5-८ न गाय to discharges functions under sub-section (1) of section 7
as (a the maaer of srtnizng the claims ws made ॥ th eopcaons une
clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 7;
(सं the maneer of seking information bya State Seed Commies unde lute
(d) of section 11;
(se specifications which shal be mami nthe National Reiser o S58
4o of kinds or varieties under sub-section (/) of section 12;
(g) the manner of registr ation of seed of any kind or variety under sub-section
(i) of section 13;
athe prod which required to establish performance of seat 00 th resus of
करण Ipetion wals conducted under sub-section (2) of section 13;


eae
fee which should accompany, such application under sub-section (1) of section 14;

(1 the eligibility requirement which an organisation shall fulfil for accreditation
under section 19;

(६ the specification required to be fulfilled for registration as a producer or seed 5.
producing unit under sub-section (3) of section 21;

(0) the form and manner in which an application for registration under sub-
section (3) of section\21 shall be made and the fee which shall accompany such
application under sub-section (4) of the said section;

(m) the form in which a certificate for maintaining a seed producing or seed fo
processing unit may be granted under sub-section (5) of section 21;

(n) the form in which and the time within which periodic returns shall be filled
under sub-section (6) of section 21;

(०) the information which an applicant for dealership in seeds shall be furnished
under sub-section (2) of section 22; a
(p) the form and manner in which an application for registration as setd dealer
under sub-section (/) of section 22 shall be made and the fee which shall accompany

such application under sub-section (3) of that section;

(q) the form in which a certificate of registration as a dealer in seeds shall, be
granted under sub-section (4) of section 22; 2°
(r) the information and return which a registered dealer shall furnish to the State

Government under sub-section (5) of section 22;

(5) the form in which an application for registration of a horticulture nursery shall
be made, the particulars which such application shall contain and fee which shall
accompany such application under sub-section (2) of section 23, as”

(0) the information on production, stocks, sales and prices of planting material in
a nursery which shall be furnished to the State Government under section 24;

(w) the manner in which the container of seeds shall bear the mark or label under
clause (c) of section 25;

(०) the requirement which a person carrying on business of selling, etc., of any 3e
registered kind of variety of seeds shall comply with under clause (९) of section 25,

(w) the criteria to be fulfilled under clause (a) and the manner of carrying out self-
certification under clause () of sub-section (/) of section 27;

(z) the inspection and control which the Committee, the concerned State
Government and the State Seeds Certification Agency shall carry out or have on an ता
accredited individual and seed producing organizations under sub-section (2) of
section 27;

0) the form of application and the particulars to be furnished in such application
and the fee which shall accompany such application under sub-section (2) of section ye
28;

fa
granted under sub-section (3) of section 28;

(2a) the form and manner in which an appeal shall be preferred and the fee which
such appeal shall accompany and the procedure which the appellate authority shall
follow under sub-section (3) of section 31; =

(2b) the manner in which a Central Seed Testing Laboratory established or declared
under sub-section (1) of section 32 shall carry out its fisnctions;



17

(ze) the manner of carrying out analysis of seeds under sub-section (2) of
section 32;

(2d) the qualifications which a person to be appointed as Seed Analyst shall
possess under sub-section (/) of section 33;

= (ze) the qualifications which a person to be appointed as Seed Inspector shall

possess under sub-section (/) of section 34;

in the form and manner in which the memorandum shall be prepared under sub-
section (3) of section 35;

(2g) the grounds on which the Central Government may restrict export of seeds
fe under section 37;

(zh) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.

47.(1) The Committee may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by
notification, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for

(87 the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.

(2) Jn particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(०) the procedure for conduct of business to be transacted by the Committee or
any Sub-Committee thereof under section है;

all (6) the procedure in regard to transaction of business at meetings of the Committee
(including the quorum at meetings) under sub-section (/) of section 10:

(०) any other matter in respect of which regulations are to be or may be made.

48, Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may
be after it is made, before each Housc of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
2S" thirty days which may be comprised in one session Gr in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation
=
shall, thereafter, have effect only im such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
ge $0, however, that any such modification or anaulment shail be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
34 of 1966. 49. (1) The Seeds Act, 1966 is hereby repealed.

10 of 1897. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the General Clauses, 1897, with
respect to repeals, no such repeal shall affect—
Ss (a) the previous operation of the law so repealed or anything duly done or
suffered thereunder; or
(0) any right, privitege, obtigation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under
the law so repealed; or
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence
ue committed against the Act so repealed; or
(d) any investigation, proceeding, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any
such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid:
and any such investigation, proceedings, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted,
continued or enforced; any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as
"S” if this Act had not been passed:
Provided further thut, subject to the first proviso and any saving provisions made
elsewhere in this Act anything done, any action taken, any rule made, any notification or

Power of
Commiticr
to make

Fegutatvons

Rules and
fegulations to
be laid before
Parkamest,

Repeal and
savings.


BE 1 _ «हा या * el

| order issued under the provisions of the Act so repealed shall, in so far as they are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done, taken, made or

| issued under the corresponding provisions of this Act, and shall continue to be in force

| accordingly, unless and until expressly or impliedly repealed by anything done, action taken,

i) rules made of, notification or order issued under this Act. s

| | (2) Notwithstanding such repeal any kind or variety of seeds that has been notified
under the law as so repealed shall be deemed to have been registered under this Act, and any
seed certification agency established under section 18 of the Seeds Act, 1966 shall be deemed 54 of 1966
to have been established or recognised, as the case may be, under this Act.


THE SCHEDULE
[See section 4(4)(), (#}and (i)
Groorarnicat, ZONES

Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Lakshadweep, Pondicherry and
Tamil Nadu.

Andaman Nicobar Islands, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Fharkhand, Madhya
Pradesh, Orissa and West Bengal.

‘Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Sikkim and Tripura.

Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Goa, Gujarat, Rajasthan amd
Maharashtra.

Chandigarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, National
Capital Territory of Delhi, Punjab, Uttaranchal and Uttar Pradesh.



= REASONS

In the interest of increased agricultural production in India, मैं was considered neces-
sary to regulate the quality of certain seeds such as seeds for food crops, cotton seeds and
“Jute seeds” to be sold for the purpose of agriculture including horticulture. Tt was, there-
fore, considered necessary to have a legislation for regulating the quality of certain seeds
and accordingly the Seeds Act, 1966 was enacted. However, during the working of the sabd
‘Act for more than four decades, the following deficiencies have been noticed: —

(०) the Act regulates only notified kinds and varieties of seeds and does not
provide for regulation of research hybrid varieties or varieties which are “not
notified’;

(8) registration of seeds is not compulsory under the Act;

(०) green manure seeds, commercial crops, plantation crops and the like are not
covered under the Act,

(a) the Act does not contain provisions fo slf-certifiation or accreditation of
private seed testing laboratories or for regulation of transgenic materials;

(2) the provisions for exempting the sale of seed for purposes other than for
sowing or planting are ambiguous;

(f) the penalties for contravention of the provisions of the Act are very mild and
inadequate for any deterrent effect.

2 Further, it has been noticed that far-reaching changes have taken place in the field
of agriculture since the enactment of the Seeds Act, 1966, ‘The plateauing of agricultural
during the last decade has necessitated new strategies to ensure food security
‘Availability of good quality seeds to the Indian farmers is a key factor in order to attain the
objective of ‘doubling food production in ten years’. Aquantum increase in production can
be effected only by enhancing Seed Replacement Rates of various crops or, in other words,
by increasing the use of quality seeds in comparison with farmers’ saved seeds. A sustained
increas¢ in agricultural production and productivity has become dependent on the develop-
ment of new and improved varieties of crops. ‘This will require a vastly expanded role for the
private seed industry as well. The creation of a facilitative climate for growth of the seed
industry, boosting of exports and encouragement of imports of useful germplasm lies at the
core of the agriculture strategy in the new millennium.

3 Also, Biotechnology is likely to be a vital element in agricultural development in the
coming decades. ‘Aconducive atmosphere for enhanced investment in research and devel-
optnent for application of frontier sciences in the development of varieties has been sought
to be created through the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Act, 2001. How-
ever, the Seed legislation has to address the issue of promoting sale of newly developed
materials while ensuring that the interest of the farmers and the sustainability of Indian
agriculture are not jeopardized.

4 It has become necessary that the existing provisions contained In the Seeds Act,
1966 and the Seed (Control) Order, 1983 made under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955
should be substantially revised to address the issues outlined above. The need for wide-
ranging changes has also been supported by the National Agriculture Policy, which inter
alia states “Development, production and distribution of improved varieties of seed and
planting materials and strengthening and expansion of seed and plant certification system
with private sector participation will receive a high priority.”



21

5. In view of the above, it is proposed to replace the Seeds Act, 1966 by a new

legislation. The proposed legislation inter alia provides for the following, namely>—

‘a August, 2004.

() regulation of seeds and planting material of all agricultural, horticultural and
plantation, crops so as to ensure availability of true to type seeds to Indian farmers;

(# provisions for constitution of a separate Registration Sub-Committee of the
‘Central Seed Committee to book after the various registration aspects and maintenance
of a National Register of Seeds of kinds and varieties;

(iii) check on the sale of spurious and poor quality seed and provisions for
compensation to farmers;

(iv) provision of registration of seed producers, seed producing units, seed
dealers and horticulture nurseries;

(रो regulation of sale of seeds and increasing the availability of quality seed for
sowing;

(शी increase in the seed replacement rate resulting in higher productivity,

(vif) simplification of procedures and placing a more efficient regulatory mecha- .

(viif) increasing private participation in seed production, distribution, certifica-
tion and seed testing,

(0) regulation of import and sale of transgenic seed and planting material;

(x) liberalised import of seed and planting materials compatible with World Trade
Organisation (WTO) commitments;

(x/ provision for right of farmers for exemption from registration in certain cases.
6. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill,
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Dewi ; SHARAD PAWAR.



Notes on clauses

Clause 1.-This clause gives the short title of the Bill, the area of its operation and its
applicability, The proposed legistation shall not be applicable to a producer in respect of
seeds produced by him for his own use and not for sale, As adequate steps have to be taken
for administering the provisions of the proposed legislation, provision has been made that
different dates may be appointed for bringing different provisions of the proposed Iegisla-
tion into force.

Clawse 2 —This clause contains definitions of certain expressions used in the Bill. The
Gefinitions of “agriculture”, “Committee”, “farmer”, “horticulture nursery", “misbranded”,
“producer”, “registered kind or variety", “seed”, “spurious seed”, “transgenic variety” and
“variety” are some of them. The word “agriculture” includes horticulture, forestry, cultiva-
tion of plantation, medicinal and aromatic plants. The word “seed” is defined to mean any
type of living embryo or propagule capable of regeneration and giving rise to a plant of
agriculture, which is true to such type. *Kind” means one or more related species or sub-
species of crop plants each individually or collectively known by one common name such as
cabbage, maize, paddy and wheat.“Seed processing™ means the process by which seeds and
planting materials are dried, threshed, shelled, ginned or delinted (in cotton), cleaned, graded
of treated. “Variety” means a plant grouping except micro-organism within a single botanical
taxon of the lowest known rank, which can be defined by the expression of the characteris-
tics resulting from a given genotype of that plant grouping or distinguished from any other
plant grouping by expression of at least one of the said characteristics or considered as a
unit with regard to its suitability for being propagated, which remains unchanged after such
Propagation and includes propagating material of such variety, extant variety, transgenic
variety, farmers’ variety and essentially derived variety. Some of these definitions are the
same as given in the Seeds Act, 1966.

Clause 3.—This clause provides for the constitution of a Committee to be called the
‘Central Seed Committee with its headquarters at New Delhi,

Clause 4.—This clause lays down the composition of the Central Seed Committee, 1.6...
8 Chairperson, members, ex officio, and other members to be nominated by the Central
Government. The nominated members include representatives from farmers, seed industry
and specinbists or experts in the field of seed development. It also provides for the terms and
conditions of appointment of members to be laid down by rules, It also makes provisions for
removal of the members other than the ex afficio members by issuing show cause notice their
Fesignation, etc.

Clause $,-This clause lays down the powers and functions of the Central Seed Com-
mittee (hereafter referred to as the Committee). The Committee shall be responsible for and
shall have all the powers for the effective implementation of the proposed legislation. These
functions, inter alia, include advising the Central Government and the State Governments
on matters relating to seed programming and planning, seed development und production
and seed registration and its enforcement, It also empowers the Committee to make regula-
tions for regulating its procedure and the procedure of its Sub-Committees,

Clause 6—This clause provides the provision to specify minimum limits of germina-
tion, purity and maximum percentage of seed health, etc., and the requirements of marking or
labelling of seeds on its containers.

ihe 7.-This clause contains the provisions for constitution of a Registration Sub-

Committee and other Sub-Committees and their functions. The Registration Sub-Committee
to be constituted by the Central Government shall consist of a Chairman and such number of
other members of the Committee as may be determined by the Central Government by rules.
It shall be the duty of the Registration Sub-Committee to register seeds of varieties after
scrutinizing the claim made by the applicant.

2



23

Clause $.—This clause empowers the Committee to make regulations, with the previ-
‘ous approval of the Central Government, for regulating its own procedure and the procedure
of its Sub-Committees.

Clause 9—This clause stipulates that the Central Government shall appoint a Secre-
tary of the Committee and provide it with technical and other officers and employees of the
‘Committee for the efficient performance of its functions under the proposed legislation.

Clause 10.~This clause provides for the conduct of the meeting of the Committee for
transaction of its business. It also empowers the Committee to lay down detailed procedure
of transaction of its business at meetings by regulations. हे

Clause 11.—This clause provides for the establishment of a State Seed Sub-Committee
in every State by the concerned State Government, The State Seed Committee has, inter
alia, to advise the State Government on registration of regional or local seeds of any kind or
variety and to maintain a district-wise list of seed dealers, seed producers, seed processing
units and horticulture nurseries.

Clause 12-This clause provides for the maintenance of a register of all kinds and
varieties of seeds to be called the National Register of Seeds by tht Registration Sub-
Committee, The specifications required to be incorporated in the register shall be laid down
inthe rules. The Registration Sub-Committee shall be required to publish a list of registered
kinds and varieties of seeds at certain intervals as decided by it.

Clause 13.—This clause makes compulsory registration of all varieties as a pre-requi-
site for their sale in the market, Registration of the variety is based on the information as may
be furnished by the producer to establish its performance on the basis of the results of multi-
locational trials, Registration Sub-Committee may grant provisional registration as well 2s
regular registration for specific periods depending upon the durability of the variety. The
registration shall be valid for a period of fifteen years in case of annuals and biennial crops
and eighteen years in case of long duration perennials.

Clause 14.-This clause lays down the procedure for registration of a variety. The form
of application, the particulars to be furnished in such application and the fee payable shall be
laid down by the Central Government in the rules. The Registration Sub-Committee will give
due regard to the efficacy of the seeds, its safety to human beings and animals while laying
down the conditions subject to which the certificate of registration is granted.

Clause 15.—This clause makes special provisions for registration of transgenic variet-
ies which involves environmental problems. Submission of environmental clearance under
the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 or the rules made thereunder shall be a pre-requisite
for registration of transgenic varieties. The procedure for registration in all other respects
== 14.

Clause 16.—This clause lays down the grounds on which a registration granted under
section 13 or section 15 could be cancelled. These grounds inter alia include violation of the
terms and conditions of grant of certificate by the cértificate holder, misrepresentation or
concealment of material facts by the applicant, non-performance of the seed, prevention of
commercial exploitation of the variety, etc. It is also provided that no such cancellation of
registration shafl be made unless the certificate holder is given a reasonable opportunity of
showing cause in respect of the grounds for the proposed cancellation.

Clause 17,~This clause stipulates that the Registration Sub-Committee should notify
in the Official Gazette, of every cancellation of registration of seeds of any kind or variety
made by it.

Clause 18.-This clause states the grounds on which registration in respect of
certain kinds or varicties of seeds should not be made, These grounds include prevention of
commercial exploitation of the kind 01 variety of seed, if necessary to protect the public order,



4

public morality, human or animal or plant life and health or the avoidance of serious prejudice
to the environment or that the seed contains a technology which would be harmful or
potentially harmful. ॥ is clarified that “technology” includes genetic use restriction technol-
ogy and terminator technology.

Clause 19.-This clause provides for accreditation of certain agencies including the
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, State Agricultural Universities and such other
organisations fulfilling the eligibility requirements as may be specifbed by the Central Gov:
ernment, by rules, for conducting trials to evaluate the performance of any kind or variety of
seeds.

Clause 20.—This clause seeks to provide adequate safeguard to provide compensa-
tion to the farmers in case any registered seed fails to provide the expected performance
under given conditions, The compensation may be claimed from the producer, dealer,
distributor or vendor as per the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986,

Clause 21.-This clause deals with the requirement and procedure for registration of
seed producers and seed processing units with the State Government. However, the specifi-
cations in respect of infrastructure, equipment, qualified manpower, form of application, fee
payable for registration, etc. will be laid down by rules by the Central Government.

Clause 22~This clause provides for compulsory registration of seed dedlers who
carry on the business of selling, keeping for sale, offering the sell, bartering or importing or
exporting seeds and also for requiring them to furnish information about the seed stock,
sales and other related information. It further provides for giving an opportunity of being
heard to the seed dealer in respect of suspension or cancellation of his registration.

Clause 23 —This clause provides that mo person shall conduct or carry on business of
horticulture nursery for any of the purposes of the proposed legislation unbess such nursery
is registered with the State Government. However, the form of application for registration, the
fee payable for sucti registration, etc,, will be laid down by rules made by the Central Govern-
ment.

Clause 24.—This clause sets out the duties of the registration holders of horticulture
nursery. The registration holder of every nursery is required to keep a complete record of the
origin or source of every planting material and performance record of mather trees in the
nursery, a layout plan showing the position of the root-stocks and scions used in raising the
horticulture plants, a performance record of the mother trees in the nursery, the nursery
plants and parent trees used for the production or propagation of horticulture plants free
from infectious or contagious insects, pests or diseases affecting plants and also to furnish
such information to the State Government on the production, stocks, sales and prices of
planting material in the nursery as may be specified by the Central Government by rules.

Clause 25.-This clause prohibits the selling, bartering, importing, exporting, etc,, of
seeds which do not conform to certain specifications including conforming to the minimum
limit of germination, genetic purity or physical purity or maximum seed health. It also pro-
vides that no seed should be sold without a label or mark on its container as specified by
rules and complies with the other requirements prescribed by rules, The transgenic seed to
be sold in the market should also bear a declaration about its nature,

Clause 26.-This clause provides for the establishment of a State Seed Certification
Agency for every State by the Commitice in consultation with the concerned State Govern:
है
the proposed legislation.

Clause 27—This clause provides for accreditation of organisations to carry out certi-
fication and the individuals or seed producing oganisations to carry out self-certification of
seeds in the manner as may be laid down by the Central Government by rules. It also
empowers the Committee to withdraw the accreditation or self-certification facility for rea~
sons to be recorded in writing.



25

Clause 28.—This clause deals with grant of certificate of seed by the Seed Certification
‘Agency to any person selling, keeping for sale, offering to sell, bartering ot otherwise
supplying such seed. It also provides for the procedure for such certification as per the rules
as may be made by the Central Government.

Clause 29.—This clause deals with revocation of certificate granted by the State Seed
Certification Agency on the grounds of misrepresentation of essential fact, ete, However,
before such revocation the certificate holder shall be given an opportunity to show cause

Clause 30.—This clause provides for the recognition, for the purpose of the proposed
legislation, of any Seed Certification Agency established in any foreign country. Such
recognition will be granted by the Central Government on the recommendation of the Com-
mittee.

Clause 31.—This clause empowers the Central Government to constitute an appellate
authority for the purpose of hearing and disposing of appeals of any person aggrieved by
the decision of the Registration Sub-Committee, under section 14, section 16 of section 27 of
the proposed legislation or of the State Seed Certification Agency under section 28 or
section 29 thereof. These matters include cancellation of the registration of seeds of any kind
or variety, accreditation of Seed Certification Agency, revocation of certificate, etc. The
appellate authority is to be constituted with a single person 06 three persons by the Central
Government as it thinks fit. This clause further lays down that the period of limitation of
filing appeals shall be thirty days from the date of communication of the decision against
which such appeal is sought for, The procedure for preferring appeal shall be laid down by
the Central Government by rules.

Clause 32-11 clause provides for the establishment of a Central Seed Testing
Laboratory or declaring any seed-testing laboratory as the Central Seed Testing Laboratory.
All such laboratories are required to have as many Seed Analysts as the Central Government
may specify. It also provides for the establishment of one or more State Seed Testing Labo-
ratories by the State Government or recognizing any Government or non-Government labo-
ratory as a State Seed Testing Laboratory. Every Seed Testing Laboratory of the State
Government or recognised by the State Government as a State Seed Testing Laboratory is
Fequired to have as many Seed Analysts as the State Government may consider necessary.

Clause 33.-This clause deals with the appointment of Seed Analysts having pre-
scribed qualifications. In case of the Central Seed Testing Laboratory, the Central Govern-
ment and in other cases the State Governments shall appoint the Seed Analysts,

Clause 34.- This clause deals with the appointment of Seed Inspectors by the State
Government. The qualifications and the area of jurisdiction of Seed Inspectors shall, how-
=

Clause 35.-Under this clause, the powers of the Seed Inspector have been defined,
The places where samples may be taken, how to issue a stop sale order for a period of thirty
days and how to seize the stock, ledger, etc., have also been specified. The provisions of
search and seizure under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in relation to the State of
Jammu and Kashmir, the provisions of any corresponding law in force in that State, shall, so
far as may be, apply to.any search and seizure under this clause.

Clasise 36.—This clause stipulates that the import of seeds would be subject to such
seeds possessing of minimum standards of germination, genetic and physical purity and
seed health as required under the proposed legislation read with the Plant Quarantine
(Regulation of Import into India) Order, 2003 or any corresponding order made under section
3 of the Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914. The imported seed should also be regis-
tered with the multi-locational trials data. However, import of unregistered seeds may be
permitted for research purposes in such quantity and subject to such conditions as may be
notified by the Central Government.



26

Clause 37,-This clause provides for regulation of export of seeds by the Central
Government on the advise of the Committee. Ifthe Central Government considers that the
export of seeds of any kind or variety would adversely affect the food security of the country
or if it foels that the reasonable requirements of the public will not be met or on such other
grounds as may be laid down by rules, the Central Government may restrict export of seeds.

Clause 38.—This clause lays down certain offences under the proposed legislation and
the penalty for such offences. The penalty for contravention of the provisions of the pro-
posed legislation and the rules made thereunder would be fine which shall not be less than
five thousand rupees and which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupecs. ‘Sub-clause (2)
of this clause lays down that if any person sells any seed which does not conform to the
standards of physical purity, germination or health or does not maintain any records required
to be maintained under the proposed legistation or the rules made thereunder he shall, on
conviction, be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but
which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees. Sub-clause (3) provides that if any per-
son furnishes any false information relating to the standards of genetic purity, misbrands
any seed of supply any spurious seed or spurious transgenic variety, sells any pon-regis-
tered seeds he shall, on conviction be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or with both.

Clause 39.~This clause provides that if any person has been convicted under the
proposed legislation for contravention of any of the provisions of it, the seed in respect
of which the contravention has been committed shall be forfeited to the Central
Government.

Clause 40.-This clause contains provisions for offences by companies. It secks to
provide that where a person committing offence is a company, every person responsible in
the company for the conduct of its business will be liable and where # person accused,
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge be will not be liable. However,
where it is proved that an offence has been committed with the consent or connivance or is
attributable to the neglect of any Director, Manager, Secretary or any other officer of the
company, he shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence,

Clause 41.—This clause sets out the powers of the Central Government to give direc~
tions to State Governments for carrying into execution of the provisions of the proposed
legistation. ion.

Clause 42.-Under this clause certain powers are sought to be given to the Central
Government to issue directions to the Committee while discharging its function and duties
under the proposed legislation. It further states that the decision of the Central Government,
whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final.

Clause 43,—This clause clarifies that nothing contained in the proposed legislation will
restrict the right of a farmer to save, use, exchange, share, or sell his farm seeds and planting
material. However, this exemption shall not be applicable in case of sale of seeds under a
brand name or in case of seeds which do not conform to the minimum limit of germination,
physical purity or genetic purity as may be prescribed by the Central Government. This
clause also empowers the Central Government to exempt from the requirements of the pro-
posed legislation or the rules made thereunder any educational, scientific or research or
extension organisation by notification and subject to such conditions as may be specified in
that notification.

Clause 44.—This clause seeks to provide immunity to persons from suits, prosecution
and other legal proceedings in respect of anything which is done in good faith under the
proposed legislation.

Clawse 45— This clause empowers the Central Government to remove any difficulty
which may rise in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation by order
published in the Official Gazette. Such order shall not be inconsistent with the provisions
of the proposed legislation. This power can be exercised only within two years from the


27

commencement of the proposed legislation. Every such order shall be required to be laid
before each House of Parliament,

Clause 46.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out
the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) enumerstes the various matters in
respect of which such rules may be made, These matters, inter alia, include the terms and
conditions of appointment of members of the Committee, the form of application for registra-
tion of varieties, the particulars which should be furnished in such application and the fee
which shall accompany such application under proposed section 14 of section 15, scrutiniz-
ing applications for registration of the varieties, manner of registration af seeds, specifica-
tions which shall be maintained in the National Register of Seeds, periods for which multi-
locational trials of seeds shall be conducted, eligibility requirements for accreditation of
seed testing institutes, procedure for registration of seed producers, seed processing units,
seed dealers and persons conducting or carrying on the business of horticulture nurseries,
information on production, stocks sales and prices of planting material in a nursery to be
furnished to the State Government and form and manner of filing appeal agrinst the उल्टा,
sions of the Committee.

Clause 47,—This clause empowers the Central Seed Committee to make, with the ap-
proval of Central Government, regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of the pro-
posed legistation and the rules mads thereunder. These include the procedure for conduct of
business to be transacted by the Central Seed Committee and its Sub-Committees and the
procedure at meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) of the Committee,

Clause 48.~This clause provides that every rule made by the Central Government and
every regulation made by the Committee under the proposed legislation shall be taid before
cach House of Parliament.

Clause 49_-This clause deals with repeal and savings. On the commencement of the
proposed legislation, the Seeds Act, 1966 shall stand repealed subject to certain savings
with regard to investigation, proceedings, penalty, forfeiture, punishment, notification of
kind and variety, ete.



z

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette, constitute for the purposes of the proposed legislation a Committee to be
called the Central Seed Committee. Clause 4 of the Bill lays down the composition of the
Committee. The Committee shall be constituted in the Department of Agriculture and Coop-
eration of the Ministry of Agriculture ‘The Secretary to the Government of India in the said
Department shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the Committee, Sub-clause (4) of clause 4
provides for nomination of certain members including two representatives each of farmers
and seed industry and two specialists or experts in the field of seed development,

Clause 9 of the Bill provides for appointment of a Secretary of the Committee and such
technical and other officers and employees of the Committee by the Central Government,
The Committee would be functioning as a part of the Department of Agriculture and Coop-
eration and existing staff of the Department will look after the work relating to the functioning
of the Committee. Hence, no additional recurring or non-recurring expenditure except the
travelling and daily allowance payable to the non-official members for attending the moct-
ings of the Committee is envisaged.

Clause 31 of the Bill provides for filing of appeals against the decisions of the
Registration Sub-Committee and State Seed Certification Agencies before the appellate au-
thority. Sub-Clause (2) of this clause stipalates that an appellate authority shall consist of a
single person or three persons as the Central Government may think fit to be appointed. In
case officials are appointed, no additional expenditure would be incurred. However, when
non-officials or officials on deputation are appointed as appeliate authority both recurring
and non-recurring expenditure will be incurred. The requirement depends upon the number
ofcases. No additional expenditure towards establishment of office of appellate authorities
is envisaged for the financial year 2004-05

Clause 32 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Central Seed Testing Labora-
tory and State Seed Testing Laboratories or declaring any seed-testing laboratory as such
laboratories. Until new laboratories are established, no expenditure on account of implemen-
tation of this provisivn | envisaged for the curtent financial year, 1४. 2004-05.

Clause 33 of the Bill provides for appointment of Seed Analysts for “he Central Seed
Testing Laboratory by the Central Government and in other cases by the Staur Governments,
‘The expenditure for appointment of Seed Analysts for the Central Seed Testing Laboratory
and State Seed Testing Laboratories in the Union territories is to be bome by the Central
Government.

Sub-clause (1) of clause 34 provides that the State Government shall appoint Seed
Inspectors. The State Government in relation to Union territories being the Central Govern-
ment the expenditure for appointment of Seed Inspectors for the Union territories छ to be met
from the Consolidated Fund of India.

The implementation of the aforesaid provisions would involve certain expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of Indin. However, it is not possible to give any specific figure
of expenditure, as it would depend on the specific decision which may be taken on the
manner of implementation.

It is estimated that a sum of rupees thirty-six lakhs approximately may be required
to meet the recurring and non-recurring expenditure towards the abave items during the
financial year 2004-05. The Bill will not involve any other expenditure of a recurring oF non-
recurring nature from of the Consolidated Fund of India.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Sub-clause (1) of clause 46 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation, Sub-clause (2) of that clause
Foumerates the matters in respect of which such rules may be made under the proposed
legistation. These matters, inter alia, relate to the terms and conditions of appointment of
members of the Central Seed Committee, functions of the Registration Sub-Committee, the
form of application for registration of varieties including transgenic varieties, the particulars
10 be furnished in such application and the foe which shall accompany such application, the
manner of scrutinising of applications for registration of seeds, the eligibility requirements
which an organisation shall fulfil for accreditation for conducting trial to evaluate the perfor-
mance of any kind or variety of seed, the specifications required to be fulfilled for registration
85 a producer or as a seed producing unit, the form and manner in which an application for
registration as a seed producer or a seed processing unit and the fee which shall
such application, the form in which and the time within which periodic returns shall be filed
by seed producers and seed processing units to the Seed Certification Agency, the form and
manner of making application for obtaining 3 registration certificate for dealership in seeds
and the fee which shall accompany such application, the form in which an application for
registration of a horticulture nursery shall be made, the particulars which such applicatiod
Shall contain and the fee which such application shall accompany, the information on
production, stocks, sales and prices of planting material in a nursery to be furnished, the
criteria to be fulfilled and the manner of self-certification of seeds, the form and maniser in
which an appeal shall be preferred against the decisions of the Central Seed Committee or a
State Seed Certifying Agency, the manner of carrying out the functions of the Central Seed
Testing Laboratory, the manner of carrying out analysis of seed by Seed Testing Laborato-
ties, qualifications of Seed Analysts and Seed Inspectors, form and manner of preparation of
memorandum of seed inspections and the grounds on which the Central Government may
restrict export of seeds.

2 Sub-clause (1) of clause 47 empowers the Central Seed Committee to make, by
notification in the Official Gazette and with the previous approval of the Central Government
and not inconsistent with the provisions of the propased legislation and the rules made
thereunder, regulations to provide for matters for which provision is necessary or expedient
for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2)
of that clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such regulations may be made
under the proposed legislation. These matters, inter alia, inchsde the procedure for conduct
of business to be transacted by the Central Seed Committee or any of its Sub-Committees
and the procedure in regard to the transaction of business at meetings of the Commitiee
(including the quorum at such meetings).

ला Clause 48 of the Bill provides that the rules made by the Central Government and
the regulations made by the Committee under the proposed legislation shall be required to be

4 The aforesaid matters in respect of which rules oF regulations may be made relate to
matters of procedure or administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of normal character.



P|

॥ ६५०४७ SABHA

A

BLL

to provide for regulating the quality of seeds for sale, import and export and to facilitate
production and supply of seeds of quality and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

है गा Sharad Pawar, Minister of Agriculture)

MGIPMRND—S248R451)-06 12.2004,