Short title
and com-
mencement.
THE   SPECIAL  FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE  TO  THE  STATE  OF
ANDHRA  PRADESH  BILL,  2012
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh for the
purpose of promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward Classes of the society and for the development,
exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of
Andhra Pradesh Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  There shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may, by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Andhra Pradesh to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes
of the society and for the development, proper utilization and exploitation of the resources in
the State.
3.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law made by the Parliament or for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Andhra
Pradesh.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON
THE 8TH MARCH, 2013
Bill No. LII of 2012
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The State of Andhra Pradesh is socially and economically lagging behind compared to
several other States. The problem of poverty and unemployment is rampant in the State
particularly among the socially and economically weaker sections of the society which need
to be addressed urgently and in a time-bound manner. Measures for proper utilization of
resources, welfare of weaker sections in the region and initializing new developmental schemes
are also required to be undertaken in an expeditious and time-bound manner.
The State of Andhra Pradesh has also been facing the problem of naxalite violence for
a number of years. In view of its economic backwardness, the naxalites have found sympathetic
elements within the population. The fact remains that economic backwardness is the root
cause of the naxalite problem.
It is therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special financial
assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh for its all-round development including the welfare
of weaker sections and for the development and exploitation of its resources. It may also be
kept in mind that the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Class people
need special attention as they are far behind the other segments of the society. Such a step
of providing financial assistance to this State would go a long way in building this nation
more and more strong.
Hence this Bill.
T.  SUBBARAMI  REDDY
2

3
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of money out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh to meet the costs of such schemes
of development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expediture from the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh. As
the sums of money which will be given to the State of Andhra Pradesh as special financial
assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare
schemes to be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of
India are identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which
would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
A non-recurring expediture is also likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

GMGIPMRND—5525RS(S4)—8.3.2013.
RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Andhra Pradesh for the purpose
of promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward Classes of the society and for the development,
exploitation and proper utilization of its resources.
—————
(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, M.P.)