1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of  the People Act, 1951.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 29B of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter
referred to as the Principal Act), the following section shall be substituted namely:—
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LII of  2016
As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON THE 3RD FEBRUARY, 2017
5
Substitution of
new section for
section 29B.
43 of 1951.

2
‘‘29B. (1) Every political party shall be funded only by the Central government in
consultation with the State Governments.
(2) The quantum of funding for each political party shall be decided by the
Central Government in consultation with the State Government as may be prescribed
taking into account the vote share of each party in the last concluded general election
to the Lok Sabha or the concerned State Legislative Assembly as the case may be.
(3) No political party shall be eligible to accept any contribution in any form from
any person or company."
3. Section 29C of the principal Act shall be omitted.
4. Section 77 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
5. In section 126 of the principal Act, the sub-section (1), the following be substituted,
namely:—
"126.(1) No person shall—
(a) convene, hold or attend, join or address any public meeting or procession in
connection with an election; or
(b) propagate any election matter to the public by holding, or by arranging the
holding of, any musical concert or any theatrical performance or any other entertainment
or amusement with a view to attracting the members of the public thereto.
6. After section 126B of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"126C. (1) No person shall publish or broadcast the results of an opinion poll in
any polling area during the period of twenty-four hours ending with the hour fixed for
the conclusion of the poll for any election in the polling area.
(2) No broadcast of opinion polls shall be done without providing the following
information together with the results,—
(a) the name of sponsor of the survey;
(b) the name of the person or the organisation that concluded the survey;
(c) the date on which or the period during which the survey was conducted;
(d) the population from which the sample of respondents was drawn;
(e) the margin error with respect to the data obtained; and
(f) the number of people who participated in the survey.
Explanation—For the purposes of this section, "opinion poll" means a survey of how
electors shall vote at an election or of the preferences of electors towards any candidate,
group of candidates, or political party.
126D. Where an offence under 126C has been committed by a company, every person
who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge the company, shall be deemed to
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or both.
7. After section 127A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
Political party
to be funded
by appropriate
authority.
Omission of
section 29C.
Omission of
section 77.
Amendment
of section 126.
Insertion of
new sections
126C and
126D.
Restrictions
for
publication of
opinion poll.
Offences
Committed by
companies.
Insertion of
new section
127B.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
‘‘127B.  (1) No person shall publish or broadcast any paid news.
(2) Any person who is found guilty of publishing paid news, or receiving payment for
news shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years and
with fine, which may extend upto twenty-five lakh rupees.
(3) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Section unless
there is a complaint made by order of, or under authority from the Election Commission of
India or the Chief Electoral Officer of the State concerned.
(4) All political advertisements in any media shall carry a disclosure in such form and
manner to be notified by the Election Commission of India.
(5) Whoever contravenes the provision of sub-section ( 4) of section 127B shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto six months or fine which may
extend upto five lakh rupees or with both.
Explanation —For the purpose of this section, "Paid news" means news items
sponsored by an individual/group of individuals without any basis of true facts for furthering
their political motives.
8. After section 170 of the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"171. (1) With effect from such date, as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purpose of this Act, an authority, to be known as
the "Election Commission Auditing Authority" consisting of three retired Supreme Court
judges nominated by the Central Government in consultation with the President of India.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the retired Supreme Court judges shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(3) The Authority may appoint such number of officer and staff as it consider necessary
for discharge of its functions under this Act.
(4) The salary, allowances and terms of conditions of service of officers and staff of
authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The authority shall have the powers to audit the actions taken by the Election
Commission as may be prescribed.
(6) The authority shall submit a report on any excesses committed by the Election
Commission of India, to the President of India, as may be prescribed.
(7) The President of India may take action pertaining to excesses committed by Election
Commission of India or receipt of the report from the authority.
(8) The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due appropriation
made by the Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for the functioning of the
authority.
Insertion of
new section
171.
Authority to
audit the
Election
Commission of
India.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Prohibiting and
punishment for
paid news.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The elections in the country form the cornerstone of democracy, conducting of free
and fair elections is pertinent to India's democratic framework. Given the fact, India is the
largest democracy in the world; its electoral system is bounded by its unique set of political
and institutional problems. With the increasing number of electorates and diverse party
structures, a robust nature of Indian democracy can be further enhanced by introducing
certain electoral reforms. With the growing use of excessive money in election campaign,
followed by money and muscle politics, this Bill aims to introduce or insert concepts like
State Funding of Elections. Thus, in order to ensure just and free and fair election, the
present bill seeks to amend section 29B of Representation of the People Act, 1951 (RPA).
Introduction of the concept of state funding envisages to prescribe a fixed budget for
central and assembly elections, respectively All the parties and individual candidates would
be given financial support as per their earlier performance in the elections.
At present under section 126 A of RPA exit polls are banned in India. Followed by
section 126B, which restricts conducting of opinion polls forty eight hours prior to the
election. These restrictions are to enable holding free and fair elections, bereft of any external
influence on the voters. Similar is the case with political advertisements in electronic media.
However, these restrictions are in contradiction with right to free speech and right to know.
Given the growing upsurge in social media, it has become a major platform for more political
advocacy and advertisements, which is currently not regulated under any act. In the light of
more inclusive and participatory approach to democratic framework, the section aims to ban
existing restrictions on opinion polls and political advertisement prior to forty eight hours
before the elections. Conduct and publication of opinion polls should be allowed, to be
followed by a given  code of conduct. The Bill also prohibits publication of paid news.
Under article 324 of the constitution, Chief Election Commissioner can exercise certain
powers, which are not prescribed in the rules and the acts. These powers are enshrined in
the Constitution to ensure free and fair conduct of election across all India In order to curb
futuristic misinterpretation of powers, under article 324 RPA is to be amended to insert
mechanism for accountability and transparency in the execution of power up held by Election
Commission.
The above given amendments and reforms are an attempt to resove the challenges
unique to India's democratic framework. The present, bill is an endeavour to reflect the
concerns and voices political parties and citizens across the country. Largely, the existing
problems are seated into the political and institutional failure within the existing RPA. Thus,
in the light of these above given concerns, the present Bill envisages to strengthen the
transparent and participatory conduct of election in India.
Hence this Bill.
VIVEK GUPTA
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite
funds to every political party.
Clause 8 Provides for the constitution of Election Commission Auditing Authority
and it further provides for the appointment of officers and staff of the Authority.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve recurring expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India  to the tune of rupees five Hundred crore per annum.
However, a non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees one hundred crore is also
likely to be involved.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE REPRESENTATION  OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951
*** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
29B. Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), every political
party may accept any amount of contribution voluntarily offered to it by any person or
company other than a Government company:
Provided that no political party shall be eligible to accept any contribution from any
foreign source defined under clause (e) of section 2 of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation)
Act, 1976.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 29C,—
(a) "company" means a company as defined in section 3;
(b) "Government company" means a company within the meaning of section 617; and
(c) "contribution" has the meaning assigned to it under section 293A of the Companies
Act, 1956 and includes any donation or subscription offered by any person to a political
party; and
(d) "person" has the meaning assigned to it under clause (31) of section 2 of the
Income-tax Act, 1961, but does not include Government company, local authority and every
artificial juridical person wholly or partially funded by the Government.
29C. (1) The treasurer of a political party or any other person authorised by the
political party in this behalf shall, in each financial year, prepare a report in respect of the
following, namely:—
(a) the contribution in excess of twenty thousand rupees received by such
political party from any person in that  financial year;
(b) the contribution in excess of twenty thousand rupees received by such
political party from companies other than Government companies in that financial year.
(2) The report under sub-section (1) shall be in such form as may be prescribed.
(3) The report for a financial year under sub-section (1) shall be submitted by there
treasurer of a political party or any other person authorised by the political party in this
behalf before the due date for furnishing a return of its income of that financial year under
section 139 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, to the Election Commission.
(4) Where the treasurer of any political party or any other person authorised by the
political party in this behalf fails to submit a report under sub-section (3) then, notwithstanding
anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), such political party shall not be
entitled to any tax relief under that Act.
*** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
77. (1) Every candidate at an election shall, either by himself or by his election agent,
keep a separate and correct account of all expenditure in connecton with the election incurred
or authorized by him or by his eletion agent between 2 [the date on which he has been
nominated] and the date of declaration of the result thereof, both dates inclusive.
Explanation 1. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that—
(a) the expenditure incurred by leaders of a political party on account of travel by air or
by any other means of transport for propagating programme of the political party shall not be
deemed to be the expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorised by a
candidate of that political party or his election agent for the purpose of this sub-section.
Political
parties
entitled to
accept
contribution.
49 of 1976.
1 of 1956.
43 of 1961.
Declaration of
donation
received by the
political parties.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
Account of
Election
expenses and
maximum
thereto.
6

7
(b) any expenditure incurred in respect of any arrangements made, facilities provided
or any other act or thing done by any person in the service of the Government and belonging
to any of the classes mentioned in clause (7) of section 123 in the discharge or purported
discharge of his official duty as mentioned in the proviso to that clause shall not be deemed
to be expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorised by a candidate or by
his election agbent for the purpose of this sub-section.
Explanation 2.— For the purpose of clause (a) of Explanation 1, the expression ''leaders
of a political party'', in respect of any election, means,—
(i) where  such political party is a recognised political party, such persons not
exceeding forty in number, and
(ii) where such political party is other than a recognised political party, such
persons not exceeding twenty in number.
whose names have been communicated to the Election Commission and the Chief  Electoral
Officers of the States by the political party to be leaders for the purposes of such
election, within a period of seven days from the date of the notification for such election
published in the Gazettee for India or Official Gazette of the State, as the case may be, under
this Act:
Provided that a political party may, in the case where any of the persons referred to in
clause (i) or, as the case may be, in clause (ii) dies or ceases to be member of such political
party, by further communication to the Election Commission and the Chief Electoral Officers
of the States, substitute new name, during the period ending immediately before forty-eight
hours ending with the hour fixed for the conclusion of the last poll for such election, for the
name of such person died or ceased to be a member, for the purpose of designating the new
leader in his place.
(2) The account shall contain such particulars, as may be prescribed.
(3) The total of the said expenditure shall not exceed such amount as may be prescribed.
*** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
126. (1) No person shall—
(a) convene, hold or attend, join or address any public meeting or procession in
connection with an election; or
(b) display to the public any election matter by means of cinematograph,
television or other similar apparatus; or
(c) propagate any election matter to the public by holding, or by arranging the
holding of, any musical concert or any theatrical performance or any other entertainment
or amusement with a view to attracting the members of the public thereto, in any
polling area during the period of forty-eight hours ending with the fixed for the
conclusion of the poll for any election in the polling area.
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) In this section, the expression ''election matter'' means any matter intended or
calculated to influence or affect the result of an election.
*** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
Prohibition of
public meetings
during period of
forty-eight hours
ending with hour
fixed for
conclusion of
poll.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of  the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4421RS(S3)—03.02.2017.