5
Bill No. LII-F of 2008
THE  REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
   (AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJYA SABHA  ON 25TH NOVEMBER , 2009
LOK SABHA ON  9TH DECEMBER, 2009)
ASSENTED TO
ON 22ND DECEMBER, 2009
ACT NO.41 OF 2009

THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
 BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950  and the Representation of
the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950
2. In section 24 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950,—
(i) in clause ( a), for the words “chief electoral officer”, the words “district
magistrate or additional district magistrate or executive magistrate or district collector
or an officer of equivalent rank” shall be substituted;
Short title and
commence-
ment.
43 of 1950. Amendment of
section 24.
Bill No. LII-F of 2008

2
(ii) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(b) to the chief electoral officer, from any order of the district magistrate
or the additional district magistrate under clause (a).”.
3. In the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, against serial
number 18 relating to the State of Mizoram, in column 7, for the entry “38”, the entry “39”
shall be substituted.
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENTS TO THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951
4. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in sub-section ( 1) of section 8A, for the words “as soon as may be after such order
takes effect”, the words “as soon as may be within a period of three months from the date
such order takes effect” shall be substituted.
5. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause ( a), for the words “a sum of  ten thousand rupees or where the
candidate is a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of  five
thousand rupees”, the words “a sum of  twenty-five thousand rupees or where the
candidate is a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of  twelve
thousand five hundred rupees” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause ( b), for the words “a sum of  five thousand rupees or where the
candidate is a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of  two
thousand five hundred rupees”, the words “a sum of  ten thousand rupees or where
the candidate is a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of  five
thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
6. In section 123 of the principal Act, in clause (7),—
(i) for the words “from any person in the service of the Government”, the words
“from any person whether or not in the service of the Government” shall be
substituted;
(ii) after sub-clause (g), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(h) class of persons in the service of a local authority, university,
government company or  institution or concern or undertaking appointed or
deputed by the Election Commission in connection with the conduct of elections.”.
7. After section 126 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘126A. (1) No person shall conduct any exit poll and publish or publicise by
means of the print or electronic media or disseminate in any other manner, whatsoever,
the result of any exit poll during such period, as may be notified by the Election
Commission in this regard.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Election Commission shall, by a
general order, notify the date and time having due regard to the following, namely:—
 (a)   in case of a general election, the period may commence from the
beginning of the hours fixed for poll on the first day of poll and continue till half
an hour after closing of the poll in all the States and Union territories;
(b) in case of a bye-election or a number of bye-elections held together,
the period may commence from the beginning of the hours fixed for poll on and
from the first day of poll and continue till half  an hour after closing of the poll:
43 of 1950.Amendment of
the Second
Schedule.
43 of 1951.Amendment of
section 8A.
Amendment of
section 34.
Amendment of
section 123.
Insertion of
new sections
126A and
126B.
Restriction on
publication and
dissemination
of result of exit
polls, etc.

3
Provided that in case of a number of bye-elections held together on
different days, the period may commence from the beginning of the hours fixed
for poll on the first day of poll and continue till half an hour after closing of the last poll.
(3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this section shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine or
with both.
Explanation.—  For the purposes of this section,—
(a) ‘‘exit poll’’ means an opinion survey respecting how electors have
voted at an election or respecting how all the electors have performed with
regard to the identification of a political party or candidate in an election;
(b) ‘‘electronic media’’ includes internet, radio and television including
Internet Protocol Television, satellite, terrestrial or cable channels, mobile and
such other media either owned by the Government or private person or by both;
(c) ‘‘print media’’ includes any newspaper, magazine or periodical, poster,
placard, handbill or any other document;
(d) ‘‘dissemination’’ includes publication in any “print media” or
broadcast or display on any electronic media.
126B. (1) Where an offence under sub-section ( 2) of section 126A has been
committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was
in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of, the business of
the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and  punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was
committed without his   knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on
the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.’.
Offences by
companies.

A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the Representation of
the People Act, 1951.
————
(As passed by the Houses of  Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—53LS(S5)—12.01.2010.