AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. LII   of 2025 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MEN BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for Men to 
 safeguard the rights and welfare of men, to inquire into grievances 
 and recommend redressal mechanisms, to review existing laws 
 and policies affecting men, to promote awareness and 
 preventive outreach on issues impacting men’s 
 physical, mental and social well-being, 
 and to ensure institutional support 
 through legal aid, counselling, 
 and research, and for matters 
 connected therewith or 
 incidental thereto. 
   BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth year of the Republic of 
India as  follows: ― 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Men Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires – 
(a) “Commission” means the National Commission for Men 
constituted under section 3; 
(b) “Member” means a Member of the Commission and 
includes the Member-Secretary; 
(c) “men” means a person of any age, who is biologically male 
by birth and has not identified himself otherwise in accordance with 
any law for the time being in force;  
(d) “prescribed” m eans prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; and 
(e) “State Commission” means the State Commission for Men 
that may be constituted by any State Government under section 13. 
 
5 
 
10 
CHAPTER II 
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MEN 
Constitution 
of the 
National 
Commission 
for Men. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Commission to be known as the National 
Commission for Men to exercise the powers conferred on, and to 
perform the functions assigned to it under this Act. 
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable
and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi  and the
Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government,
establish office(s) at such other place(s) in the country, as it may deem
fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The Commission shall consist of the following Members to be
appointed by the Central Government, in such manner as may be
prescribed, namely, ―
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence in
the field of law, public administration, gender studies, sociology, 
psychology, or social work, with at least fifteen years of relevant 
experience and committed to the cause of men and gender 
equality; 
(b) a Vice-Chairperson, possessing qualifications and
experience similar to that of the Chairperson; 
(c) five Members, to be appointed from amongst persons
of ability, integrity and standing, having special knowledge of, 
and professional experience in, one or more of the following 
fields, such as — 
(i) law and justice,
(ii) men’s rights and welfare,
(iii) mental health and counselling,
(iv) family and child welfare, or
(v) human rights and public policy;
      Provided that at least one Member each shall be from amongst 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes 
respectively. 
 
15 
 
20 
25 
 
30 
35 
 
40 
 
45 

3 
   5 
  10 
    Provided further that at least one Member shall be from amongst 
persons below the age of forty years, at the time of such appointment; 
and 
(d) a Member-Secretary, who shall be an officer not below
the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, 
possessing appropriate administrative experience and 
knowledge of the issues pertaining to gender or social justice. 
(5) The Commission may, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, co -opt not more than two persons having special
knowledge or practical experience in any relevant field as  experts o r
c
onsultants, from any relevant field for such period and on such t erms
and conditions, as may be prescribed:
Provided that such experts or consultants shall not be entitled to 
vote at any meeting of the Commission. 
 
15 
20 
25 
 
30 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 
4. (1) The Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson, and every Member of the
Commission shall hold office for a term not exceeding three years from the 
date on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for reappointment 
for a further term not exceeding three years: 
 P rovided that no person shall hold office as Chairperson, Vice -
Chairperson, or Member for more than two consecutive terms. 
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of, the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson, and
Members as well as remuneration payable to experts and consultants co-
opted to the Commission, shall be such as may be prescribed by rules
made under this Act:
 P rovided that until such rules are made in this behalf, they shall 
be entitled to such remuneration and benefits as are admissible to 
persons holding equivalent post in the Central Government. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson, or any Member other than the Member -Secretary,
appointed under clause (d) of sub-section (4) of section 3 may resign from
his office by giving a notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Central 
Government, and such resignation shall take effect from the date on which it
is accepted;
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a person shall be
disqualified for being appointed as, or for continuing as the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson, or a Member, other than the Member-Secretary, appointed
under clause (d) of sub-section (4) of section 3, if such person―
(a) is adjudged an undischarged insolvent;
(b) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence 
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude; 
(c) has engaged, during his term of office, in any pai d
employment or activity outside the duties of his office; 
(d) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, become unfit
to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body; 
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abuse d
t
he position of Chairperson or Member as to render that person’s 
continuance in office detrimental to the public interest; or 
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely t o
af
fect prejudicially his functions as a Member; 
Term of office 
and conditions 
of service of the 
Chairperson and 
Members of the 
Commission. 

4 
(g) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or
(h) i s so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in
force: 
and the Central Gover nment may, by order, remove from office, the 
Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson, or any Member, other than the Member-
Secretary, appointed under clause (d) of sub-section (4) of section 3, in any 
of the above cases. 
         Provided that no person shall be disqualified or removed under this 
sub-section e unless such person has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard. 
        Provided further that a person disqualified or removed under this 
sub-section shall forthwith cease to hold office. 
(5) Any vacancy caused under this section or otherwise shall be filled b y
f
resh appointment within a period of six months from the date on which such
va
cancy occurs.
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
Officers and 
other 
employees of 
the 
Commission. 
5. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with such
officers and other employees to the Commission, as may be necessary for
the efficient performance of its functions under this Act;
(2) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and other
employees, so appointed for the purposes of the Commission shall be
such as may be prescribed.
 
20 
Vacancies, 
etc., not to 
invalidate 
proceedings 
of the 
Commission. 
6. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be
invalidated on the ground merely by reason of, –
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the
Commission; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson
or Member of the Commission; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not
affecting the merits of the case. 
 
25 
 
30 
 
Committees 
of the 
Commission. 
7. (1) The Commission may appoint such Committees as may be necessary for
dealing with such special issues as may be taken up by the Commission from 
time to time. 
(2) The Commission shall have the power to co- opt as members of any
Committee appointed under sub-section (1) such number of persons, who are 
not Members of the Commission, as it may think fit and the persons so co -
opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the Committee and take 
part in its proceedings but shall not have the right to vote. 
(3) The persons so co -opted shall be entitled to receive such allowances
for attending the meetings of the Committee as may be prescribed. 
 
35 
 
40 
 
Procedure to 
be regulated 
by the 
Commission. 
8. (1) The Commission or a Committee thereof shall meet as and when
necessary and shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think
fit.
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure and the procedure of
the Committees thereof.
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the
Member-Secretary or any other office r of the Commission duly authorised
by the Member-Secretary in this behalf.
 
45 

5 
CHAPTER III 
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
 
5 
10 
15 
 
20 
25 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 
9. (1) The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions,
namely—
(a) to investigate and examine all matters relating to ―
(i) violation or deprivation of rights of men and
safeguards provided to them under the Constitution or any 
other law for the time being in force; and 
(ii) misuse or abuse of laws resulting in
harassment, victimisation, or mental distress to men, 
including false or malicious prosecution in family and 
criminal law matters; 
(b) to study and recommend reforms in laws, rules, an d
policies that disproportionately or unjustly affect men, with a view 
to ensuring equitable access to justice; 
(c) to promote awareness and sensitisation regarding the
rights, mental health, and social challenges of men, especially in 
relation to family disputes, workp lace stress, and societal 
expectations; 
(d) to assist men in distress by providing legal aid,
counselling, or rehabilitation services, directly or in 
coordination with legal services authorities, mental health 
professionals, or non-governmental organisations; 
(e) to undertake or sponsor research, studies, and data
collection on issues specifically affecting men, including but not 
limited to male suicide rates, health disparities, unemployment, 
custodial rights, and domestic abuse; 
(f) to review the safeguards provid ed to men under the
Constitution and other laws, and recommend measures for their 
effective implementation; 
(g) to inspect or visit, either independently or in associati on
with other authorities, any jail, shelter home, mental health 
institution, or rehabilit ation centre housing male inmates or 
patients, and to make recommendations for ensuring humane and 
dignified treatment; 
(h) to advise the Central Government on the planning,
formulation, and implementation of social welfare schemes and 
affirmative action poli cies concerning men, boys, and male 
adolescents; 
(i) to coordinate with State Governments, State
Commissions, if constituted in future, and other bodies working for 
men’s welfare, to ensure policy coherence and effective grievance 
redressal; 
(j) to present to the Central Government, annually and at such
other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the 
working of the Commission and the safeguards provided for men 
under the Constitution and other laws including therein 
recommendations for the effective implementation of those 
safeguards and reforms in laws, rules and policies for improving the 
conditions of men by the Central Government or any State 
Government; and 
 
Functions of the 
Commission. 

6 
(k) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed or as
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act or may be 
referred to it by the Central Government; 
(2) T he Central Government shall cause all the reports referred to in clause
(j) of sub-section (1) to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance,
if any of any of such recommendations;
(3) W here any such report or any part thereof relates to any matter with which 
any State Government is concerned, the Commission shall forward a copy of
such report or part to such State Government who shall cause it to be laid
before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the
action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the
State and the reasons for the non -acceptance, if any, of any of such
recommendations.
 
5 
 
10 
15 
Educational 
and 
preventive 
outreach 
functions. 
10. (1) The Commission shall, in consultation with the appropriate authorities
and institutions, develop and promote educational programmes a nd
awareness campaigns aimed at—
(a) fostering gender sensitivity and mutual respect among boys 
and young men in schools, colleges, and Universities; 
(b) promoting the values of healthy masculinity, emotional
intelligence, mental well-being, and non-violence;and 
(c) raising awareness on issues such as lawful conduct i n
relationships, consent, responsibility in family life, and respect for 
diversity. 
(2) For the purpose of sub -section (1), the Commission shall coordi nate
w
ith—
(a) the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE);
(b) the National Council of Educational Research and Training
(NCERT); 
(c) the University Grants Commission (UGC);
(d) State Education Boards; and
(e) such other academic or skill development bodies, as may
be prescribed; 
(3) The Commission may recommend the inclusion of suitable modules,
workshops, or resource materials on men's rights, mental health, legal 
awareness, and gender equality in school and university curricula. 
(4) The Commission shall also facilitate community -level outreach
programmes, youth camps, and media campaigns to sensitise the public o n
i
ssues affecting boys and men, with special focus on rural and underserved
areas.
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
Commission 
to have 
powers of a 
civil court . 
11. The Commission shall, while inquiring into any matter referred to it under
this Act, have the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 while trying a suit and in particular, in respect of the following –
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses or
any person from any part of India and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from a ny
c
ourt or office; 
 
45 
 
50 
 
5 of 1908. 

7 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
12. (1) Nothing anything contained in this Act shall be construed as limiting or
affecting the rights and protections accorded to women under the Constitution
or
 any other law for the time being in force.
(2) The Commission shall not intervene in or pronounce upon any complaint
or matter in which a woman is the complainant, unless—
(a) the competent court of law has, by a final and binding
judgment, declared the complaint to be false, malicious, or an abuse 
of legal process; or 
(b) the competent authority under any law has, after due
inquiry, recorded a finding to that effect. 
(3) In cases involving cross-allegations by both parties, the Commission may
render assistance to the male complainant only to the extent that such 
assistance does not impede or undermine the legal process being pursued by 
the woman complainant. 
(4) The Commission shall ensure that all actions taken in furtherance of its
functions are in conformity with the principles of equality, non -
discrimination, and gender justice.
Safeguard to 
protect the 
rights of 
women. 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
13. (1) Any State Government may, if it deems necessary, by notification in the
Official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the –––––– (name of the
S
tate) Commission for Men, to exercise such powers and carry out such
functions within the State as may be prescribed by the State Government or
as may be assigned to it under any State Act and to perform such other
functions in coordination with the Commission, as may be delegated to it by
the Central Government.
(2) The composition of the State Commission, the qualifications and
experience, term of office, salary and allowances of the Chairperson and
Members of the State Commission as well as the regulation of its procedure
shall be such as may be prescribed by the respective State Government.
(3) The State Commission shall, at such intervals and in such form a nd
m
anner, as may be prescribed, submit periodic reports to the Commission
and to the respective State Government, on matters within its jurisdiction and
the State Government, shall cause such reports to be laid, as soon as may be
after they are received, before both Houses of the State Legislature, where it
consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House,
before that House.
Constitution of 
State 
Commissions 
for Men. 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 
14. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission, by way of
grants such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for
being utilised for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that the Commission may spend such sums as it thinks
fit for performing the functions assigned to it under this Act and suc h
s
ums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants referred
to in sub-section (1).
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the expenditure
towards salaries, allowances, and pensions payable to the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson, Members, officers, and other employees of th e
C
ommission shall be met from a separate head of account under the
Union Budget, as may be specified by the Central Government in this
behalf, and shall  not form part of the grants -in-aid provided by the
Separate 
Grants for 
Salary and 
Functional 
Expenditure 

8 
Central Government for the discharge of the functio ns of the 
Commission under sub-section (1). 
(3) The Commission shall maintain separate accounts for each such grant
received under sub-section (1) and each such expenditure referred to in sub-
section (2) and shall utilize the same only for the purposes for which they
are allocated, subject to audit and oversight as prescribed.
 
5 
Accounts 
and audit. 
15. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and a ny
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the
Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this
Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection
w
ith such audit as the Comptr oller and Auditor -General generally has in
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall
have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connecte d
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of
the Commission;
(
4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together
with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central
Government by the Commission.
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
Annual 
report. 
16. The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for eac h
financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account
of its activities during the previous financial year and forward a copy thereof
to the Central Government.
 
30 
Annual 
report and 
audit report 
to be laid 
before 
Parliament. 
17. The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a
memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, in
so far as they relate to the Central Government, and the reasons for the non-
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations and the audit report to
be laid as soon as may be after the reports are received, before each House of
Parliament.
 
35 
   CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS 
Chairperson, 
Members, 
officers and 
other 
employees of 
the 
Commission 
to be public 
servants. 
18. The Chairperson, the Vice -Chairperson, the Members, officers and other
employees of the Commission shall be deemed to be public servants within
the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita.
 
40 
45 of 2023. 
Central 
Government 
to consult 
Commission. 
19. The Central Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy
matters affecting men.
Power to 
make rules 
and 
regulations. 
20. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent wit h
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for al l
 
45 

9 
 5 
 
10 
matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purposes of 
implementing the provisions of this Act. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made
by 
the Commission under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both the Houses agree
that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule
or
 regulation.
 
15 
 
20 
21. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
P rovided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2
) E
very order under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
 
25
 
 
25 
22. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have over  riding effect on the
provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency.
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 

10 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
     The Constitution of India guarantees equality before the law and equal 
protection of the laws to all persons. While women have historically faced, and 
continue to face, deep -rooted discrimination and violence —which justifies the 
existence of a robust  institutional framework for their protection— recent socio-legal 
trends and empirical data highlight those men  too are increasingly experiencing 
challenges that warrant dedicated institutional attention. 
      Numerous studies, public interest litigations,  and judicial pronouncements 
have drawn attention to the rising instances of false accusations under matrimonial and 
gender-specific laws, including the misuse of Section 85 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 (earlier Section 498A of the Indian Penal Cod e) and provisions under 
domestic violence laws. While the Hon’ble Supreme Court has acknowledged such 
misuse and issued procedural safeguards, there remains no statutory authority to offer 
institutional support to falsely accused men, many of whom suffer from social stigma, 
mental trauma, and unjust incarceration. 
      A petition filed in recent years brought forth compelling data, citing the 2021 
National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) figures: out of 1,64,033 total suicides, 81,063 
were committed by married men, compared to 28,680 by married women. The petition 
also noted that 33 per cent. of male suicides were linked to family-related issues, and 
4.8 per cent. specifically to marital stress. These figures reflect an alarming mental 
health and societal crisis that remains unaddressed in national policy. 
     The petition further highlighted the absence of any mechanism for addressing 
domestic violence against men, despite th e growing number of cases involving 
psychological abuse, physical harm, and marital breakdowns affecting men’s well-
being. The petitioner sought the creation of a National Commission for Men, 
analogous to the National Commission for Women, and requested the formulation of 
guidelines for police stations to accept complaints of domestic abuse from men and 
refer them to the State Human Rights Commissions or other competent forums. It was 
also urged that the Law Commission of India be tasked with studying the l egal and 
psychological effects of marital distress and suicides among men, with a view to 
recommending structural reform. 
     Additionally, the petition urged the National Human Rights Commission 
(NHRC) to accept and act on complaints submitted by men exp eriencing domestic 
violence or family -related stress. Despite the rising demand and genuine public 
concern, the lack of a statutory framework has led to judicial reluctance to intervene, 
with courts consistently noting that the creation of such a body lies  within the 
legislative domain. 
      Various scholars, legal experts, and civil society organisations have 
supported the view that gender justice must be inclusive, and that the presence of 
institutions like the National Commission for Women must not negate or overshadow 
the legitimate needs of men —particularly in the spheres of family law, custody 
disputes, workplace harassment, and mental health. 
      Therefore, it is proposed to establish a National Commission for Men, a 
statutory body entrusted with powers to investigate complaints, recommend legal and 
policy reforms, coordinate with State authorities, conduct awareness campaigns, and 
provide institutional support through legal aid, mental health counselling, and research. 
The Commission shall also maintain full respect for women’s rights and will intervene 
only in matters where a competent court or authority has determined that a complaint 
made by a woman was false, malicious, or an abuse of process. 
       The Bill provides for the constitution of the  Commission, including its 
structure, powers, and functions; grants the Commission quasi-judicial powers akin to 
a civil court; and mandates the creation of State Commissions for Men. It also ensures 
financial transparency, with separate allocations for salary and functional expenditure, 
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General, and annual reporting to Parliament. 
It further provides for preventive and educational outreach, promoting healthy 

11 
masculinity, lawful conduct, emotional resilience, and gende r  equality through 
collaboration with bodies like CBSE, NCERT, UGC, and other stakeholders. 
        This Bill seeks to institutionalise a gender -balanced and constitutionally 
sound framework for the recognition, protection, and empowerment of men and boys  
in India, thereby ensuring justice for all genders without in any way diluting or 
compromising the rights and protections guaranteed to women under law. 
 Hence, this Bill. 
ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL. 

12 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
        Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National 
Commission for Men, which shall consist of a Chairperson, a Vice -Chairperson, five 
Members, and a Member -Secretary. Clause 4  provides for the tenure, salary and 
allowances and other service conditio ns of the Chairperson , Vice -Chairperson and 
Members as  well as the remuneration to experts and consultants appointed to the 
Commission. Clause 5 empowers the Central Government to appoint officers and staff 
necessary for the functioning of the Commission a nd provide for their salaries and 
allowances and other service conditions. Clause 7 provides for allowances to persons co-
opted to the Commission for attending meetings thereof.  Clause 9  lays down the 
functions of the Commission, which inter-alia, include providing legal aid, counselling, 
or rehabilitation services to men in distress directly or in coordination with legal services 
authorities, mental health professionals, or non -governmental organisations  and 
undertaking or sponsor research, studies, and data collection on issues specifically 
affecting men. Clause 14 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate 
funds to the Commission to be utilised for the purposes of the Bill and mandates a separate 
budgetary head under the Union Budget for meeting the expenditure incurred on salaries, 
allowances and pensions of the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson, Members, officers and 
other employees of the Commission.    
        The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure , both of recurring and non -
recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of approximately rupees one hundred crore per annum will be involved.  A 
non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be involved. 

13 
 M EMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION  
        Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules and the 
National Commission for Men to make regulations to carry out the provisions of the 
Act. Clause 21 empowers the Central Government to make such provisions through 
an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the provisions 
of the Bill. 
        As the rules or  regulations or orders  will relate to matters of procedural and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

 RAJYA SABHA 
 ________________ 
  A 
 BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for Men to 
safeguard the rights and welfare of men, to inquire into grievances 
and recommend redressal mechanisms, to review existing laws 
and policies affecting men, to promote awareness and 
preventive outreach on issues impacting men’s 
physical, mental and social well-being, 
and to ensure institutional support 
through legal aid, counselling, 
and research, and for matters 
connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
 _______________ 
 (Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal, M.P.) 
   RS-P&PS―PMB(E)―289―08.12.2025 