 THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act,  1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act,
2013.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 15th day of May, 2013.
 2. In the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), for the long title, the following long title shall be substituted, namely:—
“An Act to provide for the constitution of the Medical Council of India
and for the determination, co-ordination, maintenance and regulation of
standards of medical education, the practice of medicine, maintenance of Indian
Medical Register and to make endeavour in making available doctors in all
States and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”.
3.  In section 3 of the principal Act,—
 (a) in sub-section (1),—
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
long title.
Amendment of
section 3.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. LII of 2013
102 of 1956.
5
10

2
 (i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
 “( aa) one member, to represent the Union territories by
rotation, to be nominated by the Central Government;”;
 (ii) in clause (b), the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:
 “Provided that where there is a Health University in a State,
that University shall elect one representative for every ten medical
colleges affiliated to it to represent such medical colleges:
 Provided further that a Health University with less than ten
medical colleges affiliated to it, shall also be eligible to elect one
representative to represent such medical colleges:
 Provided also that such number of representatives shall be
reviewed by the Central Government after every four years;”;
 (iii) clause (d) shall be omitted;
 (b) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:
 “Provided that no person shall hold office as the President or, as
the case may be, the Vice-President for more than two terms.”.
 4.  After section 3A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“3AA. The Central Government shall, after the commencement of the
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2013, reconstitute the Council, by
notification in the Official Gazette, and publish the names of the members
nominated or elected to the Council under sub-section (1) of section 3 within a
period not exceeding one hundred and eighty days:
 Provided that the Board of Governors constituted under sub-section (4)
of section 3A shall continue to exercise the powers and perform the functions
of the Council till the new Council is reconstituted or for such period not
exceeding one hundred and eighty days, whichever is earlier.”.
5. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
 (a) the words, brackets and letter “or clause (d)” shall be omitted;
 (b) the words, brackets, letter and figures “and any rules so made may
provide that pending the preparation of the Indian Medical Register in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, the members referred to in
clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 3 may be nominated by the Central
Government instead of being elected as provided therein” shall be omitted.
6. In section 7 of the principal Act,—
 (a) in sub-section (1), for the words “five years”, the words “four years”
shall be substituted;
 (b) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(2) Subject to the provisions of the Act, a member, whether
nominated or elected, shall hold office for a term of four years.”;
 (c) in sub-section (6), for the words “five years”, the words “four years”
shall be substituted.
7. After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
 “9A. (1) The Council shall, subject to the provisions of the Act and rules
made thereunder, take measures to determine, coordinate and maintain the
Insertion of new
section 3AA.
Reconstitution of
Council.
Amendment of
section 4.
Amendment of
section 7.
Insertion of new
section 9A.
Functions of
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
standards of medical education and practice in medicine, the Indian Medical
Register and make endeavour in making available doctors in all States.
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the
measures referred to in sub-section (1), may, inter alia, provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:—
 (a) lay down the standards of professional ethics in the practice of
medicine;
 (b) grant or withdraw permission for establishment of medical college
and course of study in medical education and ensure compliance of its
terms and conditions for such permission;
 (c) maintain the Indian Medical Register;
 (d) render advice to the Central Government or the State Government
on matters relating to the medical education and practice in medicine;
 (e) facilitate medical education in the institutions situated outside
the country;
 (f) undertake and recommend to the Central Government or the
State Government such measures as may be necessary to regulate medical
education in or outside the country;
(g) organise seminars, symposiums and workshops in order to
promote continuous medical education and practice in medicine; and
(h) perform such other functions as may be laid down in the rules
made by the Central Government.”.
8. In section 13 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3), for the words “a citizen of India”, the
words “a citizen of India or an overseas citizen of India” shall respectively be
substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 4A), for the words “a citizen of India”, the words “a
citizen of India or an overseas citizen of India” shall be substituted;
(c) sub-section (4B) and the proviso relating thereto shall be omitted;
(d) in sub-section (4C), for the words, brackets, figures and letters “sub-
sections ( 4A) and ( 4B)”, the word, brackets, figure and letter “sub-section
(4A)” shall be substituted;
(e) after sub-section ( 5), the following Explanation shall be inserted,
namely:—
'Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression
“overseas citizen of India” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause
(ee) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Citizenship Act, 1955.'.
 9.  In section 14 of the principal Act, in the proviso to sub-section ( 1), in
clause (b), the words “for the time being for the purposes of teaching, research or
charitable work” shall be omitted.
10.
 In section 21 of the principal Act,—
 (a) in sub-section (1), for the words “the names”, the words “the names
and biometric details” shall be substituted;
 (b) after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
Amendment of
section 13.
Amendment of
section 14.
57 of 1955.
Amendment of
section 21.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
 '(2A) The Council shall, in addition to the Indian Medical Register
referred to in sub-section (1), maintain the Medical Register in electronic
form containing the particulars included in the Indian Medical Register.
 Explanation.— For the purpose of this sub-section, the expression,
“electronic form” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( r) of
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.'.
11.  After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
 “30A. (1) The President, Vice-President or any member of the Council
may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government,
resign from his office:
 Provided that the President, Vice-President or any member of the Council
shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office
sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of a period of three months from
the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his
successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever
is the earliest.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government may remove from office the President, Vice -President, or any member
of the Council, who—
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such
President, Vice-President, or other member; or
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
court; or
(d) has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude; or
(e) has acquired such financial or any other interest in any medical
institution falling within the purview of the Council, which is likely to
affect prejudicially the exercise of his functions as the President, Vice-
President, or a member; or
(f) is unable to perform or has made persistent defaults—
(i) in the performance of the duties imposed on him under
this Act or has exceeded or abused his position; or
(ii) either wilfully or without sufficient cause neglects to
comply with the directions issued by the Central Government under
sections 33A and 33B;
(g) has been guilty of proved misbehaviour or his continuance in
office would be detrimental in public interest.
(3) No person shall be removed from his office on the grounds specified
in clause (e) or clause ( f) or clause ( g) of sub-section ( 2), unless he has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.”.
12. In section 32 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of election of the Council under sub-section ( 1) of
section 4;
Insertion of new
section 30A.
21 of 2000.
Amendment of
section 32.
Resignation,
removal and
suspension of
President,
Vice-President
or members of
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
 (b) such other functions of the Council under clause ( h) of sub-
section (2) of section 9A as may be laid down by the Central Government;
 (c) the conditions and payment of fees for filing of an appeal before
the Central Government under sub-section (2) of section 24;
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, provided by
rules or in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.”.
13. In section 33 of the principal Act, for clause (ma), the following clause shall
be substituted, namely:—
 “( ma ) the modalities for conducting screening test under
sub-section (4A) of section 13;”.
14.  After section 33 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“33A. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the
Council shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be
bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government
may give in writing to it from time to time.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of
policy or not shall be final.
 33B. (1) Where the Central Government considers it expedient so to do,
it may, by order in writing, direct the Council to make any regulations or to
amend or revoke any regulations already made by it, within such period as the
Central Government may specify in this behalf.
 (2) If the Council fails or neglects to comply with such order within the
specified period, the Central Government may make the regulations or amend or
revoke the regulations made by the Council, as the case may be, in such manner
as the Central Government thinks fit.
33C. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, regulation or both Houses
agree that the rule and regulation should not be made, the rule and regulation
shall, thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or
regulation.”.
15. (1) The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 is hereby
repealed.
 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the
principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done
or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this
Act.
Amendment of
section 33.
Insertion of new
sections 33A,
33B and 33C.
Power of
Central
Government to
give directions.
Powers of
Central
Government to
direct
regulations to be
made or to make
or amend
regulations.
Laying of rules
and regulations.
Repeal and
saving.
 Ord. 4 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 was enacted for the purpose of
reconstituting the Medical Council of India (the Council) and to provide for the
maintenance of the Indian Medical Register and for matters connected therewith.
The Act was amended, inter alia, by the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act,
2010 superseding the Council for one year with effect from the 15th May, 2010 and
providing for the constitution of a Board of Governors of not more than seven persons
to exercise the powers and to perform the functions of the Council under the said Act.
Subsequently, the term of the Board of Governors was extended to one year at a time
by amending the Act in 2011 and 2012 and as per the provisions of the Indian Medical
Council (Amendment) Act, 2012 the Council has to be reconstituted within a period of
three years from the date of its supersession, that is latest by the 14th May, 2013.
2. The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 was amended by the Indian Medical
Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 to provide for the reconstitution of  the Council
and review the composition of the said Council so as to give representation to the
Union territories and to remove the anomaly where States having larger number of
medical colleges, but having formed a medical university, were having fewer seats in
the Council as compared to States having fewer colleges affiliated to several
Universities, by inserting a proviso in clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of section 3.
3. The Council's main function as contained in the Indian Medical Council Act,
1956 is to make recommendations to the Central Government on matters relating to
recognition of medical qualifications, determining the courses of study and
examinations required to obtain such qualifications, inspection of examinations and
maintenance of register of medical practitioners, etc. By the amendment of the said
Act in 1993, the power to grant permission for establishment of new Medical Colleges,
increase in admission capacity or for starting new or higher course of study or training
in the established colleges was entrusted to the Central Government from the
respective State Governments.  For this purpose, the Council became a
recommendatory body to the Central Government for taking final decisions in these
matters.  After reviewing the working of the Council in this area and the problems
being faced, a need has been felt to empower the Central Government to give such
directions to the Council wherever necessary on matters of policy and public
importance and to ensure their proper compliance.
 4. As Parliament was not in session and immediate action was required to be
taken to extend the term of the Board of Governors of Medical Council of India
beyond the 14th May, 2013 and to allow the Board to exercise powers till the Council
is reconstituted and make necessary amendments to the Indian Medical Council Act,
1956, the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 was promulgated on
21st May, 2013.
5. The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013, which seeks to replace
the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013, inter alia, provides for
the following, namely:—
(a) to amend long title of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (Act) so as
to make it more comprehensive;
(b) to amend sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Act so as to provide that
no person shall hold the post of President or Vice-President for more than two
terms;
(c)  to amend section 13 of the Act relating to recognition of medical
qualification and provisional registration so as to recognise the medical
6

7
qualifications granted to the citizen of India by medical institutions in India and
to extend the benefit to the overseas citizens of India;
(d)  to amend section 14 of the Act which recognises the medical practice
by the persons having medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in
any country outside India;
(e)  to insert a new section 30A in the Act relating to resignation by the
President, Vice-President and Members of the Council and the power of the
Central Government to remove from the office the President, Vice-President or a
Member; and
(f)  to insert a new section 33A in the Act relating to power of the Central
Government to give directions to the Council  on the matters of policy and for
making any regulation.
6. The proposed amendments will make the composition of the Council compact,
more representative in character, and empower the Central Government to discharge
its functions effectively to ensure proper development of medical education in the
country.
7. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.
N
EW DELHI; GHULAM  NABI  AZAD
The 1st August, 2013.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 3AA, so as to reconstitute the
Medical Council of India within a period of one hundred and eighty days. The proviso
to section 3AA provides that the Board of Governors (BOG) shall continue to exercise
the powers and perform the functions of the Council till the new Council is
reconstituted or for such period not exceeding one hundred and eighty days,
whichever is earlier. The proposed amendment would automatically increase the term
of the office of the Board of Governors (BOG) up to the 10th November, 2013.  The
Chairperson and other members, other than ex-officio members, of the Board of
Governors shall be entitled to such sitting fee and other allowances as may be
determined by the Central Government. It is expected that such expenditure on sitting
fee and travelling and other allowances would be minimal and will be met from the
funds of the Medical Council of India. Further, as expenditure would depend on the
number of meetings of the Board of Governors during the current financial year, i.e.,
2013-14 recurring or non-recurring expenditure cannot be anticipated at this stage.
8

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (2) of clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation on matters
relating to—( a) the manner of election of the Council under sub-section ( 1) of
section 4; (b) such other functions of the Council under clause (h)   of sub-section (2)
of section 9A as may be laid down by the Central Government; (c) the conditions and
payment of fees for filing of an appeal before the Central Government under sub-
section (2) of section 24; ( d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
provided by rules or in respect of which provision is to be made  by rules.
2. The rules to be made under the proposed legislation shall be required to be
laid before the Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure
and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
4. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
9

Memorandum explaining the Modifications contained in the Bill to replace the
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013.
—————
The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Bill, 2013, which seeks to repeal and
replace the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013, proposes to make
the following modifications apart from modifications of consequential or drafting
nature in the provisions contained in the said Ordinance, namely:—
(i) The words “in such manner as may be provided by the rules made by
the Central Government” have been dropped from the proposed proviso to
clause (b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Indian Medical Council Act,
1956.
(ii) A new sub-clause has been inserted after clause 8( b) to omit sub-
section (4B) of section 13 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
10

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL ACT, 1956
(102 OF 1956)
An Act to provide for the reconstitution for the Medical Council of India, and
the maintenance of a Medical Register for India and for matters connected therewith.
* * * * *
3. (1) The Central Government shall cause to be constituted a Council consisting
of the following members, namely:—
* * * * *
(d) Seven members to be elected from amongst themselves by persons
enrolled or any of the State Medical Registers who possess the medical
qualifications included in Part I of the Third Schedule;
* * * * *
4.  (1) An election under clause (b), clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) of
section 3 shall be conducted by the Central Government in accordance with such
rules as may be made by it in this behalf, and any rules so made may provide that
pending the preparation of the Indian Medical Register in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, the members referred to in clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 3 may be nominated by the Central Government instead of being elected as
provided therein.
* * * * *
7.  (1) The President or Vice-President of the Council shall hold office for a term
not exceeding five years and not extending beyond the expiry of his term as member
of the Council.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member shall hold office for a
term of five years from the date of his nomination or election or until his successor
shall have been duly nominated or elected, whichever is longer.
* * * * *
(6) Where the said term of five years is about to expire in respect of any member,
a successor may be nominated or elected at any time within three months before the
said term expires but he shall not assume office until the said term has expired.
* * * * *
13.  (1) *** * *
(2) The medical qualifications granted to a citizen of India—
(a) before the 15th day of August, 1947, by medical institutions in the
territories now forming part of Pakistan, and
(b) before the 1st day of April, 1937, by medical institutions in the territories
now forming part of Burma, which are included in Part I of the Third Schedule
shall also be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act.
(3) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India
before such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify which are included in Part II of the Third Schedule shall also be recognised
medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act, but no person possessing any
such qualification shall be entitled to enrolment or on any State Medical Register
unless he is a citizen of India and has undergone such practical training after obtaining
that qualification as may be required by the rules or regulations in force in the country
granting the qualification, or if he has not undergone any practical training in that
country, he has undergone such practical training as may be prescribed.
*****
Constitution and
Composition of
the Council.
Mode of election.
Recognition of
medical
qualifications
granted by
certain medical
institutions
whose
qualifications are
not included in
the First or
Second Schedule.
Term of office
of President,
Vice-President
and members.
11

12
(4A) A person who is a citizen of India and obtains medical qualification granted
by any medical institution in any country outside India recognised for enrolement as
medical practitioner in that country after such date as may be specified by the Central
Government under sub-section (3), shall not be entitled to be enrolled on any Medical
Register maintained by a State Medical Council or to have his name entered in the
Indian Medical Register unless he qualifies the screening test in India prescribed for
such purpose and such foreign medical qualification after such person qualifies the
said screening test shall be deemed to be the recognised medical qualification for the
purposes of this Act for that person.
(4B) A person who is a citizen of India shall  not, after such date as may be
specified by the Central Government under sub-section (3), be eligible to get admission
to obtain medical qualification granted by any medical institution in any foreign
country without obtaining an eligibility certificate issued to him by the Council and in
case any such person obtains such qualification without obtaining such eligibility
certificate, he shall not be eligible to appear in the screening test referred to in sub-
section (4A):
Provided that an Indian citizen who has acquired the medical qualification from
foreign medical institution or has obtained admission in foreign medical institution
before the commencement of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2001,
shall not be required to obtain eligibility certificate under this sub-section but, if he is
qualified for admission to any medical course for recognised medical qualification in
any medical institution in India, he shall be required to qualify only the screening test
prescribed for enrolement on any State Medical Register or for entering his name in
the Indian Medical Register.
(4C) Nothing contained in sub-sections (4C) and (4B) shall apply to the medical
qualifications referred to in section 14 for the purposes of that section.
*****
14. (1) The Central Government after consultation with the Council may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that medical qualifications granted by medical
institutions in any country outside India in respect of which a scheme of reciprocity
for the recognition of medical qualifications is not in force, shall be recognised medical
qualifications for the purposes of this Act or shall be so only when granted after a
specified date:
Provided that medical practice by persons possessing such qualifications—
* * * * *
(b) shall be limited to the institution to which they are attached for the
time being for the purposes of teaching, research or charitable work; and
* * * * *
21. 
 (1) The Council shall cause to be maintained, in the prescribed manner a
register of medical practitioners to be known as the Indian Medical Register, which
shall contain the names of the all persons who are for the time being enrolled on any
State Medical Register and who possess any of the recognised medical qualifications.
* * * * *
32. (1)  * *** *
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expirty of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
Power to make
rules.
Special
provision in
certain cases for
recognition of
medical
qualifications
granted by
medical
institutions in
countries with
which there is
no scheme of
reciprocity.
The Indian
Medical Register.

13
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
33. The Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government,
make regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this Act, and, without prejudice
to the generality of this power, such regulations may provide for—
* * * * *
(ma) the modalities for conducting screening tests under
sub-section ( 4A), and under the proviso to sub-section ( 4B), and for issuing
eligibility certificate under sub-section (4B)  of section 13;
* * * * *
Power to make
regulations.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
—————
(Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)
GMGIPMRND—2014LS-(S4)—14.08.2013.