Bill No. LIII-F of  2013
THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJYA SABHA ON 19 JULY, 2018
LOK SABHA ON 24 JULY, 2018)
ASSENTED  TO
ON 26 JULY, 2018
ACT NO. 16 OF 2018

1
Short title and
commencement.
THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES  OF PARLIAMENT )
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in section 2,—
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(aa)  ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act and the
expression ‘‘prescribe’’ shall be construed accordingly;’;
(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(d) “undue advantage” means any gratification whatever, other than legal
remuneration.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(a) the word “gratification” is not limited to pecuniary gratifications or to
gratifications estimable in money;
Amendment of
section 2.
49 of 1988.
Bill No.  LIII-F of 2013

2
(b) the expression “legal remuneration” is not restricted to remuneration
paid to a public servant, but includes all remuneration which he is permitted by
the Government or the organisation, which he serves, to receive.’.
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, the trial of an offence shall be held, as far as practicable, on day-to-day basis and
an endeavour shall be made to ensure that the said trial is concluded within a period of
two years:
Provided that where the trial is not concluded within the said period, the special
Judge shall record the reasons for not having done so:
Provided further that the said period may be extended by such further period, for
the reasons to be recorded in writing but not exceeding six months at a time; so,
however, that the said period together with such extended period shall not exceed
ordinarily four years in aggregate.’’.
4. For sections 7, 8, 9 and 10 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘‘7.  Any public servant who,—
(a) obtains or accepts or attempts to obtain from any person, an undue
advantage, with the intention to perform or cause performance of public duty
improperly or dishonestly or to forbear or cause forbearance to perform such
duty either by himself or by another public servant; or
(b) obtains or accepts or attempts to obtain, an undue advantage from any
person  as a reward for the improper or dishonest performance of a public duty or
for forbearing to perform such duty either by himself or another public servant; or
(c) performs or induces another public servant to perform improperly  or
dishonestly a public duty or to forbear performance of such duty in anticipation
of or in consequence of accepting an undue advantage from any person,
shall be punishable, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
three years but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—For the purpose of this section, the obtaining, accepting, or
the attempting to obtain an undue advantage shall itself constitute an offence even if
the performance of a public duty by public servant, is not or has not been improper.
Illustration.—A public servant, ‘S’ asks a person, ‘P’ to give him an amount of
five thousand rupees to process his routine ration card application on time. 'S' is guilty
of an offence under this section.
Explanation 2.—For the purpose of this section,—
(i) the expressions “obtains” or “accepts” or “attempts to obtain” shall
cover cases where a person being a public servant, obtains or “accepts” or
attempts to obtain, any undue advantage for himself or for another person, by
abusing his position as a public servant or by using his personal influence over
another public servant; or by any other corrupt or illegal means;
(ii) it shall be immaterial whether such person being a public servant
obtains or accepts, or attempts to obtain the undue advantage directly or through
a third party.
Amendment
of section 4.
Substitution of
new sections
for sections 7,
8, 9 and 10.
Offence
relating to
public servant
being bribed.
2 of 1974.

3
‘‘7A.  Whoever accepts or obtains or attempts to obtain from another person for
himself or for any other person any undue advantage as a motive or reward to induce a
public servant, by corrupt or illegal means or by exercise of his personal influence to
perform or to cause performance of a public duty improperly or dishonestly or to forbear
or to cause to forbear such public duty by such public servant or by another public
servant, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
three years but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
8. (1) Any person who gives or promises to give an undue advantage to another
person or persons, with intention—
(i) to induce a public servant to perform improperly a public duty; or
(ii) to reward such public servant for the improper performance of public
duty;
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years
or with fine or with both:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply where a person is
compelled to give such undue advantage:
Provided further that the person so compelled shall report the matter to the law
enforcement authority or investigating agency within a period of seven days from the
date of giving such undue advantage:
Provided also that when the offence under this section has been committeed by
commercial organisation, such commercial organisation shall be punishable with fine.
Illustration.—A person, ‘P’ gives a public servant, ‘S’ an amount of ten thousand
rupees to ensure that he is granted a license, over all the other bidders. ‘P’ is guilty of an
offence under this sub-section.
Explanation.—It shall be immaterial whether the person to whom an undue advantage
is given or promised to be given is the same person as the person who is to perform, or has
performed, the public duty concerned, and, it shall also be immaterial whether such undue
advantage is given or promised to be given by the person directly or through a third party.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to a person, if that person, after informing a
law enforcement authority or investigating agency, gives or promises to give any undue
advantage to another person in order to assist such law enforcement authority or investigating
agency in its investigation of the offence alleged against the later.
9. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a commercial organisation,
such organisation shall be punishable with fine, if any person associated with such commercial
organisation gives or promises to give any undue advantage to a public servant intending—
(a) to obtain or retain business for such commercial organisation; or
(b) to obtain or retain an advantage in the conduct of business for such
commercial organisation:
Provided that it shall be a defence for the commercial organisation to prove that it had
in place adequate procedures in compliance of such guidelines as may be prescribed to
prevent persons associated with it from undertaking such conduct.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a person is said to give or promise to give any
undue advantage to a public servant, if he is alleged to have committed the offence under
section 8, whether or not such person has been prosecuted for such offence.
(3) For the purposes of section 8 and this section,—
(a) “commercial organisation” means—
(i) a body which is incorporated in India and which carries on a
business, whether in India or outside India;
Offence
relating to
bribing a
public servant
by a
commercial
organisation.
Taking undue
advantage to
influence
public servant
by corrupt or
illegal means
or by exercise
of personal
influence.
Offence
relating to
bribing of a
public
servant.

4
(ii) any other body which is incorporated outside India and which
carries on a business, or part of a business, in any part of India;
(iii) a partnership firm or any association of persons formed in India
and which carries on a business whether in India or outside India; or
(iv) any other partnership or association of persons which is formed
outside India and which carries on a business, or part of a business, in any
part of India;
(b) “business” includes a trade or profession or providing service;
(c) a person is said to be associated with the commercial organisation, if
such person performs services for or on behalf of the commercial organisation
irrespective of any promise to give or giving of any undue advantage which
constitutes an offence under sub-section ( 1).
Explanation 1.—The capacity in which the person performs services for or on
behalf of the commercial organisation shall not matter irrespective of whether such
person is employee or agent or subsidiary of such commercial organisation.
Explanation 2.—Whether or not the person is a person who performs services
for or on behalf of the commercial organisation is to be determined by reference to all
the relevant circumstances and not merely by reference to the nature of the relationship
between such person and the commercial organisation.
Explanation 3.—If the person is an employee of the commercial organisation, it
shall be presumed unless the contrary is proved that such person is a person who has
performed services for or on behalf of the commercial organisation.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, the offence under sections 7A, 8 and this section shall be cognizable.
(5) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the concerned
stakeholders including departments and with a view to preventing persons associated
with commercial organisations from bribing any person, being a public servant, prescribe
such guidelines as may be considered necessary which can be put in place for
compliance by such organisations.
10. Where an offence under section 9 is committed by a commercial organisation,
and such offence is proved in the court to have been committed with the consent or
connivance of any director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be of the commercial
organisation, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend
to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, ‘‘director’’, in relation to a firm
means a partner in the firm.’’.
5. In section 11 of the principal Act,—
(i) in the marginal heading, for the words ‘‘valuable thing’’, the words ‘‘undue
advantage’’ shall be substituted;
(ii) the words ‘‘or agrees to accept’’ shall be omitted;
(iii) for the words ‘‘valuable thing’’, the words ‘‘undue advantage’’ shall be
substituted;
(iv) for the words ‘‘official functions’’, the words ‘‘official functions or public
duty’’ shall be substituted.
 6. For section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
Person in
charge of
commercial
organisation
to be guilty of
offence.
Amendment
of section 11.
Substitution of
new section
for section 12.
2 of 1974.

5
“12. Whoever abets any offence punishable under this Act, whether or not that
offence is committed in consequence of that abetment, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than three years, but which may extend
to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.”.
7. In section 13 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 1), the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(1) A public servant is said to commit the offence of criminal misconduct,—
(a) if he dishonestly or fraudulently misappropriates or otherwise converts
for his own use any property entrusted to him or any property under his control
as a public servant or allows any other person so to do; or
(b) if he intentionally enriches himself illicitly during the period of his
office.
Explanation 1.—A person shall be presumed to have intentionally enriched himself
illicitly if he or any person on his behalf, is in possession of or has, at any time during the
period of his office, been in possession of pecuniary resources or property disproportionate
to his known sources of income which the public servant cannot satisfactorily account for.
Explanation 2.—The expression ‘‘known sources of income’’ means income received
from any lawful sources.”.
8. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“14. Whoever convicted of an offence under this Act subsequently commits an
offence punishable under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall be not less than five years but which may extend to ten years and shall also
be liable to fine.”.
9. In section 15 of the principal Act, for the words, brackets and letters “clause (c) or
clause (d)”, the word, brackets, and letter “clause (a)” shall be substituted.
10. In section 16 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the words, brackets and figures, “sub-section ( 2) of section 13 or
section 14”, the words, figures and brackets “section 7 or section 8 or section 9 or
section 10 or section 11 or sub-section (2) of section 13 or  section 14 or section 15”
shall be substituted;
(b) for the word, brackets and letter “clause (e)”, the word, brackets and letter
“clause (b)” shall be substituted.
11. In section 17 of the principal Act, in the second proviso, for the words, brackets,
letter and figure “clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1)”, the words, brackets, letter and figure
“clause (b) of sub-section (1)” shall be substituted.
12. After section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“17A. (1) No police officer shall conduct any enquiry or inquiry or investigation
into any offence alleged to have been committed by a public servant under this Act,
where the alleged offence is relatable to any recommendation made or decision taken
by such public servant in discharge of his official functions or duties, without the
previous approval—
(a) in the case of a person who is or was employed, at the time when the
offence was alleged to have been committed, in connection with the affairs of
the Union, of that Government;
(b) in the case of a person who is or was employed, at the time when the
offence was alleged to have been committed, in connection with the affairs of  a
State, of that Government;
Substitution of
new section
for section 14.
Amendment
of section 15.
Punishment
for habitual
offender.
Amendment of
section 16.
Amendment of
section 17.
Insertion of
new section
17A.
Enquiry or
Inquiry or
investigation
of offences
relatable to
recommendations
made or
decision taken
by public
servant in
discharge of
official
functions or
duties.
Punishment
for abetment
of offences.
Amendment
of section 13.

6
(c) in the case of any other person, of the authority competent to remove
him from his office, at the time when the offence was alleged to have been
committed:
Provided that no such approval shall be necessary for cases involving arrest of a
person on the spot on the charge of accepting or attempting to accept any undue advantage
for himself or for any other person:
Provided further that the concerned authority shall convey its decision under this
section within a period of three months, which may, for reasons to be recorded in writing by
such authority, be extended by a further period of one month.’’.
13. After Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘CHAPTER IV A
A
TTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY
18A. (1) Save as otherwise provided under the Prevention of Money Laundering
Act, 2002, the provisions of the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944 shall, as far
as may be, apply to the attachment, administration of attached property and execution
of order of attachment or confiscation of money or property procured by means of an
offence under this Act.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the provisions of the Criminal Law Amendment
Ordinance, 1944 shall have effect, subject to the modification that the references to
“District Judge” shall be construed as references to “Special Judge”.’.
14. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the words and figures “sections 7, 10, 11, 13 and 15”, the words and figures
"sections 7, 11, 13 and 15" shall be substitued;
(ii) in clause (a), for the words "who is employed", the words “who is employed,
or as the case may be, was at the time of commission of the alleged offence employed”
shall be substituted;
(iii) in clause (b), for the words “who is employed”, the words “who is employed,
or as the case may be, was at the time of commission of the alleged offence employed”
shall be substituted;
(iv) after clause (c), the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that no request can be made, by a person other than a police
officer or an officer of an investigation agency or other law enforcement authority,
to the appropriate Government or competent authority, as the case may be, for
the previous sanction of such Government or authority for taking cognizance by
the  court of any of the offences specified in this sub-section, unless—
(i) such person has filed a complaint in a competent court about the
alleged offences for which the public servant is sought to be prosecuted; and
(ii) the court has not dismissed the complaint under section 203 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and directed the complainant to
obtain the sanction for prosecution against the public servant for further
proceeding:
Provided further that in the case of request from the person other than a police
officer or an officer of an investigation agency or other law enforcement authority, the
appropriate Government or competent authority shall not accord sanction to prosecute
a public servant without providing an opportunity of being heard to the concerned
public servant:
Provided also that the appropriate Government or any comptent authority shall,
after the receipt of the proposal requiring sanction for prosecution of a public servant
under this sub-section, endeavour to convey the decision on such proposal within a
period of three months from the date of its receipt:
Insertion of
new Chapter
IVA.
15 of 2003.
Ord. 38 of
1944.
Ord. 38 of
1944.
Amendment of
section 19.
Provisions of
Criminal Law
Amendment
Ordinance,
1944 to apply
to attachment
under this Act.
2 of 1974.

7
Provided also that in case where, for the purpose of grant of sanction for prosecution,
legal consultation is required, such period may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, be
extended by a further period of one month:
Provided also that the Central Government may, for the purpose of sanction for
prosecution of a public servant, presecribe such guidelines as it considers necessary.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the expression "public servant"
includes such person—
(a) who has ceased to hold the office during which the offence is alleged to have been
committed; or
(b) who has ceased to hold the office during which the offence is alleged to have been
committed and is holding an office other than the office during which the offence is alleged
to have been committed.".
15. For section 20 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘‘20. Where, in any trial of an offence punishable under section 7 or under
section 11, it is proved that a public servant accused of an offence has accepted or
obtained or attempted to obtain for himself, or for any other person, any undue
advantage from any person, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that
he accepted or obtained or attempted to obtain that undue advantage, as a motive or
reward under section 7 for performing or to cause performance of a public duty
imporperly or dishonestly either by himself or by another public servant or, as the case
may be, any undue advantage without consideration or for a consideration which he
knows to be inadequate under section 11.".
16. In section 23 of  the principal Act,—
(a) in the marginal heading, for the word, figures, brackets and letter
“section 13 (1) (c)”, the word, figures, brackets and letter “section 13 (1) (A)” shall be
substituted;
(b) for the word, brackets and letter “clause (c)”, the word, brackets and letter
“clause (a)” shall be substituted.
17. Section 24 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
18. After section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"29A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) guidelines which can be put in place by commercial organisation under
section 9;".
(b) guidelines for sanction of prosecution under sub-section ( 1) of
section 19;".
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
Substitution of
new section for
section 20.
Presumption
where public
servant
accepts any
undue
advantage.
Amendment
of section 23.
Omission of
section 24.
Insertion of
new section
29A.
Power to make
rules.

8
rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.”.
19. In the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002, in Part A of the Schedule, for
Paragraph 8, the following Paragraph shall be substituted, namely:—
“PARAGRAPH 8
O
FFENCES UNDER THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT, 1988
(49 OF 1988)
Section Description of offence.
7. Offence relating to public servant being bribed.
7A. Taking undue advantage to influence public servant by corrupt or illegal
means or by exercise of personal influence.
8. Offence relating to bribing a public servant.
9. Offence relating to bribing a public servant by a commercial organisation.
10. Person in charge of commercial organisation to be guilty of offence.
11. Public servant obtaining undue advantage, without consideration from person
concerned in proceeding or business transacted by such public servant.
12. Punishment for abetment of offences.
13. Criminal misconduct by a public servant.
14. Punishment for habitual offender.”.
Amendment
of Act 15 of
2003.

A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—1170LS—30.07.2018.