1
THE PROTECTION OF THE STATE RESOURCES BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to provide for protecting the interests of the State when State land is given for free or for
a price or by alienation, for public purposes or otherwise to the Central Government,
and that such land shall not be handed over to a third party without the
concurrence of the donor State and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of the State Resources Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) ‘‘land’’ means the soil and any buildings, parts of buildings, or similar structures,
anything permanently attached to the soil, rights under the land, rights above the land
to such a height as is necessary for the ordinary use and enjoyment of the land and the
structures upon it and easements.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LIII of 2022
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 5TH AUGUST, 2022
Definitions.
10

2
Applicability.
5
10
15
20
25
(ii) ‘‘donor State’’ refers to the Government of the State or Union Territory which
has provided land for the setting up of a Central Public Sector Undertakings, for free,
by alienation or for a price.
3. The provisions of the Act shall be applicable in all cases where the partial or full
control of a Central Public Sector Undertaking situated on the land provided by the donor
State is transferred to a third party other than the Government of India or the donor State.
4. The land handed over to the Central Government by the State or Union Territory for
free or for a price or by alienation, for public purposes or otherwise, shall not be handed over
to a third party without the express concurrence of the donor State, failing which, it shall be
void ab initio.
5. If any land has been provided for setting up a Central Public Sector Undertaking and
in case the Central Public Sector Undertaking is in the process of privatization, the donor
State shall have the right to participate in the bidding process for acquiring the full or partial
control of the Central Public Sector Undertaking, as the case may be:
Provided that if the donor State is participating in the bidding process, the price
of the land provided by the donor State, shall be added to the bidding amount offered
by the donor State.
6. If the majority stake in the Central Public Sector Undertaking is handed over to a
third party other than the donor State, by bidding or otherwise, the Central Government shall
provide compensation to the donor State for the cost of the land it has given free or for a
price or by alienation, and the rate of compensation shall be decided by the donor State as
per the prevailing market rates and other relevant factors.
7. A donor State may move to the respective High Court for protecting the right to fair
compensation and right to participate in the bidding as provided by the Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
Concurrence
of donor
State.
Right to
participate in
bidding by the
donor State.
Compensation.
Jurisdiction of
High Court.
Act to have
overriding
effects.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS   AND   REASONS
Ever since the neoliberal reforms were undertaken in the country, increasing pace of
privatization has seen a number of Public Sector Undertakings in the country going for sale.
The process of disinvestment involves selling of the assets of the Public Sector Undertakings
to the bidders who are private players.
Many of the Public Sector Undertakings have been the result of the whole hearted
support and cooperation of the respective States in which they are functioning. The States
of India have always reacted enthusiastically to the prospect of having a Central Public
Sector Undertakings established in their respective States.
As a result, the States have willingly shared their resources for the establishment of
these Public Sector Undertakings and the primary contribution has been in the form of land.
States have offered huge chunks of land for the setting up public sector institutions, factories,
plants and laboratories, etc. under the ownership of Government of India.
These contributions were made in the good faith, by virtue of the presence of these
Public Sector Undertakings, the people of the State will have avenues to secure employment.
Such prospects are not made when the privatization of Central Public Sector Undertakings
takes place.
There are instances in which the State which has allotted its precious land to the
Central Public Sector Undertakings, is unable to participate in the bidding process. The
terms and conditions are set in such a way that makes State Governments ineligible to
participate in auction. This practice needs to be immediately addressed.
If the Central Government finds it impossible to run the Public Sector Undertakings
effectively, then the state government should be given an opportunity to take up that Public
Sector Undertakings or set up new industrial units in such lands. There have been several
other objections posed by various States. Thus a law is necessary for protecting the interests
of the State when Public Sector Undertakings are privatized.
In some cases, the land has been sold at a very nominal price with the good faith that
the institution will serve the cause of the State. But when the institution is handed over to a
third party, that implicit promise remains unfulfilled. Hence the States need legal protection
even if the land has been sold to the Central Government for the said purpose.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. V .  SIVADASAN
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides compensation to the donor State for the cost of the land
by the Central Government for the purpose of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve both non-recurring and recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
However, at this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the amount required as it would depend
upon the number of Public Sector Undertaking going for sale.
4

MGIPMRND—871RS—08-08-2022.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protecting the interests of the State when State land is given for free or for a
price or by alienation, for public purposes or otherwise to the Central Government, and
that such land shall not be handed over to a third party without the
concurrence of the donor State and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P .)