1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  After article 15 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“15A. Except as expressly provided by an Act of appropriate legislature, second
marriage between a woman and a man whose wife is living is prohibited and shall be an
offence punishable in accordance with law”.
3. After article 17 of the Constitution, the follwing articles  shall be inserted, namely:—
“17A. Manufacture, sale and consumption of intoxicating drinks and drugs
which are injurious to health except for medicinal purpose and as expressly provided
by any law made by the Parliament, is prohibited.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 18TH DECEMBER, 2009.
Insertion of
new article
15A.
Prohibition of
bigamy.
Insertion of
new articles
17A and 17B.
Bill No. LIII of 2009
Prohibition of
manufacture,
sale and
consumption
of intoxicating
drinks and
drugs.
5
10

2
17B.  (1) Cow shall be the national animal.
(2) Cow and its progeny shall be entitled to protection in all respects.
(3) Slaughter of cows, calves and other milch and draught cattle is prohibited.
(4) Slaughter of cows, calves and other milch and draught cattle shall be an
offence punishable in accordance with law”.
Prohibition of
slaughter of
cow and its
progeny.
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Several Directive Principles of State Policy were incorporated in Part-IV of the
Costitution. Out of them articles 44, 47 and 48 are of fundamental importance. However,
Article 37 expressly stated that though these articles were declared to be unenforceably by
a court of law, they were declared to be fundamental in the governance of the country and it
shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making law. Though it is nearly six
decades from the commencement of the Constitution, as the Centres as well as the States
have failed to implement these three articles, it has become necessary in national interest to
incorporate these articles in Part-III itself. Non-implementation of these three articles is the
cause for many of the problems which the nation is facing.
Firstly, failure to remove gender discrimination in the matter of marriage and divorce
which also happens to be the mandate of Article 15 against discrimination inter alia  on the
ground  of religion and sex and also a directions of Article 16 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights ,  is responsible for communal divide of people and inconsistent with
equality, feeling of fraternity and the mandate against gender discrimination and secularism
which constitute the elements of basic structure of the Constitution.
Secondly, the failure to implement Article 47 has resulted in a disaster in that substantial
percentage of youths have become alcohol addicts and have fallen into immoral acts and
habits which are incidental to addition to alcohol which is the biggest problem the nation is
facing in all its activities.
Moreover, failure to implement Article 48 has in addition to the adversely affecting our
cattle wealth and agriculture is also inconsistent with the feeling of fraternity among the
citizens and is destructive of the cultural values of this country which hold cow in the
highest esteem and  consumption of  beef is tabooed in our culture. Further, non-violence
[ahimsa] and service to humanity [ manava seva ] being our national ethos, cow which
represents both these values is proposed to be declared as  'National Animal' entitled to
protection in all respects, as a mark of our distinction.
Hence this Bill.
M. RAMA  JOIS

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*** *** *** *** *** ***
15.  (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of
them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to—
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of pulic entertainment;
or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort
maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general
public.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for
women and children.
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause ( 2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from
making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens or  for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent the
State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions
including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than
the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.
*** *** *** *** *** ***
17. "Untouchability" is abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden. The
enforcement of any disability arising out of "Untouchability" shall be an offence punishable
in accordance with law.
*** *** *** *** *** ***
4
Prohibition of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of birth.
Abolition of
Untouchability.

RAJYA   SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri M. Rama Jois, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND— 5615RS(S5)—18-12-2009.