1
THE CRIMINAL LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENT TO THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
2. In the Indian Penal Code, (hereinafter referred to as the Penal Code), after section
153B, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:—
"153C. Whoever on grounds of religion, race, caste or community, sex, gender
identity, sexual orientation,  place of birth, residence, language disability or tribe—
(a) uses gravely threatening words either spoken or written, signs, visible
representations within the hearing or sight of a person with the intention to
cause or knowledge that it is likely to cause, fear or alarm; or
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LIII of 2019
5
Insertion of
new section
153C.
10
Prohibiting
incitement to
hatred.
15
15 of 1860.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE  7
TH
 FEBRUARY, 2020

2
Insertion of
new section
505A.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
(b) advocates hatred by words either spoken or written, signs, visible
representations, that causes or is likely to cause incitement to violence;
shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.".
3. In the Penal Code, after section 505 the following new section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"505 A. Whoever on grounds of religion, race, caste or community, sex, gender,
sexual orientation, place of birth, residence, language, disability or tribe, intentionally
or knowingly uses, in public, words, statements containing rumour or alarming news
or displays any writing, sign, or other visible representation which is or is likely to be
gravely threatening, or derogatory;
(i) within the hearing or sight of a person,  causing fear or alarm; or
(ii) with the intent to provoke or knowledge that it is likely to provoke the
use of violence,
against that person or another,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine, or with both".
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENTS TO THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
4. In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 under the heading
"I.— OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE",
(i) after the entries relating to section 153B, the following entry shall be inserted
namely:—
12 3 4 5 6
153C Prohibiting Imprisonment Cognizable Non bailable Magistrate
incitement for three of the first
to hatred years, and/or class
fine, or both
(ii) after the entry relating to section 505, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
12 3 4 5 6
505A Causing Imprisonment Cognizable Non any
fear, alarm, for three-year bailable Magistrate
or and/or with
provocation fine, or both
of violence
in certain
cases
Causing fear,
alarm, or
provocation
of violence in
certain cases.
Amendment
of First
Schedule to
the Code of
Criminal
Procedure,
1973.
2 of 1974.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 20(2) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), of
which India is a signatory, requires states to prohibit hate speech. Advocacy of national,
racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitiement of discrimination or hostility is prohib-
ited by law. Under the common law system, such speech had been treated, 'outside the realm
of protected discourse'.
Hate speech has the potential of provoking invidivduals or society to commit acts of
terrorism, genocides, ethnic cleansing etc. and has real and devastating effects on people's
lives and risks their health and safety.
However, in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 there is no water tight compartment to deal
with the various acts relating to hate speech, which generally overlap with each other. The
provisions of hate speech fall under the categories of Offences Relating to Religion, Offences
Against Public Tranquility and Criminal Intimidation, Insult and Annoyance. Section 124A
penalises sedition, 153A penalises promoting enmity among groups on various grounds
and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony, section 153B penalises imputation
assertions prejudicial to national integration, and section 295A penalises malicious acts
intended to outrage religious feelings which supplement section 298 which relates to uttering
words with intent to wound the religious feelings. Section 505 deals with statements conducing
to public mischief.
The Law Commission in its 267th report noting the above recommended that new
provisions in IPC are required to be incorporated to address the issues elaborately and
recommended insertion of new section 153C (Prohibiting incitement to hatred) and section
505A (Causing fear, alarm, or provocation of violence in certain cases.
Therefore, it is proposed that the provision relating to hate speech be added so as to
fill the lacuna in the existing criminal laws and provide for effective enforcement of human
Rights.
Hence, this Bill.
HUSAIN DALWAI

4
RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
—————
(Shri Husain Dalwai, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5261RS(S3)—07-02-2020.