Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE HOSTING, SPONSORING AND ADVERTISING OF SPORTS
EVENTS (REGULATION) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to regulate the hosting, sponsoring and advertising sports events by body corporates,
persons, partnerships, associations other than recognised sports  associations who
spend substantial money on a single sport and take tax exemption thereon but
ignore other sports and to provide for declaration of annual budget for such sports
activities and spending limit of fifty percent of the budget on a single sport so that
other sports too get their due promotion and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Hosting, Sponsoring and Advertising of Sports
Events (Regulation) Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(c) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the
Companies Act, 1956 shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in that Act.
Bill No. LIII  of  2011
Definitions.
62 of 1956.
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012

2
3.  (1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
every body corporate the public sector or private sector, created by an Act of parliament or
of a State Legislature, as the case may be, or registered under the Companies Act, 1956 shall,
in case such body corporate is involved in hosting, sponsoring or advertising of any sports
event within the country or out of the country,  have to create a budget for such sports event
through a Board Resolution, by allocating a specified  percentage of the net profit of the
previous year for that purpose.
(2) Once the budget so created under sub-section (1), the body corporate shall
not be entitled to spend more than one half of such budget on hosting, sponsoring or
advertising of a particular sport and in case of non compliance of this provision, the
appropriate Government shall debar such body corporate of any kind of  exemption
whatsoever.
(3) Any body corporate who spends half of its budget on a particular sport shall
distribute the rest of the budget on the hosting, promotion,  sponsoring and advertising
of other sports as may be chosen by its Board.
(4) The provisions of sub-section (1)  to (3) shall be made applicable to persons,
partnerships, associations and others by the appropriate Government in such manner
as may be prescribed.
4. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisons of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three
years from the commencement of this Act.
5. The Provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding  anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force  dealing with the subject matter of
this Act.
6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Allocation of
specified of
budget by
body
corporates
and state
owned
corporation
for hosting
sponsoring
and
advertising of
sports.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
62 of 1956.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
These days hosting, sponsoring or advertising of sports events are becoming very
popular with the body corporates of the private sector and public sector enterprises of the
Government including the Banking sector. These corporates are spending crores of rupee on
the sports and thereby taking various tax exemptions  on these spendings. But, it has been
seen that the spending is on Cricket alone and other sports have completely been ignored.
Some corporates organise Formula Car races but generally outside the country though
recently it has also made  in the country as well in Greater Noida Cricket is a game played in
few countries generally of Commonwealth Nations. It is not recognised in the Olympics and
other International games. But in our Country other games have completely been ignored.
Though these games have given great players of international fame but ignoring of these
games including our national sport Hockey continues. So, it has become necessary to regulate
the spending of Corporates on sports. They have to fix a yearly budget for sports and they
can spend only fifty percent of that budget on one sport. Rest they have to spend for
promotion of other sports. In case, they do not do so they will not get any exemption in
taxation from the Government. This is the only way other games such as Hockey, Football,
Tennis, Badminton, Archery, Shooting, Boxing, Judo, etc. will be promoted in the country.
Hence this Bill.
DR.  AKHILESH  DAS  GUPTA
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
4

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the hosting, sponsoring and advertising sports events by body corporates,
persons, partnerships, associations other than recognised sports  associations who
spend substantial money on a single sport and take tax exemption thereon but ignore
other sports and to provide for declaration of annual budget for such sports activities
and spending limit of fifty percent of the budget on a single sport so that other sports
too get their due promotion and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3929RS(S3)—07-12-2012.