AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No.LIIIof 2025 
THE MANDATORY POPULATION CONTROL 
BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to provide for mandatory population control 
 and for matters connected therewith 
 or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mandatory Population Control Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definition. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State, and in other cases, the Central Government; 
and 
(b) “prescribed”  means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 5
Central 
Government to 
promote two 
child norm. 
3. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to encourage, promote and
motivate all citizens of the country to adopt two child family norm, with a
view to control the rising population in the country.
Facilities in 
case of 
sterilization 
after two living 
children. 
4. If either the husband or the wife in the case of a married couple, who
have only two living children on the date of commencement of this Act,
voluntarily undergoes sterilization, the appropriate Government shall
provide them with the following benefits, namely:—
(i) free education including highe r education to  bot h
children; 
(ii) suitable employment to one child after he completes his
education; and 
(iii) such other benefits as may be prescribed.
 
10 
15 
Introduction of 
population 
control as a 
compulsory 
subject in 
educational 
institutions. 
5. The appropriate Government shall introduce population control as a
compulsory subject in all educational institutions for all children who
have attained the age of fifteen years, irrespective of the class in which
they are studying and the course they are pursuing, in such manner as
may be prescribed.
 
20 
Establishment 
of Health Care 
Centre for 
promoting 
population 
control 
awareness. 
6. (1) The  appropriate Government shall,  set up a Health Care Centre in
every village of  the country, with a view to create awareness about
population control amongst the  people and provide necessary
assistance as required by the people in this regard:
Provided that where a Health Care Centre is already set up and is
functioning in a village, then such centre sha ll promote awareness about
population control amongst and provide necessary assistance as required  by
t
he people in this regard.
(2) The Health Care Centre established under sub -section ( 1) shall
disseminate such information amongst, and provide such ass istance to the
masses, with regard to population control, as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
 
25 
 
30 
Minimum 
marriageable 
age. 
7. No marriage shall be solemnized between a male who is less than twenty-
seven years of age and a female who is less than twenty-two years of age. 
 
35 
Undertaking 
by 
Government 
employees. 
8. (1) Any person who is serving in connection with the affairs of the  Central
Government or of the State Government or in any undertaking or 
organization under the control of the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, and,— 
(a) who has only one living child or who has not procreated any
child or who is unmarried on the date of commencement of this Act, 
shall give an undertaking that he shall not procreate more than two 
living children; or  
(b) who has two living children on the date of coming into force
of this Act, shall give an undertaking that he shall not procreate any 
child one year after the coming into force of this Act. 
(2) Any person violating the provisions of sub -section (1) shall be subject
to such disciplinary action  as per the applicable rules of the service or as
may be determined by the appropriate Government.
40 
 
45 
 
50 

3 
 
  9. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 7 shall be punished 
with simple imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than five years 
and with fine which shall be not less than rupees twenty thousand. 
 Penalty. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force. 
 Overriding 
effect of the Act. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
11.  (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature 
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one  
House, before that House. 
 Power to make 
rules. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

4 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Rapid increase in population has given rise to many socio -economic 
problems like poverty, food and housing shortage, unemployment, environmental 
degradation, etc.  India is the most populous country after China. If the present 
trend continues, it will not be possible for the country to tackle the growing socio-
economic problems. It is, therefore, imperative that certain effective steps are taken 
to check the increasing growth of our population. Since resources are limited, 
proper upbringing of children is possible only if small family norm is adopted by 
all citizens of the country. Despite existence of various birth control measures and 
various family planning programme, the problem of overpopulation still remains. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to promote voluntary sterilization among the 
married couples having two children and also provides for certain measures like 
fixing the minimum age for marriages, promoting small family norm, introduction 
of a compulsory subject on population control in the school curricula for promoting 
and inculcating small family norm in the future generation. 
Hence, this Bill. 
 
 
 KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
C lause 4 of the Bill provides for certain benefits to be given by the Central 
or State Government, as the case may be, to married couples with two living 
children, who undergo sterilization voluntarily. Clause 5 provides for the 
introduction of  population control as a compulsory subject in all educational 
institutions. Clause 6 provides for  the setting up of a Health Care Centre in every 
village of the country to provide  assistance and information regarding population 
control.  
T he Bill, there fore, if enacted, would involve an annual recurring 
expenditure of about rupees Five Hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. A non-recurring expenditure of rupees Five hundred crore is also likely to 
be involved. 

6 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central and the State Government, 
as the case may be, to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  As 
the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power 
is of a normal character. 

 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for mandatory population control 
and for matters connected there with or 
 incidental thereto. 
____________ 
(Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu, M.P.) 
RS− P&PS−PMB(E) − 351−08.12.2025. 