1 of 1956.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LIIl of 1999
THE LOTTERIES (PROHIBITION) BILL, 1999

A
BILL

to prohibit the organisation, conduct and promotion of lotteries and to provide for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of * the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (1) This Act may be called the Lotteries (Prohibition) Act, 1999.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

5 2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, —

(a) “lottery” means a scheme, in whatever form and by whatever name
called, for distribution of prizes by lot or chance to those persons participating in
the lots or chances of prize by purchasing tickets;

(b) “organisation” means any local or other authority functioning under the

10 control of the Central Government or a State Government and includes an undertaking
established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act or which is controlled or
financed wholly or substantially by funds, provided directly or indirectly, by the
Central Government or a State Government or a Government company as defined
under section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956.

Short title and
extent.

Definitions.


Prohibition of
lotteries.

Offences by
companies.

Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.

2

3. The Central Government or a State Government or any organisation shall not—

(@ organise, conduct or promote any lottery or sell or distribute or put for sale
any lottery ticket, in any manner whatever or receive or remit any money in pursyance
of organising, conducting or promoting any lottery or sale or distribution or putting
for sale of any lottery ticket; or

(i) cause any lottery to be organised, conducted or promoted through any
other person including any society whether registered or not under any law for the
time being in force.

4. (1) Where any contravention of the provisions of section 3 has been committed by
any Department of the Central Government or State Government or any organisation, the
Head of such Department or the person incharge of such organisation, as the case may be,
shall be guilty of offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished under
sub-section (3):

Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of the
Department or such person incharge liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence
was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence,

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where any offence under
sub-section (/) has been committed by a Department of the Central Government or State
Government or any organisation and it is proved that the offence has been committed with
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any officer,
other than the head of such Department or the person incharge of such organisation, such
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.

(3) Whoever commits an offence under sub-section (/) shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.

5. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed was incharge of, and was responsible to
the company for the conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the company,
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall’ be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an offence undér
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part
of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—

(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and

(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an
offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.

20

25

30

35

45
20194


17 of 1998

10 of 1897

3

7. (1) The Lotteries (Regulation) Act, 1998 is hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, without prejudice to the application of section 6 of
the General Clauses Act, 1897, anything done or any action taken or purported to have
been done or taken in pursuance of the Act so repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under or in pursuance
of the corresponding provisions of this Act.

Repeal and

saving.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The malpractices in the conduct of lotteries and its impact on the poorer sections of
the society had been under scrutiny of the Government for quite some time. The continued
prevalence of the popularity known single digit and instant lotteries and the temptation
offered by them had proved to be the undoing of many families. Inspite of the guidelines
issued by the Central Government from time to time as also the guidelines issued by the
Supreme Court of India in the matter, the evil could not be totally eliminated and it was
felt that a Central legislation to regulate the conduct of lotteries was necessary to protect
the interest of the gullible poor. To tackle this evil, the Lotteries (Regulation) Act, 1998
was enacted by Parliament. This Act, besides imposing stipulations for conduct of lotteries
in the country, banned single digit and pre-announced number lotteries.

2. The Lotteries (Regulation) Bill, 1998 was referred to the Department related
Parliamentary Committee on Home Affairs. The said Committee, after considering the
matter in all its aspects, had strongly recommended to the Government to come forward
with a comprehensive Bill, at the earliest, in consultation with all the State Governments
and the Union territory Administrations, imposing a complete ban on the lottery trade in
the country. The matter was debated at length in Parliament when the said Bill was taken
up for consideration. During the debate there was an overwhelming view in both Houses
of Parliament in favour of banning the lotteries.

3. The matter was also placed before the Conference-of Chief Ministers held on the
27th November, 1998 in New Delhi. The general consensus in the Conference was that
lotteries should be statutorily banned.

4, Under the Constitutional frame-work, Parliament has legislative competence with
regard to lotteries falling under entry 40 of List I (Union List) of the Seventh Schedule to
the Constitution. Other types of lotteries fall under entry 34 of List II (State List) of said
Schedule which is within the legislative competence of the State Legislatures. The Bill,
therefore, proposes to prohibit the Central Government, State Government and any
organisation controlled by such Government from conducting, organising or promoting
any lottery. It also seeks to repeal the Lotteries (Regulation) Act, 1998.

.5. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objective.

L.K. ADVANI.

New DELHI,
The 21st December, 1999.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

To provide the organisation, conduct and promotion of lotteries and to provide for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri L. K. Advani, Minister of Home Affairs)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3023RS—22.12.1999,