THE COMMISSIONS FOR PROTECTION OF CHILD RIGHTS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to amend the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights
(Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In section 3 of the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 (herein after
referred to as the Principal Act), in sub-section (2),—
(i) in clause (a), for the word “person”, the word “woman” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words “at least two shall be women”, the words “at least
four shall be women” shall be substituted;
(iii) in clause (b), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that each member shall have at least ten years of experience in
the prescribed field.”
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 3.
Bill No.  LIII of  2006
5
10
4 of 2006.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28TH JUL Y, 2006.

2
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, for the existing proviso the following proviso shall
be substituted, namely:—
"Provided that the Chairperson and the members of the Commission shall be
appointed on the recommendations of a Committee consisting of the Prime Minister,
Leaders of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha and the Ministers of
Home Affairs and Human Resource Development."
4. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (e) the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ee) look into the matters relating to children in need of special education and
health care particularly the mentally and physically challenged children."
5. In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1) for the word 'may', the word 'shall' shall be substituted
(ii) in sub-section (2),—
(a) in clause ( a) for the word ‘person’, the word ‘woman’ shall be
substituted;
(b) in clause (b) for the words "at least, two shall be women", the words "
at least, four shall be women" shall be substituted.
(iii) in clause (b), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that each member shall have at least ten years of experience in the
prescribed field.
6. In section 18 of the principal Act, for the existing proviso, the following proviso
shall be substituted, namely:—
"Provided that the Chairperson and members of the Commission shall be
appointed on the recommendations of a committee consisting of the Chief Minister,
Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly and the Ministers in charge of
Departments of Home and Child Welfare.
Amendment
of Section 4.
Amendment
of Section 13.
Amendment
of Section 17.
Amendment
of Section 18.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 was enacted by Parliament
in December, 2005. The Act deals with the constitution of a National Commission and State
Commissions for protection of child rights and children’s courts for providing speedy trial of
offences against children or of violation of child rights. It is a well known fact that it is the
mother who understands the child better than anyone else. But, the women have not been
given adequate and desired representation in the scheme of the Commissions for Protection
of Child Rights Act, so much so that even the post of Chairperson of the Commission has not
been reserved for a woman. It has been felt by the public at large that women should be given
a major and significant role in the functioning of the Commission. For this, at least, four of the
six members of the commission should be women besides the chairperson who should
always be a woman. Further, the Act does not prescribe for any experience to become a
member of the Commission. It is also desirable that the members of a Commission should not
be appointed without possessing adequate experience in the prescribed field. Hence, it is
proposed that the members to be appointed to the Commission must have, at least, ten years
of experience in the respective field. Further, apprehensions have also been expressed
regarding independence of the Commission in view of the provisions in the Act for
appointment of the Chairperson and the members of the Commission. In order to make the
Commission more independent, it would be appropriate if the Chairperson and members are
appointed on the recommendation of a Committee consisting of the Prime Minister, Leaders
of Opposition in Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha and the Ministers of Home Affairs and Human
Resource Development. Similar provisions have been proposed in the Bill for State
Commissions also.
Section 17 of the Bill empowers the State Governments to constitute State Commissions
for protection of child rights. The word used in this section is ‘may’ which gives a wide
discretion to the State Governments which may or may not constitute the Commission. The
experience in this regard is not very encouraging, as many of the State Governments did not
constitute the Commissions under different enactments where similar provisions exist.
Therefore, it is felt that there should be a mandatory provision for the States to constitute
State Commissions for the welfare and development of the children all over the country. An
amendment has been proposed in the Act accordingly. Concerns have also been expressed
with regard to matters pertaining to educational and health care of the children, particularly
the mentally and physically challenged children. Therefore, it is proposed that the Commission
should also look after these issues.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective by amending the relevant provisions of
the Act.
VIJAY J. DARDA
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE COMMISSIONS FOR PROTECTION OF CHILD RIGHTS ACT, 2005
* * * * *
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR PROTECTION OF CHILD RIGHTS
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a body to be known as
the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights to exercise the powers conferred on,
and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of the following Members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson who is a person of eminence and has done outstanding work
for promoting the welfare of children; and
(b) six Members, out of which at least two shall be women, from the following
fields, to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons of eminence,
ability, integrity, standing and experience in,—
(i) education;
(ii) child health, care, welfare or child development;
(iii) juvenile justice or care of neglected or marginalized children or children
with disabilities;
(iv) elimination of child labour or children in distress;
(v) child psychology or sociology; and
(vi) laws relating to children.
(3) The office of the Commission shall be at Delhi.
4. The Central Government shall, by notification, appoint the Chairperson and other
Members:
Provided that the Chairperson shall be appointed on the recommendation of a three
member Selection committee constituted by the Central Government under the Chairmanship
of the Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Human Resource Development.
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
F
UNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION
13. (1) The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely:—
(a) examine and review the safeguards provided by or under any law for the time
being in force for the protection of child rights and recommend measures for their
effective implementation;
(b) present to the Central Government, annually and at such other intervals, as
the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(c) inquire into violation of child rights and recommend initiation of proceedings
in such cases;
(d) examine all factors that inhibit the enjoyment of rights of children affected by
terrorism, communal violence, riots, natural disaster, domestic violence, HIV/AIDS,
trafficking, maltreatment, torture and exploitation, pornography and prostitution and
recommend appropriate remedial measures;
4
Constitution
of National
Commission
for
Protection of
Child Rights.
Appointment
of
Chairperson
and Members.
Functions of
Commission.

5
(e) look into the matters relating to children in need of special care and protection
including children in distress, marginalized and disadvantaged children, children in
conflict with law, juveniles, children without family and children of prisoners and
recommend appropriate remedial measures;
(f) study treaties and other international instruments and undertake periodical
review of existing policies, programmes and other activites on child rights and make
recommendations for their effective implementation in the best interest of children;
(g) undertake and promote research in the field of child rights;
(h) spread child rights literacy among various sections of the society and promote
awareness of the safeguards available for protection of these rights through
publications, the media, seminars and other available means;
(i) inspect or cause to be inspected any juvenile custodial home, or any other
place of residence or institution meant for children, under the control of the Central
Government or any State Government or any other authority, including any institution
run by a social organisation; where children are detained or lodged for the purpose of
treatment, reformation or protection and take up with these authorities for remedial
action, if found necessary;
(j) inquire into complaints and take suo motu notice of matters relating to,—
(i) deprivation and violation of child rights;
(ii) non-implementation of laws providing for protection and development
of children;
(iii) non-compliance of policy decisions, guidelines or instructions aimed
at mitigating hardships to and ensuring welfare of the children and to provide
relief to such children,
or take up the issues arising out of such matters with appropriate
authorities; and
(k) such other functions as it may consider necessary for the promotion of child
rights and any other matter incidental to the above functions.
(2) The Commission shall not inquire into any matter which is pending before a State
Commission or any other Commission duly constituted under any law for the time being in
force.
* * * * *
17. (1) A State Government may constitute a body to be known as the....................
(name of the State) Commission for Protection of Child Rights to exercise the powers conferred
upon, and to perform the functions assigned to, a State Commission under this Chapter.
(2) The State Commission shall consist of the following mambers, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson who is a person of eminence and has done outstanding work
for promoting the welfare of children; and
(b) six Members, out of which at least two shall be women, from the following
fields, to be appointed by the State Government from amongst persons of eminence,
ability, integrity, standing and experience in,—
(i) education;
(ii) child health, care, welfare or child development;
(iii) juvenile justice or care of neglected or marginalized children or children
with disabilities;
Constitution
of State
Commission
for
Protection of
Child Rights.

6
(iv) elimination of child labour or children in distress;
(v) child psychology or sociology; and
(vi) laws relating to children.
(3) The headquarter of the State Commission shall be at such place as the State
Government may, by notification, specify.
18. The State Government shall, by notification, appoint the Chairperson and other
Members:
Provided that the Chairperson shall be appointed on the recommendation of a three
Member Selection Committee constituted by the State Government under the Chairmanship
of the Minister in-charge of the Department dealing with children.
* * * * *
Appointment
of
Chairperson
and other
Members.

RAJYA   SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to amend the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005
————
(Shri  Vijay J. Darda, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1782RS (S1)—28.07.2006.