THE DECLARATION OF COUNTRIES AS SPONSOR OF TERRORISM
BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to declare any country as state sponsor of terrorism and withdraw economic and trade
relations with the such country and to create legal, economic and travel
sanctions for citizens of that country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS  the Islamic Republic of Pakistan propagates and harbors agents of
international terror who have repeatedly attacked the territory and people of our country;
AND WHEREAS the Islamic Republic of Pakistan poses a continual risk to the peace and
security of the region, so long as it continues to harbor agents of terror and propagates acts
of terror against the territory and the citizens of our country;
N
OW, THEREFORE it is expedient to coordinate activities at international and national level
to ensure the best response to protect the interest of our country and its citizens.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Declaration of Countries as Sponsor of Terrorism Act,
2016.
Bill No. LIII of 2016
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 18TH NOVEMBER, 2016

2
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) "abet" , with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes,—
(i) the communication or association with any person or class of persons
who is engaged in assisting in any manner terrorists or disruptionists;
(ii) the passing on, or publication of, without any lawful authority, any
information likely to assist the terrorists or disruptionists, and the passing on, or
publication of, or distribution of, any document or matter obtained from terrorists
or disruptionists;
(iii) the rendering of any assistance, whether financial or otherwise to the
terrorists or disruptionists.
(b) "State sponsor of terrorism" means the Government of any country which,
the Government of India has determined, for purposes of the Foreign Trade
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1992, the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act,
2010, or any other provision of law in force in India, to be a Government that has
provided support to" terrorist acts, directly or indirectly, including through its
instrumentalities or retired officials or through negligence in taking effective steps to
curtail or prevent the use of its territory for commission of terrorist acts:
Provided that a country shall be designated as a State sponsor of terrorism, by
including its name in the Schedule to this Act by the Central Government by notification
in the Official Gazette.
(c) "terrorist act" means any act with intent to threaten or likely to threaten the
unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or with intent to strike terror or likely to
strike terror in the people or any section of the people in India, or in any foreign
country, or with the intent to influence by threat or likely to influence by threat the
Government of India or an international governmental organization,—
(i) by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammable
substances or firearms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious gases
or other chemicals or by any other substances (whether biological, radioactive,
nuclear or otherwise) of a hazardous nature or by any other means of whatever
nature to cause or likely to cause—
(a) death of, or injuries to any person or persons; or
(b) loss of, or damage to, or destruction of, property; or
(c) disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the community
in India or in any foreign country; or
(d) damage or destruction of any property in India or in a foreign country used
or intended to be used for the defence of India or in connection with any other purpose
of the Government of India, any State Government or any of their agencies; or
(ii) by overawing by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force
or attempts to do so or causes death of any public functionary or attempts to
cause death of any public functionary; or
(iii) by designing to seriously interfere with or seriously disrupt an
electronic system, computer system or network; or
(iv) by providing support by means of sponsoring or making provisions,
including by non- enforcement of any law to prevent the same, for the training of
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
22 of 1992.
42 of 2010.

3
any militia, paramilitary or guerilla forces to wage proxy war against the
Government of India; or
(v) by detaining, kidnapping or abducting any person and threatening to
kill or injure such person or does any other act in order to compel the Government
of India, any State Government or the Government of a foreign country or any
other person to do so or abstain from doing any act,
Explanation  I.—For the purposes of this clause, public functionary means the
Constitutional Authorities and any other functionary notified in the Official Gazette by the
Central Government as a public functionary under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Act, 1967.
Explanation II.—For the purpose of this clause a terrorist act shall include an act of
terrorism involving citizens or the territory of more than one country.
Explanation III.—Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions and unless the context
so requires otherwise, the term 'terrorism' shall also mean premeditated violence motivated
by any political, religious, racial or ideological cause perpetrated against non-combatant
targets by subnational groups or clandestine agents. The term 'non-combatant' implies, in
addition to civilians, military personnel (whether or not armed or on duty) who are not
deployed in a war zone.
(d) "trade" shall include any import or export of goods or services or technology, of
any sort with another country.
3. (1) Whoever being a Head of the State, member of Government, a citizen or a body
corporate domiciled in a country included in the Schedule or notified in the Official Gazette,
as a state sponsor of terrorism shall be subject to prohibitions as under,—
(a) to travel within the territory of India and eligible for the grant of visa;
(b) from trading with any individual, entity, or a body corporate in India;
(c) from receiving or making grants, financial remittances, investments or assets
of any description whether corporeal or incorporeal, moveable or immoveable, tangible
or intangible, wherever located, or providing financial assistance or aid to any
individual, entity or body corporate in India;
(d) for undertaking maritime activities including but not limited to fishing or
trawling or entering the territorial waters of India;
(e) from overflight over the geographical boundaries of India.
(2) The prohibitions, under sub-section ( 1) may be waived or relaxed if the Central
Government so permits, subject to the conditions which may be imposed by the Central
Government in granting such waiver or relaxation.
4. (1) Any individual being a Head of the State, member of Government, a citizen or a
body corporate who aids and abets a state sponsor of terrorism shall be subject to some or
all of the prohibitions as described in section 3 of this Act, as deemed fit by the Central
Government.
(2) The restrictions, under sub-section (1) may be waived or relaxed if the Central
Government so permits, subject to the conditions which may be imposed by the Central
Government in granting such waiver or relaxation.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
provisions for revoking the immunity of the  officials of a country designated as a state
sponsor of terrorism and making them amenable to the jurisdiction of the courts in India.
Prohibitions.
Restrictions
for aiding or
abetting
States
sponsor of
terrorism.
Liability of
officials of
States
sponsor of
terrorism.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
37 of 1967.

4
(2) An official of a country designated as a state sponsor of terrorism shall not be
immune from any suit brought against him in any Court in India in which monetary damages
and compensation that country are sought against the for physical injury to person or
property or for death caused by—
(a) an act of terrorism; and
(b) acts of  the country, or of any official, employee, or agent of that country designated
as a state sponsor of terrorism while acting within the scope of his office, employment, or
agency, regardless where the tortious act or acts of the country has occurred.
6. The Central Government shall use the voice and vote of India to oppose any loan or
other use of the funds of any International Financial Institution to state sponsor of terrorism.
Explanation .—For purposes of this section, the term "International Financial
Institution" includes, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank or any similar institution by whatever name
called.
7. The Central Government of India shall not provide any assistance to any country
that has been designated as a State sponsor of terrorism and has been notified as such by
the Central Government, including the provision of credits, guarantees, or other financial
assistance under any law for the time being in force.
8. (1) No individual or body corporate shall import into or export from the territory of
India any goods or services from or into any country which has been designated as a State
sponsor of terrorism.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, no individual or
body corporate shall transact in foreign exchange, or transfer credit or payment between, by,
through or to any banking institution, to the extent that such transfers or payments involve
any interest of a state sponsor of terrorism or a national thereof, or import or export currency
or securities to or from a State sponsor of terrorism.
(3) No individual or body corporate shall make any new investment in a State sponsor
of terrorism or in property owned or controlled by  the Government of such a state sponsor
of terrorism or a national thereof.
9. (1) If any person contravenes any provision of this Act, or  otherwise deals in any
manner whatsoever, with a State sponsor of terrorism, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment   for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with   both, and
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of   Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Court
trying such contravention may also impose on the person convicted an additional fine to
recover from him the amount of, moneys or credits, in respect of which the contravention has
been proved, or such part thereof as the Court may deem fit.
(2) Notwithstanding the generality of the foregoing provision, any person who
contravenes this Act, shall also be liable to be tried in addition under any other law, for the
time being in force and applicable to such person.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973, an
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.
10. The Central Government by notification in the official Gazettee may make rules to
carry out the purpose of this Act.
Opposition to
assistance by
International
Financial
Institutions
to States
sponsor of
terrorism.
Prohibition
on Assistance
to
Governments
of a State
sponsor of
Terrorism.
Prohibition
on trade in
goods and
services with
a State
sponsor of
Terrorism.
Offences and
Penalties.
Powers to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
2 of 1974.

THE SCHEDULE
[Section 2(b)]
I. Islamic Republic of Pakistan
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our country and indeed countries in the region and around the world have been
subjected to numerous terror attacks, from organisations and individuals based in and with
support of elements in Government of Islamic Republic of Pakistan. India in particular has
suffered numerous attacks like 26/11 Mumbai and most recent attack in Uri on September 18,
2016. There has been widespread International condemnation of the attack and also of the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan by most nations.
Despite undeniable evidence to substantiate that the Islamic Republic of Pakistan
sponsors terror in India, we have continued to remain engaged diplomatically, culturally and
economically with the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for decades.
The strategic restraint practiced by India for the last decade has come at a heavy price.
Several hundred brave men of our security forces and citizens have been killed in various
terror attacks on our soil.
The Islamic Republic of Pakistan continues to provide safe haven to dreaded terrorists
like Hafeez Saeed and terrorist organizations like the Taliban, Al-Qaeda, Jama'at-ud-Da'wah,
Jaish-e Mohammad, the Haqqani Network, Lashkar-e-Toiba among many others.
This proxy war being waged against India has also forced us to incur unprecedented
economical expenditure.
While we are looking at the international community to recognise and declare Pakistan
as a terror state, it is for us, as the country most affected, to take the first step towards this.
We must go beyond merely condemning the attacks on our sovereignty time after time and
take a decisive and strong step to declare the Islamic Republic of Pakistan a terror state.
This Bill underlines our strong condemnation of Islamic Republic of Pakistan's
propagation and sponsorship of international terror and recognises its role in providing a
safe haven to dreaded terrorists and terror organisations and its active role in abetting and
aiding infiltration by terrorists from its soil.
Pakistan poses a continual risk to the peace, security and stability of the region and
this Bill seeks to terminate and prohibit further economic, trade, sports and cultural agreements
with Pakistan.
Hence this Bill.
RAJEEV CHANDRASEKHAR
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 provides that the Central Government may make rules to carryout the
purposes of this Bill. As the matters will relate to details only the delegation of legislations
powers is of world character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to declare any country as state sponsor of terrorism and withdraw economic and trade
relations with the such country and to create legal, economic and travel
sanctions for citizens of that country and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar , M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3200RS(S3)—18-11-2016.