AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
 
Bill No. LIII of 2024 
THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) 
 BILL,   2024 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005. 
        BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: – 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) I t shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title and 
commencement. 
53 of 2005. 5 2. In the Disaster Management Act, 2005, (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act),
(a) fo r the words, “National Disaster Management Authority" wherever they
General. 

2 
occur, the words “National Disaster Management Council" shall be 
substituted; and 
(b) for the w ords, "National Authority" wherever they occur, the words
"National Council" shall be substituted.
Amendment 
of section 2.
3. In section 2 of the principal Act , for clause (s), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely, -
“(s) “State Government” means the Department of Government of 
the State or Union Territory having  Legislative Assembly, 
having administrative control of disaster manag ement and inclu des 
Administrator of the Union Territory appointed by the President un der 
article 239 of the Constitution;”. 
5 
10 
Substitution 
of section 3. 
4. For section 3 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely, -
Establishment 
of National 
Disaster 
Management 
Council.
“3. (1) There shall be established for the purposes of this Act, an authority 
to be known as the National Disaster Management Council. 
(2) T he National Disaster Management Council shall consist of the following
members: 
(a) the Prime Minister of India, or any Minister of the Central Government
nominated by the Prime Minister to represent the Central Government,
who shall be the Chairperson, ex-officio; and
(b) the Minister in- charge of disaster management or any other Minister
nominated by each State Government, who shall be the Member, ex officio. 
(3) The Cabinet Secretary of the Central Government shall be the ex- officio
Secretary of the National Council but shall not have a vote.
(4
) A
ll decisions taken by the National Council shall be determined by a simple
majority of fifty-one per cent. of votes of the members present and voting.
(5) F
or the purpose of sub -section (4) of section 3, the value of votes which
each member of the National Council is entitled to cast shall be determined in
the following manner: -
(a) the Prime Minister or the Minister representing the Central
Government, shall have one vote equivalent to the value of fifteen per
cent. of the total votes available in the National Council; and
(b) e very Member representing a State Government, shall have one vote
and the value of such vote shall be calculated in proportion to the number
of seats held by the respective State Government in the   Council of States
among the remaining eighty -five per cent. of v
otes available in the
National Council.
Illustration 
If a State or Union Territory has ten per cent. of the total seats o f the 
Council of States, then the vote of that State or Union Territory, as the case 
may be, in the National Council shall be worth eight and a half per cent. of the 
total vote of the National Council. 
(6) Any S tate G overnment which  wishes t o replace i ts M ember s hall b e 
entitled to do so at any point of time.
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 

3 
 
    5. 
 
After section 3 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted, 
namely: - 
 Insertion of new 
section 3A. 
  
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 “3A. (1) Any relief, rehabilitation, mitigation, restoration or fund 
requested by any State Government from the National Disaster Response Fund 
or National Disaster Mitigation Fund shall be dealt with by the National 
Council within thirty days from the date of request. 
         (2) The National Council shall consider reports of the State Authority 
prior to any decision on relief to be given to the States. 
        (3) The decision to grant any fund to a State Government, as requested by 
them or otherwise deemed appropriate, shall be based on objective criteria such 
as but not limited to – 
(a)     the nature of disaster and the level of impact on the State or 
Union territory and its people; 
(b) the financial position of the State or Union t erritory to meet 
the impact of the disaster; 
(c) the need for funds to restore normalcy and resettle the people 
affected by the disaster; and 
(d)      any other objective reasons as may be decided by the National 
Council. 
 Time period to 
consider relief 
request. 
 20   6. 
 
For section 4 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely: -  Substitution of 
section 4. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
“4.  (1) The National Council shall meet at least twice in a year, ordinarily 
at New Delhi, or at any other place chosen by the Council. 
(2) The Prime Minister of India or the Minister representing the Central 
Government shall chair all meetings of the National Council. 
     (3) In the absence of the Prime Minister or the Minister representing the 
Central Government, the remaining Members shall elect any other Member as 
a pro-term Chairperson for that meeting alone.”. 
 
 Meetings of 
National 
Council. 
  
 
   30 
  7. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), after clause (e), the 
following shall be inserted, namely, - 
“(ea) lay down directions and guidelines to be followed by the National 
Executive Committee in applying the National Disaster Response Fu nd for 
meeting the expenses for emergency response, relief and rehabilitation;”. 
 
 Amendment of 
section 6. 
  
 
 
35 
  8. In section 7 of the principal Act, for sub -section (1), the following shall be 
substituted, namely, - 
“(1) The National Council may constitute an advisory committee consisting 
of experts in the field of disaster management and having practical experience 
of disaster management at the national, State or district level, from time to time 
to aid in its decisions and oversee mitigation works including the transfer of 
funds. 
 Amendment of 
section 7. 
 40   9. 
 
 
In section 10 of the principal Act, after sub -section (2), , the following shall be 
inserted, namely, –  
“(3) The National Executive Committee shall be bound by any direction or 
order issued by the National Council”. 
 Amendment of 
section 10. 
 
 
 
45 
10. In section 46 of the principal Act, for sub -section (2), the following shall be 
substituted, namely: - 
“(2) The National Disaster Response Fund shall be made available to the 
National Executive Committee to be applied towards meeting the expenses 
for emergency response, relief and rehabilitation in accordance with the 
directions and guidelines laid down by National Council.”. 
 
  

4 
 
 
  
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
  
The primary objective of the present amendment is to  amend the 
Disaster Management Act, 2005, in order to substitute the National 
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) which comprises only of the 
Prime Minister and Members appointed by the Prime Minister with a 
broader and more inclusive National Disaster Management Council 
(NDMC) with representatives of all States. 
 
The creation of the NDMA was to enable the Union to a id the 
States when disaster strikes. The Union has a primary role in protecting 
the life and property of the citizens of India. The Union as the parens 
patriae come to the aid of the people who are suffering due to a natural 
disaster. The Union's legal obl igation to come to the aid of the States 
providing relief from natural disasters are reinforced under the 
provisions of the Disaster Management Act, 2005. The obligations of 
the Union are to be discharged by it impartially and without political 
bias. There fore, it is imperative that the apex decision making body 
under the Disaster Management Act, 2005 comprise of State 
representatives as well. This would only strengthen the constitutional 
guarantee of co -operative federalism. All States can participate  in the 
deliberations of the NDMC and the process of releasing funds would 
become transparent and objective when all stakeholders are heard. 
Currently, the NDMA follows a one -size-fits-all approach, whereas 
with the States pa rt of the newly constituted NDMC, th e unique 
requirements of each State would be brought to the fore and considered 
while making decisions. 
 
This amendment aims to ensure that there is a structured, 
transparent, and equitable mechanism for the allocation and utilisation 
of funds dedicated to disaster management, thereby ensuring that States 
severely affected by disasters are not left underfunded or neglected. 
The NDMC would prioritise funding based on the severity of disaster 
impact and the urgent needs of affected States. 
 
The new amendment will ensure the equitable and efficient 
allocation of resources, prioritizing support for the States with the 
greatest needs. This approach will enhance national resilience and 
preparedness in the face of disasters. 
 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above-mentioned objectives. 
 
P. WILSON 
 
   
  

5 
 
  
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE DISASTER MANAGEMENT ACT, 2005 
 
 
 *                                  *                                    *                                    *                                        
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions. 
 *                                  *                                    *                                    *                                        
   
 *                                  *                                    *                                    *                                    
      (s) “State Government” means the Department of Government of the 
State having administrative control of disaster management and includes 
Administrator of the Union territory appointed by the President under 
article 239 of the Constitution; 
 
 *                                  *                                    *                                    *       
                             
 
 CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY 
 
 
 3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette appoint in this behalf, there shall be 
established for the purposes of this Act, an authority to be known as the 
National Disaster Management Authority. 
 
(2) The National Authority shall consist of the Chairperson and such 
number of other members, not exceeding nine, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government and, unless the rules otherwise provide, the National 
Authority shall consist of the following: — 
 
(a) the Prime Minister of India, who shall be the Chairperson of the 
National Authority, ex officio; 
(b) other members, not exceeding nine, to be nominated by the 
Chairperson of the National Authority. 
 
(3) The Chairperson of the National Authority may designate one of the 
members nominated under clause (b) of sub -section (2) to be the Vice-
Chairperson of the National Authority. 
 
(4) The term of office and conditions of service of members of the 
National Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 
Establishment of 
National Disaster 
Management 
Authority. 
 4. (1) The National Authority shall meet as and when necessary and at 
such time and place as the Chairperson of the National Authority may 
think fit. 
 
(2) The Chairperson of the National Authority shall preside over the 
meetings of the National Authority.  
 
(3) If for any reason the Chairperson of the National Authority is unable to 
attend any meeting of the National Authority, the Vice -Chairperson of the 
National Authority shall preside over the meeting. 
Meetings of 
National 
Authority. 
 *                                  *                                    *                                *                                        
 7. (1) The National Authority may constitute an advisory committee 
consisting of experts in the field of disaster management and having 
practical experience of disaster management at the national, State or 
district level to make recommendations on different aspe cts of disaster 
management. 
Constitution of 
advisory 
committee by 
National 
Authority. 

6 
 
 *                                  *                                    *                                *                                        
National Disaster 
Response Fund. 46. *                            *                                    *                                *                                     
(2) The National Disaster Response Fund shall be made available to the 
National Executive Committee to be applied towards meeting the expenses 
for emergency response, relief and rehabilitation in accordance with the 
guidelines laid down by the Central Governm ent in consultation with the 
National Authority. 
 
  

 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005. 
_____________ 
(Shri P. Wilson, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS–PMB(E)–045–11.02.2025 