5

10

AS INIRODUCLD IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LIII_of 2001

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001.

2. In Part V of the Constitution after Chapter III, the following Chapter shall be
inserted, namely:—
CHAPTER IIIA — The National Judicial Commission
123A. (7) There shall be a National Judicial Commission (hereinafter referred
to in this Chapter as “the Commission’) to recommend the appointment and transfer

and removal of Judges and Chief Justices of the High Courts and the appointment
and removal of Judges and Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.

Short title.

Insertion of
new Chapter
MIA.

Establishment
of National
Judicial


Qualification
for member-
ship.

Resignation
and removal
etc. of mem-
bers.

Barto hold any
other public of-
fice or practice
in any Court.
Salaries and
allowances etc.
of chairman and
members.

Power to make
rules.

Officer and Suaff
of the Commis-
sion.

2

(2) The Commission shall consist of a Chairman and four other members who
shall be appointment by the President by warrant under his hand and seal in the
following manner:—

(i) The Chairman of the Commission on the recommendation of a collegium
consisting of all sitting judges of the Supreme Court;

(ii) one member of the Commission on the recommendation of a collegium
consisting of the Chief Justices of High Courts;

(iii) one member on the recommendation of the Union Council of Ministers;

(iv) one member on the recommendation of the Leader of the Opposition in
the Lok Sabha who shall act in consultation with the Leaders of other Opposition
Parties in both Houses of Parliament for the purpose; and

(v) one member on the recommendation of a collegium consisting of all the
members of the Bar Council of India.

123B. (/) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as Chairman or
member of the Commission unless he

(a) is a citizen of India
(b) has completed the age of fifty-five years;
(c) has been a judge of the Supreme Court or a judge of a High Court; or

(व) has been enrolled as for at least ten years a senior advocate in a High
Court or the Supreme Court

(2) The Chairman and members of the Commission shall have a fixed tenure
of five years, but shall be eligible for a second term. Each vacancy shall be filled by
appointment in the manner specified in this article 123A(2).

123C. (6) A member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the Presi-
dent, resign his office;

(6) A member may be removed from his office on the unanimous recommendation

of all the other members of the Commission on the ground of misconduct after giving him
an opportunity of being heard.

123D. A member of the Commission, after completion of his term,
shall not hold any other public office or shall practice in any Court or do
any chamber practice.

12370. (i) The Chairman and members of the Commission shall be paid such
salaries and allowances as may be payable respectively to the Chief Justice and
other judges of the Supreme Court.

(ii) Every member of the Commission shall be entitled to such privileges and
rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as are available to the Judges of the
Supreme Court.

Provided that neither the salary nor the allowances nor the privileges
nor rights in respect of leave of absence and pension of a member shall be
varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.

123F. The Commission may make rules for regulating the procedure of its
own working.

1236. The President may, after consultation with the Commission, make
rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of
persons appointed, to the Office of the Commission and until such rules are made

15

20

25

30

35

40

45


15

20

25

30

35

40

45

3

the Central Government shall make available such number of
officers and staff as may be deemed necessary by the Commission.

123H. The administrative expenses of the office of the Commission, inclu-
ding all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, or in respect of persons
serving in that office, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India.

1231. The seat of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.

3. For Article 124 of the Constitution, the following Article shall be substituted,

namely:—

"124. (1) There shall be Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice
of India and such number of other Judges as the Parliament may by law prescribe.”

(2) Every judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by
warrant under his hand and seal on the recommendation of the National Judicial
Commission and shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty five years. The
Chief Justice of India shall always be appointed by seniority from amongst the
judges of the Supreme Court, unless the Commission unanimously recommends
otherwise.

Before making any recommendation for the appointment of a judge to the
Supreme Court, the National Judicial Commission may consult the Chief Justice of
India and other judges of the Supreme Court. However in case of a disagreement the
view of the Commission shall be final in the matter.

(3) A judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign
his office.

(4) If any dispute arises about the age of a judge of the Supreme Court, it
shall be determined by the National Judicial Commission whose decision shall be
final in the matter.

(5) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of the Supreme
Court unless he—

(a) is a citizen of India;

(9) has been for at least 15 years a judge of a High Court or of two or
more High Courts in succession; or

(c) has been for at least 15 years an advocate of a High Court or of two
or more High courts in succession; or

(व) is, in the opinion of the National Judicial Commission, a distin-
guished jurist.
“Explanation:
In computing for the purpose of this clause the period during which a person
has been an advocate, any period during which a person has held Judicial office not
inferior to that of a district judge after he became an advocate shall be included.

(6) A Judge shall not be removed from his office except by an order of the
President passed on the recommendation of the National Judicial Commission which
shall be binding on the President.

(7) @) A judge of the Supreme Court shall be removed from his office on the
recommendations of the National Judicial Commission only on the finding of mis-
behaviour or incapacity of the Judge arrived at after an enquiry by a Committee of
three retired judges of the Supreme Court, to be selected by the National Judicial
Commission to inquire into charges of misbehaviour or incapacity against the judge.
The rules of procedure for framing the charges, constituting the Inquiry Committee
and for the Inquiry shall be framed by the National Judicial Commission.

Administrative
expenses of the
Commission.

Headquarter of
the Gommis-
sion.
Substitution of
art, 124.

Establishment
and Constitu-
tion of
Supreme Court.


Amendment of
Article 126.

Substitution of
Article 217.

Appointment
and Conditions
of the Office ofa
Judge of a High
Court.

for the purpo:
National Ju

4

(b) Once the Inquiry Committee is constituted to enquire into the charges
against a judge, he shall not discharge any judicial function.

(8) Every person appointed to be judge of the Supreme Court shall, before he
enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, or some person
appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out
for the purpose in the Third Schedule.

(9) No person who has held office as a judge of the Supreme Court shall plead
or act in any court or before any authority within the territory of India. He shall not
be appointed to any office of profit, including a Commission of Inquiry by the
Government at the Centre or State, except on the recommendation of the National

4. In Article 126 of the Constitution,—for the words, “as the President may appoint
** the words “as the President may appoint on the recommendation of the
ial Commission” shall be substituted.

5. For Article 217 of the constitution, the following Article shall be substituted,

namely:—

"217. (1) Every judge of the High Court shall be appointed by the President by
warrant under his hand and seal on the recommendation of the National Judicial
Commission and shall hold office until he attains the age of 62 years. The Chief
Justice of a High Court shall always be appointed by seniority from amongst the
ing judges of that High Court, unless the National Judicial Commission unani-
mously recommends otherwise. The President shall be bound by the advice of the
National Judicial Commission.

(2) The National Judicial Commission shall not make its recommendation to

the President until at least two weeks after the name of the proposed appointee has
been duly notified to the public in the press by the National Judicial Commission.

(3) A Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign
his office;

(4) If any dispute arises about the age of a judge of the High Court, it shall be
determined by the National Judicial Comm: in whose decision shall be final.

(5) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of the High
Court unless he— .
(a) is a citizen of India;

(9) has held for at least 10 years a judicial office in the territory of India;
or

(c) has been for at least 10 years an advocate of a High Court or of two
or more High Courts in succession; or
(व) ts, in the opinion of the National Judicial Commission, a distin-
guished jurist.
(6) (a) A judge shall not be removed from his office except by an order of the
President passed on the recommendation of the National Judicial Commission which
shall be binding on the President.

(b) the National Judicial Commission A Judge of the High Court shall be
removed from his office on the recommendation of only on the finding of misbe-
haviour or incapacity arrived at after an Inquiry Committee of 3 retired judges of the
Supreme Court or High Court constituted by the National Judicial Commission to
inquire into charges of misbehaviour or incapacity against the judge. The rules of
procedure for framing the charges, constituting the Inquiry Committee and for the
Inquiry shall be framed by the National Judicial Commission.”

10

20

25

30

35

45


5

6. For Article 220 of the Constitution the following Article shall be substituted.
namely:—

“220. No person who, after the commencement of-this Constitution has held

office as a judge of a High Court shall plead or act in any Court or before any

5 authority; in India except the Supreme Court and the other High Courts. He shall

not be appointed to any office of profit, including a Commission of Inquiry by the

Government, except on the recommendation of the National Judicial Commission.

7. In Article 222, for clause (1) the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

"(1) A judge of a High Court may be transferred from one High Court to
10 another High Court by the President on the recommendation of the National Judi-
cial Commission which shall be binding on the President.”

Subsutution of
Amicle 220

Restriction on
practice after
being a perma-
nent Judge

Amendment of
Article 222


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

A competent, independent and impartial judiciary is vital for sustaining the consti-
tutional democratic system of governance. Our Constitution makers did try to ensure
independence of higher judiciary to enable it to work impartialy without fear or favour.
However, experience has shown that the system of appointment, promotion, transfer of
judges in the higher judiciary and their removal for misconduct is deficient, inadequate
and lacks transparency. Inordinate delays in appointment of judges and very often selec-
tion of inappropriate persons has contributed to long delays in the decision of cases to the
detriment of the litigant public.

Complaints are also heard about the competence and integrity of judges manning
the higher judiciary. Further the procedure for removal of judges for their misconduct is
cumbersome, impractical and ineffective and fails to ensure their accountability. It is,
therefore, not surprising that the system has given rise to wide spread public perception
that there is decline in the quality of the higher judiciary in the country besides percepti-
ble decline in the quality of administration of justice. Such a public perception is bound to
eat into the vitals of the Constitutional system of governance.

As a remedial measure it is necessary to set up a high powered multimember
National Judicial Commission entrusted with the task of —

(i) selecting capable persons of proven integrity, honesty and impartiality for
appointment in the higher judiciary;

(ii) ensuring elimination of inordinate delays in selection and appointment of judges;
(iii) ensuring transparency in promotion and transfer of judges; and
(iv) ensuring effective removal of errant judges for their misconduct.
For achieving the aforesaid objectives an amendment to the Constitution is required.
Hence this Bill.
S. RAMACHANDRAN PILLAI



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Judicial Commis-
sion. The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a sum of Rs. three crores may involve as recurring expenditure per
annum.

A sum of Rs. Ten crores may also be involved as non recurring expenditure.


_ ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of
India and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than seven
other Judges.

(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by war-
rant under his hand and seal after consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme
Court and of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem necessary for the
purpose and shall hold office unul he attains the age of sixty-five years:

Provided that in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the
Chief Justice of India shall always be consulted:

Provided further that—

(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign
his office;

(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in the manner provided in
clause (4).

[(2A) The age of a Judge of the Supreme Court shall be determind by such
authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.)

(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court
unless he is a citizen of India and—

(a) has been for at least five years a Judge of the High court or of two or more
such Courts in sucession; or

(0) has been for at least ten years an advocate of a High court or of two or
more such Courts in succession; or

(c) is, in the opinion of the President, a distinguished jurist.

Explanation I—In this clause “High Court” means a High Court which exercises,
or which at any time before the commencement of this Constitution exercised, jurisdic-
tion in any part of the territory of India.

Explanation I1.—In computing for the purpose of this clause the period during which
a person has been an advocate, any period during which a person has held judicial office
not inferior to that of a district judge after he became an advocate shall be included.

(4) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office except by an
order of the President passed after an address by each House of Parliament supported by
a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-
thirds of the members of that House present and voting has been presented to the Presi-
dent in the same session for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or inca-
pacity:

(5) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the presentation of an address
and for the investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge under
clause (4).

(6) Every person appointed to be a Judge of the Supreme Court shall, before he
enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed
in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose
in the Third Schedule.


9

(7) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall plead or act
in any court or before any authority within the territory of India.

126. When the office of Chief Justice of India is vacant or when the Chief Justice is,
by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of
the office shall be performed by such one of the other Judges of the Court as the President
may appoint for the purpose.

217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal after consultation wtih the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of
the State, and, inthe case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the
Chief Justice of the High Court, in and [shall hold office, in the case of an additional or
acting Judge, as provided in article 224, and in any other case, until he attains the age of
[sixty-two years]]:

Provided that—

(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign
his office;

(b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the manner
provided in clause (4) of article 124 for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme
Court;

(c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appointed by the
President to be a Judge of the Supreme Court or by his being transferred by the
President to any other High Court within the territory of India.

(2) a person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court unless
he is a citizen of India and—

(a) has for at least ten years held a judicial office in the territory of India; or

(b) has for at least ten years been an advocate of a High Court or of two or
more such Courts in succession;
Explanation,—For the purposes of this clause— है

[(a) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in
the territory of India, there shall be included any period, after he has held any judi-
cial office, during which the person has been an advocate of a High Court or has
held the office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State,
requiring special Knowledge of law;]

[(aa)] in computing the period during which a person has been an advocate of
a High Court, there shall be included any period during which the person [has held
judicial office or the office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or
a State, requiring special knowledge of law] after he became an advocate;

(b) in computing the period during which a person has. held judicial office in
the territory of India or been an advocate of a High Court, there shall be included
any period before the commencement of this Constitution during which he has held
judicial office in any area’ which was comprised before the fifteenth day of August,
1947 within India as defined by the Government of India Act, 1935, or has been an
advocate of any High Court in any such area, as the case may be.

{(3) If any question arises as to the age of a Judge of a High Court, the question
shall be decided by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the
decision of the President shall be final.)

[220. No person who, after the commencement of this Constitution, has held office
as a permanent Judge of a High Court shall plead or act in any court or before any
authority in India except the Supreme Court and the other High Courts.

Appointment
of acting Chief
Justice.

Appointment
and conditions
of the office of
a Judge of a
High Court,

Restriction on
practice after
being a perma-
nent Judge.


10

Explanation.—In this article, the expression “High Court” does not include a High
Court for a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule as it existed before the com-
mencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956.)

Transfer of a 222. (1) The President may, after consultation with the Chief Justice of India,
Judge from one transfer a Judge from one High Court to any other High Court.

High Court to

another {(2) When a Judge has been or is so transferred, he shall, during the period he

serves, after the commencement of the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act,
1963, as a Judge of the other High Court, be entitled to receive in addition to his
salary such compensatory allowance as may be determined by Parliament by law
and, until so determined, such compensatory allowance as the President may by
order fix.]


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai, M.P.)

NggiP(PLU)MRND—1470RS—01.08.2001.