1
THE CHAIRPERSONS AND MEMBERS OF TRIBUNALS AND
COMMISSIONS (RETIREMENT AGE) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for uniform retirement age for Chairpersons and Members of  the  various
Tribunals and Commissions established under various laws enacted by Parliament.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Chairpersons and  Members of Tribunals and
Commissions (Retirement Age) ) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “Tribunals or Commissions”
means any Tribunal or Commission established under any law enacted by Parliament and
includes the Councils and State Commissions so established.
Short title and
commencement.
Definition.
Bill No. LIV of  2010
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2011

2
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, on
and from such date as the Central Government shall appoint in this behalf, the retirement age
for Chairperson and Member of any Tribunal or Commission shall be seventy-two years and
sixty-eight years respectively.
Retirement
age for
Chairperson
and Member
of any
Tribunal or
Commission.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The life expectancy in our country has tremendously improved and is comparable to
many developed countries. Accordingly, there is a need for a fresh look towards the retirement
age in various establishments of the Government. The retirement age of the Judge of
Supreme Court is sixty five years whereas that of High Court is sixty two years. Many of
these Judges are appointed as Chairpersons of Commission and Tribunals. In many cases,
they hardly have much time to perform their functions. By the time they are accustomed with
the system they are due for retirement. The abilities and experience of these Judges needs to
be utilised for the good of the society for longer period. Similarly, the Government spends a
lot of money for the training and orientation of its officers at senior level. Many senior
officers are appointed Chairpersons/members of various Commission and Tribunal. Their
rich experience for running  the affairs of the Government also needs to be utilised for the
benefit of the common man. In view of the lower retirement age in various establishments, the
experience gained by the senior Government officers is being fruitfully tapped by multinationals
by giving hefty salaries to these retired officers. It is the Government which should utilise the
professional experience of these officers to the fullest in their establishments for the betterment
of the society. Different enactments for establishing various Tribunals and Commission
prescribe different retirement ages for their Chairperson and members without any cogent
reasons. There is a strong case for uniformity in retirement age.
In this connection, the Law Commission of India in his 232nd Report regarding
“retirement age of Chairperson and members of Tribunals” has recommended that the
retirement age for the Chairperson of all the Tribunals and Commissions established under
various statutes should be raised to seventy years. It has also recommended that the
retirement age for members of these Tribunals/Commissions should be raised to sixty five
years. It is felt that rich and vast experience of persons appointed in various Tribunal and
Commission needs to be utilised more than what has been  recommended by Law Commission.
Accordingly, it has been proposed in the Bill that retirement age of Chairpersons of various
Commissions and Tribunals shall be raised to seventy two years and of members to
sixty eight years.
Hence, this Bill.
MAHENDRA  MOHAN
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for uniform retirement age for Chairpersons and Members of  the  various
Tribunals and Commissions established under various laws enacted by Parliament.
————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—6666RS(S3)—28-02-2011.