Bill No. LIV of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Repulbic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazettee, appoint.
2. In article 239AA of the Constitution of India for clause (4), the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘‘(4). There shall be a Council of Ministers consisting of not more than ten per
cent of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly, with the Chief Minister
at the head to aid and advise the Lieutenant Governor who shall in the exercise of his
functions act in accordance with such advice in relation to matters with respect to
which the Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, except in so far as he is, by or
under any law, required to act in his discretion:
Provided that the Lieutenant Governor may require the Council of Ministers to
reconsider such advice, either generally or otherwise, and the Lieutenant Governor
shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration:
Provided further that the question whether any, and if so what, advide was tendered
by Ministers to the Lieutenant Governor shall not be inquired into in any court.’’
Amendment of
article 239AA.
5
10
15

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
An elected government is the repository of the will of the people. The power to take
key administrative decision is important to realise this will. In Delhi, however, administrative
powers of the Lieutenant Governor vis-a-vis such powers of the elected government, the
overall quality of governance and affect the implementation of welfare schemes for the
people. Decisions taken by the Lieutenant Governor directly impact the lives of the people of
Delhi. Therefore the advice of he elected government is important to ensure accountability
to the demands of the people.
Article 239 AA (4) the Constitution provides for a Council of Ministers from the elected
government to aid and advice the Lieutenant Governor. However there needs to be a provision
for the Lieutenant Governor to act in accordance with such advice. This would be in line with
article 74 of the Constitution which provides that the President shall act in accordance with
the advice of the council of Ministers in the case of the Union government. Union Territories
are administered by the President acting through an administrator, according to article 239 of
the constitution. In the case of Delhi, however, the administrator is, as per article 239 AA,
referred to as the Lieutenant Governor. Therefore the powers drawn by the Lieutenant
Governor vis-a-vis administration must be in the line with the powers exercised by the
President in the case of the Union Government, as enshrined in the Constitution.
Further, article 74 allows the President to require the Council of Ministers to reconsider
its advice. The President would however then have to act upon the advice given by the
ministers after the reconsideration. This provision would also be meaningful in the case of
Delhi. The Lieutenant Governor would be able to scrtinise the advice of the elected government
and would, if the need arises, require reconsideration of the advice provided. Such scrutiny
would ensure a mechanism of checks and balances for the elected government.
The above mentioned provisions would, therefore, retain effective checks and balances
for the elected government, while being fair to its collective responsibility towards the
welfare and aspirations of the people. Accountability can be safeguarded with a more active
role for the elected government in the governance of the Union Territory of Delhi.
Hence, this Bill.
TIRUCHI SIV A

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
**** **
239AA.  (1) * * * * *
(2) * * * * *
(3) * * * * *
(4) There shall be a council of Ministers consisting of not more than ten per cent. of
the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly, with the Chief Minister at the head
to aid and advise the Lieutenant Governor in the exercise of his functions in relation to
matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, except in so
far as he is, by or under any law, required to act in his discretion:
Provided that in the case of difference of opinion between the Lieutenant Governor
and his Ministers on any matter, the Lieutenant Governor shall refer it to the President for
decision and act according to the decision given thereon by the President and pending such
decision it shall be competent for the Lieutenant Governor in any case where the matter, in
his opinion, is so urgent that it is necessary for him to take immediate action, to take such
action or to give such direction in the matter as he deems necessary.
(5) * * * * *
(6) * * * * *
(7) * * * * *
(8) * * * * *
* *** **
3
Special
provisions
with respect
to Delhi.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
.
————
(Shri Tiruchi Siva, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—841RS(S3)—24-06-2019.