THE PROHIBITION OF LITTERING AND DEFILING OF PUBLIC
PLACES BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to  prohibit  littering, smoking, spitting and defiling by way of attending the call of nature
in public places which are meant for the general public so as to maintain cleanliness,
hygiene and healthy atmosphere in and around such public places and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Littering and Defiling of Public Places
Act, 2006.
 (2) It extends to all the Union Territories.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State which has adopted
this Act, the Government of that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "litter" means anything which is likely to cause or contribute to the defilement
of the place where it is thrown or left to stink;
Bill No. LIV  of  2006
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28TH JUL Y, 2006.

2
(c) "publice place" means any place to which the general public, at the material
time has, or is entitled or permitted to have access with or without payment and
includes road and highway, street, lane, railway station, hospital, bank premises, theatre,
Court premises, race course, circus, music hall, gymnasium, swimming pool, dancing
hall, market shopping mall, park, educational institutions, religious place and such
other places.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
smoking, spitting, littering. urinating, defecating in a public place and defiling or defacement
thereof is hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions relating to
(a) smoking in a public place shall be liable,—
(i) in the case of first offence, to a fine of five hundred rupees; and
(ii) in the case of second or subsequent offence to a fine of five thousand
rupees.
(b) spitting, urinating defecating in a public place shall be liable to a fine of two
thousand rupees.
(c) littering in a public place shall be liable,—
(i) in the case of a first offence to a fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees; and
(ii) in the case of second or subsequent offence, to a fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees.
(d) defiling or defacement shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
(2) In penalising a person convicted of an offence under this Act, the Court shall take
into consideration not only the purpose of this Act but also the risk of diseases or injury
resulting to persons or animal or of damage to property.
5. For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government shall set up such number of
mobile Courts as it may deem necessary for carrying out such purposes.
6. The mobile courts set up under section 5 may try the offences summarily to deliver
instant justice under this Act.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Prohibition of
smoking,
spitting,
littering,
urinating in
public places.
Penalty.
Central
Government to
set up mobile
Courts.
Summary trial
of offences.
Power to
make rules
2

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 In our country littering and defiling of public places is very common. People do not
hesitate to spit anywhere particularly after chewing paan or consuming paan masala, gutkha,
khaini and other tobacco mixed products without bothering about the ill effects of such
spitting. Similarly people can be seen smoking even in ‘No Smoking Zones’ or while using
public transport. Many a time people smoke right under the banner reading "Somking is
Prohibited" without bothering for the environment which is polluted by the toxic smoke
generated by such smoking. The smokers also foreget that they are also compelling non-
smokers to inhale the deadly smoke and to suffer without fault. Sometimes burning cigarettes
or beedi butts are thrown carelessly resulting in devastating fires many a time in the senstitive
and important places.
Similarly people can be seen urinating or even defecating in public places anywhere
along the road side or along any wall including those of important national or historical
buildings without bothering about the public health resulting in such areas or walls to stink
with odour and germinate various viruses crippling of which cause diseases.
It is also a common sight that people leave or throw litter wherever they like including
the public places without caring for the health hazard that it may cause.
It has therefore, become necessary to impose a strict ban on smoking, spitting, urinating,
defecating, littering, defacement and defilement so that a healthy atomosphere prevails at
public Places.
Hence this Bill.
E.M. SUDARSANA  NATCHIAPPAN

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for setting up of mobile courts for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one hundred crore may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum.
A non recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore may also involve
from the Consolidated Fund of India.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJY A SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit littering, smoking, spitting and defiling by way of attending the call of nature in
public places which are meant for the general public so as to maintain cleanliness,
hygiene and healthy atmosphere in and around such public places and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1778RS(S1)—28-07-2006.