Bill No. LIV-F of 2005
THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT)
 BILL, 2008
   (AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJYA SABHA  ON THE 21ST OCTOBER, 2008
LOK SABHA ON THE 23RD OCTOBER, 2008)
ASSENTED TO
ON 5 DEC., 2008
ACT NO. 26 OF 2008

THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the commencement of that provision.
Short title
and comme-
ncement.
Bill No. LIV-F of 2005

2
2. After section 17D of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely,—
"17E. For the purposes of this Chapter, a costmetic shall be deemed to be
adulterated,—
(a) if it consists in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed
substance; or
(b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary conditions
whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may have been
rendered injurious to health; or
(c) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous or
deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health; or
(d) if it bears or contains, for purposes of colouring only, a colour other
than one which is prescribed; or
(e) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance which may render it injurious
to health; or
(f) if any substance has been mixed therewith so as to reduce its quality or
strength.".
3. In section 18 of the principal Act, in cluase (a) , for sub-clause (ii), the following sub-
clause shall be substituted, namely,—
"(ii) any cosmetic which is not of a standard quality, or is misbranded, adulterated
or spurious;".
4. In section 26A of the principal Act, for the word "prohibit", the words "regulate,
restrict or prohibit" shall be substituted.
5. After section 26A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely,—
"26B. Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter, if the
Central Government is satisfied that a drug is essential to meet the requirements of an
emergency arising due to epidemic or natural calamities and that in the public interest,
it is necessary or expedient so to do, then, that Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, regulate or restrict the manufacture, sale or distribution of such drug.".
6. In section 27 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause (a),—
(A) for the figures, letter and words "17B or which", the figures,
letter and words "17B and which" shall be substituted.
(B) for the words "punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than five years but which may extend to a term of life and with fine which
shall not be less than ten thousand rupees;", the words "punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be
less than ten lakh rupees or three times value of the drugs confiscated, which-
ever is more:" shall be substituted.
(C) the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the fine imposed on and released from, the person
convicted under this clause shall be paid, by way of compensation, to the
person who had used the adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in this
clause:
Insertion of
new section
17E.
Power of
Central
Government to
regulate or
restrict,
manufacture,
etc., of drug in
public interest.
Adulterated
cosmetics.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment
of section
26A.
Insertion of
new section
26B.
Amendment
of section 27.
23 of 1940.

3
Provided further that where the use of the adulterated or spurious
drugs referred to in this clause has caused the death of a person who used
such drugs, the fine imposed on and  realised from, the person convicted
under this clause, shall be paid to the relative of the person who had died
due to the use of the adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in this
clause.
Explanation.— For the purposes of the second proviso, the
expression "relative" means—
(i) spouse of the deceased person; or
(ii) a minor  legitimate son, and unmarried legitimate daughter
and a widowed mother; or
(iii) parent of the minor victim; or
(iv) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the deceased person
at the time of his death, a son or a daughter who has attained the age
of eighteen years; or
(v) any person, if wholly or in part, dependent on the earnings
of the deceased person at the time of his death,—
(a) the parent; or
(b) a minor brother or an unmarried sister; or
(c) a widowed daughter-in-law; or
(d) a widowed sister; or
(e) a minor child of a pre-deceased son; or
(f) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no
parent of the child is alive; or
(g) the paternal grandparent if no parent of the member
is alive;";
(ii) in clause (b),—
(A) for the words "not be less than one year but which may extend to three
years and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees", the
words "not be less than three years but which may extend to five years and with
fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees or three times the value of the
drugs confiscated, whichever is more" shall be substituted;
(B) in the proviso, for the words "less than one year and of fine of less
than five thousand rupees", the words "less than three years and of fine of less
than one lakh rupees" shall be substituted;
(iii) in clause (c),—
(A) for the words "not be less than three years but which may extend to
five years and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees", the
words "not less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life
and with fine which shall not be three lakh rupees or three times the value of the
drugs confiscated, whichever is more" shall be substituted;
(B) in the proviso, for the words "less than three years but not less than
one year", the words "less than seven years but not less than three years and of
fine of less than one lakh rupees" shall be substituted;
(iv) in clause (d), for the words "and with fine", the words "and with fine
which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.

4
Amendment
of section
27A.
7. In section 27A of the principal Act, for clauses (i) and (ii), the following clauses shall
be substituted, namely,—
(i) any cosmetic deemed to be spurious under section 17D or adulterated under
section 17E shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees or three
times the value of the cosmetics confiscated, whichever is more;
(ii) any cosmetic other than a cosmetic referred to in clause (i) in contravention
of any provisions of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to
twenty thousand rupees, or with both.".
8. In section 28 of the principal Act, for the words "with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees or with both", the words "with fine which shall not be less than twenty
thousand rupees or with both" shall be substituted.
9. In section 28A of the principal Act, for the words "with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees or with both", the words "with fine which shall not be less than twenty
thousand rupees or with both" shall be substituted.
10. In section 29 of the principal Act, for the words "five hundred rupees", the words
"five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
11. In section 30 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (a),—
(A) for the words "not be less than two years but which may extend
to six years and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees",
the words "not be less than seven years but which may extend to ten
years and with fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees" shall be
substituted;
(B) in the proviso, for the words "less than two years and of fine of
less than ten thousand rupees", the words "less than seven years and of
fine of less than one lakh rupees" shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words "shall not be less than six years but which
may extend to ten years and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand
rupees", the words "shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees"
shall be substituted;
(iii) in clause (c), for the words "five thousand rupees", the words "fifty
thousand rupees" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "ten years, or with fine, or with both", the
words "two years, or with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees or with
both" shall be substituted.
12. In section 32 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub-
sections shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(1) No prosecution under this Chapter shall be instituted except by—
(a) an Inspector; or
(b) any gazetted officer of the Central Government or a State Government
authorised in writing in this behalf by the Central Government or a State Government
by a general or special order made in this behalf by that Government; or
(c) the person aggrieved; or
Amendment
of section 28.
Amendment
of section
28A.
Amendment
of section 29.
Amendment
of section 30.
Amendment
of section 32.

5
(d) a recognised consumer association whether such person is a member
of that association or not.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no court inferior to that of a Court of
Session shall try an offence punishable under this Chapter.’’.
13. After section 32A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"32B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, any offence punishable under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 13, section
28 and section 28A of this Act (whether committed by a company or any officer
thereof), not being an offence punishable with imprisonment only, or with imprisonment
and also with fine, may, either before or after the institution of any prosecution, be
compounded by the Central Government or by any State Government or any officer
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or a State Government, on payment
for credit to that Government of such sum as that Government may, by rules made in
this behalf, specify:
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of
the fine which may be imposed under this Act for the offence so compounded:
Provided further that in cases of subsequent offences, the same shall not be
compoundable.
(2) When the accused has been committed for trial or when he has been convicted
and an appeal is pending, no composition for the offence shall be allowed without the
leave of the court to which he is committed or, as the case may be, before which the
appeal is to be heard.
(3) Where an offence is compounded under sub-section ( 1), no proceeding or
further proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the offender in respect
of the offence so compounded and the offender, if in custody, shall be released
forthwith.".
14. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) after clause (dd), the following clause shall be inserted, namely,—
"(dda) prescribe under clause ( d) of section 17E the colour or colours
which a cosmetic may bear or contain for the purposes of colouring;’’;
(ii) in clause (p), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be omitted;
(iii) in clause (q), the word "and'' shall be inserted at the end;
(iv) after clause (q), the following clause shall be inserted, namely,—
"(r) sum which may be specified by the Central Government under section
32B.".
15. In section 33-I of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(a) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug—
(i) deemed to be misbranded under section 33E,
(ii) deemed to be adulterated under section 33EE, or
(iii) without a valid licence or in violation of any of the
conditions thereof, as required under section 33 EEC,
Insertion of
new section
32B.
Compounding
of certain
offences.
2 of 1974.
Amendment
of section 33.
Amendment of
section 33-I.

6
Amenment of
section 33J.
Disclosure of
name of
manufacturer,
etc.
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year and with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or
three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more;";
(ii) in clause (b), for the words "five thousand rupees", occurring at both
the places, the words "fifty thousand rupees or three times the value of the
drugs confiscated, whichever is more" shall be substituted;
(iii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(c) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug in contravention of the
provisions of any notification issued under section 33EED shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years
and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or three times the
value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more.";
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the words "three months and with fine
which shall not be less than five hundred rupees", the words "six months
and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees" shall be
substituted.
16. In section 33J of the principal Act,—
(a) in clause (a), for the words "two thousand rupees", the words "fifty thousand
rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more" shall be
substituted;
(b) in clause (b), for the words "five thousand rupees" occurring at both the
places, the words "one lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated,
whichever is more" shall be substituted;
(c) in clause (c), for the words "six months and with fine which shall not be less
than one thousand rupees", the words "one year and with fine which shall not be less
than twenty thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated,
whichever is more" shall be substituted.
17. After section 33K of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely,—
"33KA. Every person, not being the manufacturer of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or
Unani drug or his agent for the distribution thereof, shall, if so required, disclose to the
Inspector the name, address and other particulars of the person from whom he acquired
the Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug.
33KB. Every person holding a licence under clause (c) of section 33EEC shall
keep and maintain such records, registers and other documents as may be prescribed
and shall furnish to any officer or authority exercising any power or discharging any
function under this Act such information as is required by such officer or authority for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.".
18. In section 33N of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) in clause (gga), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be omitted;
(ii) after clause (gga), the following clause shall be inserted, namely,—
“(ggb) prescribe the records, registers or other documents to be kept and
maintained under section 33KB; and’’.
19. In section 36A of the principal Act, for the words "all offences under this Act", the
words, brackets, figures and letters "all offences (except the offences triable by the Special
Court under section 36AB or Court of Session) under this Act" shall be substituted.
Insertion of
new sections
33KA and
33KB.
Maintenance
of records and
furnishing of
information.
Amendment
of section
33N.
Amendment
of section
36A.

7
Insertion of
new sections
36AB, 36AC,
36AD and
36AE.
20. After section 36A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘36AB. (l) The Central Government, or the State Government, in consultation
with the Chief Justice of  the High Court, shall, for trial of offences relating to adulterated
drugs or spurious drugs and punishable under clauses (a) and (b) of section 13, sub-
section (3) of section 22, clauses ( a) and (c) of section 27, section 28, section 28A,
section 28B and clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 30 and other offences relating
to adulterated drugs or spurious drugs, by notification, designate one or more Courts
of Session as a Special Court or Special Courts for such area or areas or for such case
or class or group of cases as may be specified in the notification.
Explanation.—In this sub-section, "High Court" means the High Court of the
State in which a Court of Session designated as Special Court was functioning
immediately before such designation.
(2) While trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court shall also try an
offence, other than an offence referred to in sub-section (1), with which the accused
may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, be charged at the same trial.
36AC. (I) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973,—
(a) every offence, relating to adulterated or spurious drug and punishable
under clauses (a) and ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 13, clause ( a) of sub-
section (2) of section 13, sub-section ( 3) of section 22, clauses ( a) and ( c) of
section 27, section 28, section 28A, section 28B and sub-sections (1) and (2) of
section 30 and other offences relating to adulterated drugs or spurious drugs,
shall be cognizable.
(b) no person accused, of an offence punishable under clauses (a) and (c)
of sub-section (1) of section 13, clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 13, sub-
section (3) of section 22, clauses ( a) and (c) of section 27, section 28, section
28A, section 28B and sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 30 and other offences
relating to adulterated drugs or spurious drugs, shall be released on bail or on
his own bond unless—
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose
the application for such release; and
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court
is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not
guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while
on bail:
Provided that a person, who, is under the age of sixteen years, or is a woman or
is sick or infirm, may be released on bail, if the Special Court so directs.
(
2) The limitation on granting of bail specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) is
in addition to the limitations under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other
law for the time being in force on granting of bail.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special powers
of the High Court regarding bail under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 and the High Court may exercise such powers including the power under clause (b)
of sub-section ( 1) of that section as if the reference to "Magistrate" in that section
includes also a reference to a "Special Court" designated under section 36AB.
Special Courts.
Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable in
certain cases.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

8
Appeal  and
revision.
36AD. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (including the provisions as to bails or bonds), shall apply to
the proceedings before a Special Court and for the purposes of the said provisions, the
Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and the person conducting the
prosecution before the Special Court, shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor:
Provided that the Central Government or the State Government may also appoint,
for any case or class or group of cases, a Special Public Prosecutor.
(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a
Special Public Prosecutor under this section unless he has been in practice as an
advocate for not less than seven years, under the Union or a State, requiring special
knowledge of law.
(3) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor
under this section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of
clause (u) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the provisions of
that Code shall have effect accordingly.
36AE. The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the powers
conferred by Chapter XXIX or Chapter XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
on a High Court, as if a Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the
High Court were a Court of Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction
of the High Court.'.
Application of
Code of
Criminal
Procedure,
1973 to
proceedings
before Special
Court.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

LOK   SAA
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—4242LS(S5)—10.12.2008.