5

10

AS INTRODUCED IN RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LIV of 1999

THE CONSTITUTION (EIGHTY-EIGHTH AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1999

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, This Act may be called the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1999.

2. In article 335 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be inserted at the
end, namely:—

“Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent in making of any provision in
favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for
relaxation in qualifying marks in any examination or lowering the standards of
evaluation, for reservation in matters of promotion to any class or classes of services
or posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State.”.

Short title.

Amendment
of article
335.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes had been enjoying the facility of
relaxation of qualifying marks and standards of evaluation in matters of reservation in
promotion. The Supreme Court in its judgment dated 1-10-1996 in the case of
S. Vinod Kumar Vs, Union of India held that such relaxations in matters of reservation
वा promotion were not permissible under article 16(4) of the Constitution in view of the
command contained in article 335 of the Constitution, The Apex Court also held that
the law on the subject of relaxations of qualifying marks and standards of evaluation in
matters of reservation in promotion is one laid down by the nine-judge Constitution
Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Indira Sawhney and others Vs. Union of
India and others. Para 831 of Indira Sawhney judgment also held such relaxations as
being not permissible under article 16(4) in view of the command contained in article
335 of the Constitution. In order to implement the judgments of the Supreme Court,
such relaxations had to be withdrawn with effect from 22.07.1997.

2. In view of the adverse effect of the order dated 22.07.1997 on the interests of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, representations had been received by the
Government from several quarters including the Members of Parliament. Considering
the various representations, the Government has reviewed the position and decided to
move for constitutional amendment with a view to restore the relaxations which were
withdrawn vide instructions issued by the Department of Personnel and Training on
22.07.1997.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid object.

New DELHI;

The 22nd December, 1999. VASUNDHARA RAJE.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *

335. The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes Claims of
shall be taken into consderation, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of Scheduled
administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts in connection with Castes and

the affairs of the Union or of a State. Scheduled
Tribes to

* * * * * services
and posts.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

«Smt. Vasundhara Raje, Minister of State of Department of Personnel and Traming and Department of
Pension and Pensioners’ Welfare)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3020RS—22. 12.1999.