THE COMPULSORY MILITARY TRAINING BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory military training to all youths in the country and to
include military training in the curriculum for children from matriculation to graduation
level and for matters connected therewith.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Military Training Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "youth" means a person above the age of fourteen years but less than fifty
years;
(c) "prescribe" means as prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent  and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. LIV of  2012
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012
     5
    10

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall provide,—
(a) military training to all youths including women who are physically, fit for a
period of not less than one year, irrespective of their caste, colour, religion and creed;
(b) compulsory practical and theoretical knowledge of military training in the
curriculum from matriculation to the graduation level.
(2) The Central Government shall establish such number of institutions and take
such other necessary steps, as it may deem fit to give effect to the provisions of
sub-section (1) (a).
4. (a) It shall be compulsory for every youth to pass the military training at every level.
(b) Every youth who successfully completes training under sub-section (1) (a)
of section 3 shall be awarded a certificate to that effect by the Central Government.
(c) The expenses of military training shall be shared by the Central and the
State Governments in the ratio as may be prescribed.
5. The appropriate Government shall give preference to youths who have successfully
completed their military training in services under defence, para-military forces and such
other establishments and organisations, as it may deem fit, for proper utilisation of talent:
Provided that all such youths, who, after successful completion of their military
training remain unemployed, shall be given unemployment allowances at such rate, as may
be determined from time to time, by the appropriate Government till they are gainfully
employed.
6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Compulsory
military
training to
youths.
Award of
certificate and
expenses of
military
training.
Employment
to those who
have
undergone
military
training.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In the past several years, extremists and naxalites activities have increased in almost
every part of the country and the cases of murder, loot and dacoity are also increasing day by
day leading to feeling of insecurity in public life. Though the Government is making every
effort to provide adequate protection to its citizens yet it is not possible without the individual
support. Almost all developing countries are providing for compulsory military training for
their citizens. But in India, there is not such provision for compulsory military training for
their citizens. The military training once imparted would provide quality of discipline and
sacrifice in each individual besides the spirit of brotherhood and amity. An integrated and a
coordinated programme of military training would be immensely beneficial to utilize the
synergies of our youth and would lead to their all-round development and enhancement of
the welfare of the nation.
It is also felt that the military training should also be imparted to children who are
studying in tenth class upto graduation level so that many students can join military and
para-military forces. With this in view, the Bill seeks to provide for compulsory military
training to all youths.
Hence this Bill.
A VINASH  RAI  KHANNA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide compulsory
military training to all youths for a period of not less than one year and for the purpose shall
establish such number of institutions and shall take such other necessary steps, as it may
deem fit. Clause 4 provides for sharing of expenditure of military training. Clause 5 provides
for employment opportunity to those youths who have undergone military training and
provision of unemployment allowance. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve and annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore per annum. A non-recurring expenditure of
about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—3971RS(S3)—07-12-2012.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory military training to all youths in the country and to include
military training in the curriculum for children from matriculation to graduation level
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Avinash Rai Khanna, M.P .)