THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION
OF VACANCIES) AMENDMENT BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies)
Act, 1959.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year  of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of
Vacancies) Amendment Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the words "employment
exchanges", the words "employment guidance and promotion centres" shall be substituted.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
31 of 1959. Amendment
of long title.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
AS INSTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. XXVII of 2013
S3 \F\BILL 2013RS\120RS\120RS
5

2
S3 \F\BILL 2013RS\120RS\120RS
3. In the principal Act, in section 1, in sub-section ( 1), for the words "Employment
Exchanges", the words "Employment Guidance and Promotion Centres" shall be substituted.
4. Throughout the principal Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for the words
"employment exchange" and "employment exchanges" wherever they occur, the words
"employment guidance and promotion centre" and "employment guidance and promotion
centres" shall respectively be substituted and such other consequential amendments as the
rules of grammar may require shall also be made.
5. In the principal Act, in section 2,—
(A) for clauses (b), (c)  and (d), the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:—
'(b) "employee" means any person who is employed or engaged on
contract basis, continuously for a period not less than two hundred and forty
days, in an establishment to do any work for remuneration;
(c) "employer" means any person who, employs, or, enters into contract
with, one or more other persons to do any work in an establishment for
remuneration, continuously for a period not less than two hundred and forty
days, and includes any person entrusted with the supervision and control of
employees in such establishment;
(d) "employment guidance and promotion centre" means any office or
place established and maintained by the appropriate Government for the collection
and furnishing of information,  either by the keeping of registers or through
electronic medium or otherwise, relating to—
(i) persons who seek to engage employees;
(ii) persons who seek employment;
(iii) vacancies to which persons seeking employment may be
appointed; and
(iv) persons who seek  vocational guidance and career counselling
or guidance to start self-employment;’;
(B) in clause (g), for the words "twenty-five or more", the words "ten or more"
shall be substituted;
(C) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ga) "plantation" means preparation of any land for planting of commercial
crops of perennial nature cultivated extensively in tropical and sub-tropical
situations on a large scale by uniform system of cultivation under central
management owned and managed by a company formed and registered under
the Companies Act, 1956, but does not include the plantation owned and managed
by an individual;’;
(D) clause (i) shall be omitted.
6. In the principal Act, in section 3,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (a), after the words "other than", the words "employment in
plantation or" shall be inserted;
(ii) clause (d) shall be omitted;
(iii) in clause ( e), after the word "Parliament", the words "or a State
Legislature" shall be inserted;
Amendment
of section 1.
Amendment
of section 2.
Substitution
of references
of certain
expressions
by certain
other
expressions.
Amendment
of section 3.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
S3 \F\BILL 2013RS\120RS\120RS
(b) in sub-section (2), clause (b) shall be omitted.
7. In the principal Act, in section 4, in sub-section  (2),—
(i) after the words "every establishment in private sector", the words "employing
twenty-five or more persons" shall be inserted;
(ii) after the words "category of establishments in private sector", the words
"employing twenty-five or more persons" shall be inserted.
8. In the principal Act, in section 5, after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"(4) The employer shall furnish the information relating to the result of selection
against the vacancies notified under section 4 to the employment guidance and
promotion centre within thirty days from the date of selection in such form as may be
prescribed.".
9. In the principal Act, after section 5, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"5A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the appropriate Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, having regard to the requirement of  collection
of statistics relating to employment status, require that from such date as may be
specified in the notification, the employer in every establishment in private sector
employing less than twenty-five persons or every establishment pertaining to any
class or category of establishments in private sector employing  less than twenty-five
persons shall furnish such information or return as may be prescribed in relation to
vacancies that have occurred or are about to occur in that establishment to such
employment guidance and promotion centre as may be prescribed, and the employer
shall thereupon comply with such requisition.".
10. In the principal Act, in section 6,—
(i) for the words and figure "any employer required to furnish any information or
returns under section 5", the words,  figures and letter "any employer required to
notify vacancies to employment guidance and promotion centres under section 4 or
furnish any information or return under section 5 or section 5A" shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words "under that section", the words, figures and letter "under
section 5 or section 5A" shall be substituted.
11. In the principal Act, for section 7, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"7. (1) If any employer fails to notify to the employment guidance and promotion
centre prescribed for the purpose any vacancy in accordance with sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2) of section 4, he shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees and  for every second offence with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees and for every subsequent offence with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with simple imprisonment which may extend to one
month, or with both.
(2) If any person,—
(a) required to furnish any information or return under section 5,—
(i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or returns; or
(ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or returns
which he knows to be  false; or
(b) impedes the right of access to any relevant record or document or the
right of entry conferred by section 6; or
Amendment
of section 5.
Insertion of
new  section
5A.
Obligation of
certain
establish-
ments in
private sector
to furnish
returns.
Amendment of
section 6.
Substitution of
section 7.
Penalties.
Amendment
of section
4.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
S3 \F\BILL 2013RS\120RS\120RS 1
(c) refuses to answer, or gives a false answer to any question asked under
section 6, necessary for obtaining any information required under section 5 or
section 5A,
he shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend  to five thousand
rupees and  for every  second offence with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees and for every subsequent offence with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees, or with simple imprisonment which may extend to one month, or with both.".
12. In the principal Act, after section 7, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘7A. If any employer of an establishment in private sector referred to in
section 5A,—
(a) required to furnish any information or return under that section,—
(i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or return; or
(ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or return
which he knows to be false; or
(b) impedes the right of access to any relevant record or document or the
right of entry conferred by section 6,
he shall be punishable after consecutive two defaults with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees and for every subsequent default with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees for each such default.
7B. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as
the company shall be deemed to be guilty of having committed the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on
the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of having
committed such offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.’.
13. In the principal Act, in section 10, in sub-section (2),  after clause (b), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(ba) the form in which the information relating to result of selection may be
furnished by the employer under sub-section (4) of section 5;
(bb) the information or return in relation to vacancies that have occurred or are
about to occur in the establishment in private sector and the employment guidance
and promotion centre to which such information or return shall be furnished under
section 5A;’’.
Insertion of
new sections
7A and 7B.
Penalty for
contravention
of section 5A.
Amendment
of section 10.
Offences by
companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 was
enacted on the recommendations of the Training and Employment Services Organisation
Committee set up by the Government of India in 1952 to provide for compulsory notification
of vacancies to the Employment Exchanges and for rendering returns, both employment and
occupational, relating to employment situation by the employers.
2. Over the years, based on experience gained and difficulties encountered in the
implementation of the said Act, a number of suggestions were received from various
State Governments and Union territory Administrations for amendment of the said Act. The
proposed amendments were discussed in various meetings of the Working Group on National
Employment Service. The said Working Group broadly endorsed the amendments. In addition,
the Act was enacted more than five decades back and with the passage of time, some of its
provisions have become redundant or obsolete which  need omission. In order to bring the
said Act in tune with the present day requirement, certain amendments to the Act are also felt
necessary.
3. In view of the above, the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of
Vacancies) Amendment Bill, 2013, inter alia, provides for—
(a) changing the short title of the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory
Notification of V acancies) Act, 1959 as “the Employment Guidance and Promotion
Centres (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959” and accordingly to amend
the long title of the Act;
(b) substituting the words ‘‘Employment Exchanges’’ with the words ‘‘Employment
Guidance and Promotion Centres’’, throughout the said Act, to give the emphasis on
the guidance and counselling aspect rather than mere registration for jobs;
(c) the amendment of clause ( g) of section 2 relating to the definition of
“establishment in private sector” by substituting the words “ten or more” for the
words “twenty-five or more” to collect employment information from establishments
employing ten or more persons;
(d) the insertion of a new clause ( ga) in section 2 to define the expression
“plantation” so as to bring the vacancies in the plantation sector within the purview of
the Act and to apply the provisions of the Act to the plantations owned and managed
by an individual on voluntary basis;
(e) the amendment of sub-section (1) of section 3 in order to notify vacancies
relating to unskilled office work and also vacancies relating to plantation sector along
with employment as agriculture or farm machinery operatives;
(f) providing exemption from the application of the Act to the vacancies of staff
of the State Legislature at par with the staff of Parliament;
(g) the omission of the provision relating to vacancies in an employment, which
carries a remuneration of less than sixty rupees in a month, as there is hardly any post,
which carries that remuneration;
(h) providing for an obligation on the employer to furnish the information relating
to the selection against the vacancies notified under the Act;
(i) the insertion of a new section 5A, to provide for furnishing of returns by
establishments employing ten or more but less than twenty-five persons to work for
remuneration and in case of any failure to furnish the returns, to provide the punishment
5
S3 \F\BILL 2013RS\120RS\120RS2

6
S3 \F\BILL 2013RS\120RS\120RS 2
after consecutive two defaults with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and
for every subsequent default  with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for
each such default;
(j) the substitution of section 7 so as to ensure better coverage and proper
implementation of the said Act by making penalty provisions more stringent including
an additional provision of imprisonment and raising the amount of fine for the first
offence which may extend to five thousand rupees, for any second offence with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees and for any subsequent offence with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with simple imprisonment which may
extend to one month, or with both;
(k) the insertion of new sections 7A and 7B to provide penalties for non-rendition
of returns by establishments employing ten or more but less than twenty-five persons
and to bring the public and private limited companies offering employment
opportunities under the purview of the Act and to make liable any officer or other
person working in such  companies for committing offence for non-compliance of the
provisions of the said Act.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
The 18th January, 2013.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to amend section 10 of the Employment Exchanges
(Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959, relating to the power to make rules, by
inserting clauses (ba) and (bb) in sub-section (2) of section 10. Clause (ba) proposed to be
inserted empowers the Central Government to make rules for providing the form in which the
information relating to result of selection may be furnished by the employer under
sub-section (4) of section 5. Clause ( bb) proposed to be  inserted empowers the Central
Government to make rules for furnishing the information or return in relation to vacancies
that have occurred or are about to occur in the establishment in private sector and the
employment guidance and promotion centre to which such information or return shall be
furnished under section 5A.
2. The rules made by the Central Government are required to be laid before Parliament.
The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the Central Government are matters of
procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICA TION OF VACANCIES)
ACT, 1959
(31 OF 1959)
An Act to provide for the compulsory notification of vacancies to employment exchanges.
* * * * *
1. (1) This  Act may be called the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification
of Vacancies) Act, 1959.
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(b) ‘‘employee’’ means any person who is employed in an establishment to do
any work for remuneration;
(c) ‘‘employer’’ means any person who employs one or more other persons to do
any work in an establishment for remuneration and includes any person entrusted with
the supervision and control of employees in such establishment;
(d) ‘‘employment exchange’’ means any  office or place established and maintained
by the Government for the collection and furnishing of information, either by the
keeping of registers or otherwise, respecting—
(i) persons who seek to engage employees,
(ii) persons who seek employment, and
(iii) vacancies to which persons seeking employment may be appointed;
* * * * *
(g) ‘‘establishment in private sector’’ means an establishment which is not an
establishment in public sector and where ordinarily twenty-five or more persons are
employed to work for remuneration;
* * * * *
(i) ‘‘unskilled office work” means work done in an establishment by any of the
following categories of employees, namely:—
(1) daftri;
(2) jamadar , orderly and peon;
(3) dusting man or farash;
(4) bundle or record lifter;
(5) process server;
(6) watchman;
(7) sweeper;
(8) any other employee doing any routine or unskilled work which the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be
unskilled office work.
3. (1) This Act shall not apply in relation to vacancies,—
(a) in any employment in agriculture (including horticulture) in any establishment
in private sector other than employment as agricultural or farm machinery operatives;
* * * * *
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Act not to
apply in
relation to
certain
vacancies.
Definitions.
8

9
S3 \F\BILL 2013RS\120RS\120RS 2
(d) in any employment to do unskilled office work;
(e) in any employment connected with the staff of Parliament.
(2) Unless the Central Government otherwise directs by notification in the Official
Gazette in this behalf, this Act shall not also apply in relation to—
* * * * *
(b) vacancies in an employment which carries a remuneration of less than
sixty rupees in a month.
4.  (1) * * * * *
(2)  The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
require that from such date as may be specified in the notification, the employer in
every establishment in private sector or every establishment pertaining to any class or
category of establishments in private sector shall, before filling up any vacancy in any
employment in that establishment, notify that vacancy to such employment exchanges
as may be prescribed, and the employer shall thereupon comply with such requisition.
* * * * *
6.  Such officer of Government as may be prescribed in this behalf, or any person
authorised by him in writing, shall have access to any relevant record or document in the
possession of any employer required to furnish any information or returns under section 5
and may enter at any reasonable time any premises where he believes such record or document
to be and inspect or take copies of relevant records or documents or ask any question
necessary for obtaining any information required under that section.
7. (1) If any employer fails to notify to the employment exchanges prescribed for the
purpose any vacancy in contravention of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 4, he
shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees
and for every subsequent offence with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
(2) If any person—
(a) required to furnish any information or return—
(i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or return, or
(ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or return which he
knows to be false, or
(iii) refuses to answer, or gives a false answer to, any question necessary
for obtaining any information required to be furnished under section 5; or
(b) impedes the right of access to relevant records or documents or the right of
entry conferred by section 6,
he shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to two hundred and
fifty rupees and for every subsequent offence with fine which may extend to
five hundred rupees.
* * * * *
10.  (1) * * * * *
(2)  In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
Right of access
to records or
documents.
Penalties.
Power to
make rules.
Notification of
vacancies to
employment
exchanges.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies)
Act, 1959.
————
(Shri Mallikarjun Kharge, Minister of Labour and Employment )
GMGIPMRND—120RS(S3)—12-04-2013.