AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAD SABHA

Bill No. LIV of 2001
—_—<——

THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2001

A
BILL
Surther to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —

1. This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2001.

2 of 1974, 2. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
5 Act), in section 125,—

(0) in sub-section (7),--

(a) the words “not exceeding five hundred rupees in the whole,” shall be
omitted;

(b) after the proviso and before the Explanation, the following provisos
10 shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided further that the Magistrate may, during the pendency of
the proceeding regarding monthly allowance for the maintenance under
- this sub-section, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the
interim maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, and the
15 expenses of such proceeding which the Magistrate considers reasonable,
and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to
time direct:

Short title.

Amendment of
section 125,


Amendment of
section 127.

Amendment of
section 128.

2

Provided also that an application for the monthly allowance for
the interim maintenance and expenses for proceeding under the second
proviso shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from
the date of the service of notice of the application to such person.”;

(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—

“(2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance
and expenses for proceeding shall be payable from the date of the order, or, if
so ordered, from the date of the application for maintenance or interim
maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be.”;

(iii) in sub-sections (3) and (4), for the word “allowance”, wherever it occurs,
the words “allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance and expenses
of proceeding, as the case may be,” shall be substituted.

3. In section 127 of the principal Act—
(i for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—

“(1) On proof of a change in the circumstances of any person, receiving,
under section 125 a monthly allowance for the maintenance or interim
maintenance, or ordered under the same section to pay a monthly allowance
for the maintenance, or interim maintenance, to his wife, child, father or mother,
as the case may be, the Magistrate may make such alteration, as he thinks fit,
in the allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance, as the case
may be.”;

(ii) in sub-section (3), in clause (c), for the word “maintenance”, the words
“maintenance or interim maintenance, as the case may be,” shall be substituted;
(iii) in sub-section (4),—

(a) for the words “monthly allowance has been ordered”, the words
“monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or any of
them has been ordered” shall be substituted;

(0) for the words “as monthly allowance in pursuance of”, the words “35
monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or any of
them, as the case may be, in pursuance of” shall be substituted.

4, In section 128 of the principal Act,—

(@ for the word “maintenance”, the words “maintenance or interim maintenance
and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be,” shall be substituted;

(ii) for the word “allowance”, the words “allowance for the maintenance or
the allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case
may be,” shall be substituted;

(tit) for the words “allowance due”, the words “allowance, or as the case may
be, expenses, due” shall be substituted.

20

25

30

35


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It has been observed that an applicant, after filing application in a court under section
125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, has to wait for several years for getting
relief from the court. It is, therefore, felt that express provisions should be made in the
said Code for interim maintenance allowance to the aggrieved person under said section
125 of the Code. Accordingly, it is proposed that during the pendency of the proceedings,
the Magistrate may order payment of interim maintenance allowance and such expenses
of the proceedings as the Magistrate considers reasonable, to the aggrieved person. It is
also proposed that this order be made ordinarily within sixty days from the date of the
service of the notice.

2. The ceiling of rupees five hundred per month for maintenance allowance was
prescribed in the year 1955 in section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1908.
A ceiling of rupees five hundred was prescribed in section 125 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 on the lines of section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1908
which has since been repealed, In view of the cost of living index centrally rising, retention
of a maximum ceiling is not justified. If a ceiling is prescribed and retained, it would
require periodic revision taking into account the inflation and rise in the cost of living as
well as amendment of provisions of the Act from time to time. This would necessarily be
time consuming. Accordingly, it is also proposed to amend section 125 and make
consequential changes in section 127 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to remove the
ceiling of maintenance allowance.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

New DeLut;
The 14th July, 2001. L. K, ADVANL


Order for
maintenance of
wives, children
and parents.

ANNEXURE,
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(2 oF 1974)

* * * * *
CHAPTER IX
ORDER FOR MAINTENANCE OF WIVES, CHILDREN AND PARENTS.
125. (1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain—
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or

(09) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable
to maintain itself, or

(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has
attained majority, where such child is, by reason of any physical or mental
abnormality or injury unable to maintain itself, or

@ his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself,

a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such
person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, father
or mother, at such monthly rate not exceeding five hundred rupees in the whole, as such
Magistrate thinks fit, and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time
to time direct:

Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor female child referred
to in clause (b) to make such allowance, until she attains her majority, if the magistrate is
satisfied that the husband of such minor female child, if married, is not possessed of
sufficient means.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter,—

(@ “minor” means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority
Act, 1875 is deemed not to have attained his majority;

(9) “wife” includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a
divorce from, her husband and has not remarried.

(2) Such allowance shall be payable from the date of the order, or, if so ordered,
from the date of the application for maintenance.

(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to comply with the order,
any such Magistrate may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the
amount due in the manner provided for levying fines, and may sentence such person, for
the whole or any part of each month's allowance remaining unpaid after the execution of
the warrant, to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or until payment
if sooner made:

Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due under
this section unless application be made to the Court to levy such amount within a period
of one year from the date on which it became due:

Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on condition of her
living with him, and she refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider any
grounds of refusal stated by her, and may make an order under this section notwithstanding
such offer, if he is satisfied that there is just ground for so doing.

4

9 of 1875


5

Explanation.—If a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or keeps a
mistress, it shall be considered to be just ground for his wife’s refusal to live with him.

(4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an allowance from her husband under this
section if she is living in adultery, or if, without any sufficient reason, she refuses to live
with her husband, or if they are living separately by mutual consent.

* * * * *

127. (1) On proof of a change in the circumstances of any person, receiving, under
section 125 a monthly allowance, or ordered under the same section to pay a monthly
allowance to his wife, child, father or mother, as the case may be, the Magistrate may
make such alteration in the allownace as he thinks fit:

Provided that if he increases the allowance, the monthly rate of five hundred rupees
in the whole shall not be exceeded.

* * * * *

(3) Where any order has been made under section 125 in favour of a woman who has
been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from, her husband, the Magistrate shall, if he
is satisfied that—

* * * * *

(c) the woman has obtained a divorce from her husband and that she had
voluntarily surrendered her rights to maintenance after her divorce, cancel the order
from the date thereof.

(4) At the time of making any decree for the recovery of any maintenance or dowry
by any person, to whom a monthly allowance has been ordered to be paid under section
125, the Civil Court shall take into account the sum which has been paid to, or recovered
by, such person as monthly allowance in pursuance of the said order.

128. A copy of the order of maintenance shall be given without payment to the
person in whose favour it is made, or to his guardian, if any, or to the person to whom the
allowance is to be paid; and such order may be enforced by any Magistrate in any place
where the person against whom it is made may be, on such Magistrate being satisfied as (0
the identity of the parties and the non-payment of the allowance due.

* * * * *

Alteration
allowance.

Enforcement
order

of
of


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

(Shri L. K. Advani, Minister of Home Affairs)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1478RS—1.8.2001.