1
THE BAN ON COW SLAUGHTER BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to prohibit the slaughter of cow and its progeny and for matters connected therewith.
WHEREAS article 48 of the Constitution enjoins on the State to organize agricultural and
animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and in particular to take steps for preserving
and improving the breeds and prohibiting the slaughter of cow and its progeny.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ban on Cow Slaughter Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "cow" includes a bull, bullock, ox,
heifer or calf.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definition.
Bill No. LIV of 2009
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 18TH DECEMBER, 2009
5

2
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
any usage or custom to the contrary, no person shall slaughter or offer or cause to be offered
for slaughter of any cow in any place.
4.  No person shall sell or offer for sale or cause to be sold beef or beef products in any
form for any purpose.
5. Any person who slaughters a cow or is caught selling beef or beef products shall be
punished with imprisonment which may extend to ten years or with fine which may extend to
rupees one lakh or with both.
Prohibition of
slaughter of
cow.
Ban on sell of
beef products.
Penalty.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 48 of the Constitution enjoins on the State to organize agricultural and animal
husbandry on modern and scientific lines and in particular to take steps for preserving and
improving the breeds and prohibiting the slaughter of cow and its progeny. In view of the
consideration that the cow and its entire progeny must be saved to provide milk, as well as
manure, it becomes imperative to impose complete ban on the cow slaughter.
Though some states have imposed the ban, lakhs of cows and its progeny are being
carried from these states to the states where the ban has not been imposed and even to other
countries.
Various researchers and practical observations have revealed that even after stoppage
of milk, the products out of cow dung and urine are being manufactured to such an extent
that it is becoming economically beneficial to maintain and nourish them.
The demand for complete stoppage of cow slaughter has come from eminent persons
of all religions. Supreme Court has also upheld ban in Gujarat.
Right at present, people from all walks of life have undertaken Vishwa Mangal Gow
Gram Yatra throughout the country to educate masses.
Thus, from constitutional and all other angles, it is necessary to ban slaughter of cow
and its progeny through a central law.
Hence this Bill.
SHREEGOPAL VYAS
3

RAJYA   SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to prohibit the slaughter of cow and its progeny and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Shreegopal Vyas, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND— 5623RS(S5)—18-12-2009.