Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Declaration
as to the
expediency
of Union
control.
THE INTER-STATE RIVER WA TER AUTHORITY BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Inter-State River Water Authority to look into
regulation and development of dams on inter-State rivers, controlling
developmental activities on inter-State rivers, monitoring the safety
and effects on habitat of dams  on inter-State rivers and for
all matters connected therewith and
 incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-Seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Inter-State River Water Authority  Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should
take under its control the regulation and development of inter-State rivers and dams built
over them to the extent here in after provided.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “annual safety audit report” means a report giving the safety status of
specified dams and details of effects of specified dams on surrounding environment
and habitat including human settlements.
Definitions.
Bill No.  LIV  of  2016
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 2016

2
(b) “Authority” means the Inter-State River Water Authority established under
section 4;
(c) “dam” means any artificial barrier including appurtenant works constructed
across rivers or tributaries thereof with a view to impound, store or divert water;
(d) “inter-State river” means a river which originates in one State and passes
through one or more States other than the State in which the river has its origin before
it drains into the sea and also include rivulets, tributaries and lakes which have its
source from an inter-State river;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
(f) “specified dams” means a dam which is,—
(i) constructed over an inter-State river; and
(ii) above fifteen meters in height, measured from the lowest portion of the
general foundation area to the crest; or between ten to fifteen meters in height
and capacity of the reservoir is not less than half a million cubic metres;
(g) “State” means the States which have one or more than one inter-State river
flowing within their territory;
(h) “State Dam Safety Cell” means the State Dam Safety Cell constituted under
section 7.
4. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority, to be known as
the Inter-State River Water Authority consisting of the following members, namely:—
(i) Chairman, Central Water Commission — ex-officio Chairperson;
(ii) Commissioner (Projects), Ministry of Water Resources — ex officio
Member;
(iii) Member (Hydro), Central Electricity Authority — ex officio Member;
(iv) Director General, Geological Survey of India — ex officio Member;
(v) Director General, Indian Meteorological Department — ex officio Member;
(vi) One Scientist, Grade E, Ministry of Environment and Forests — ex officio
Member;
(vii) Engineers-in-Chief or equivalent officers of Irrigation Departments of
States having specified dams — ex officio Members;
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the functioning of the Authority.
(3) The salary, allowances and terms of conditions of services of officers and staff of
the Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules
of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed by the
Central Government:
Provided that the Authority shall meet at least once every three months.
(2) The expenditure incurred to attend meetings by the Members referred to in
sub-clauses (i) to (vii) of section 4, shall be borne by their concerned controlling authorities.
(3) There shall be a Steering Committee consisting of the following members, namely:—
(a
) Chairman, Central Water Commission;
(b) Commissioner (Projects), Ministry of Water Resources; and
Constitution
of Inter-State
River Water
Authority.
Meetings of
the Authority
and Selection
of the
Steering
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(c) two members selected from Members referred to in sub-clause ( vii) of
section 4.
(4) The two members in Steering Committee among Members referred to in sub-clause
(vii) of section 4, shall have a term of six months and on expiry of their term, another two
members shall be chosen amongst themselves.
(5) All issues that come up before the Authority shall be decided by a majority of votes
of members of the Steering Committee, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman,
Central Water Commission, shall have a casting vote.
(6) The Steering Committee shall, on every issue, deliberate and take suggestions from
all members of the Authority present, before going in for a vote.
(7) The final decision of the Authority shall be taken by the Steering Committee.
6. (1) The Authority shall discharge such functions as may be necessary to ensure
equitable distribution of water from inter-State rivers to respective States involved, ensure
proper inspection and maintenance of all specified dams in the country and ensure their safe
functioning.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the functions of
the Authority shall include to:—
(a) analyse water needs of each state considering rainfall patterns, agricultural
needs of state and deciding on the amount of water to be released to said states
through specified dams within the states.
(b) revise the existing water awards to states once in every six months, taking
into account drought time, to ensure that upper riparian states are not affected.
(c) monitor and evaluate dam safety practices in all specified dams and suggest
guidelines to bring dam safety practices in conformity with latest international practices
consistent with Indian conditions;
(d) monitor broadly the functioning of State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may
be.
(e) look into and study environmental effects due to specified dams such as soil
erosion, deforestation, effect on wildlife and other existing water bodies and advise
the Central Government on appropriate remedial actions.
(f) study the effects of specified dams on people living in surrounding areas and
advice the Central Government on necessary rehabilitation measures.
(g) examine all proposals for construction of dams on inter-State rivers and no
new dams shall be constructed on inter-State rivers without prior approval from the
Authority.
(h) redress grievances of states with regard to decisions made by the Authority
and resolve it in a time bound manner by forming a Committee of three members as
specified in section 8.
(3) The Authority shall also disseminate the knowledge and information collected to
the State Dam Safety Cells.
7. (1) Every State having one or more specified dams shall establish under its Water
Resource Department or Irrigation Department or the department dealing with matters of
water resources, a separate Cell known as the State Dam Safety Cell headed by an Officer not
below the rank of Superintending Engineer or equivalent.
(2) The constitution of the State Dam Safety Cell shall be such as may be prescribed by
the State Government.
Functions of
the Authority.
State Dam
Safety Cells.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(3) The administrative and other expenses of the State Dam Safety Cells shall be borne
by the concerned State Governments.
(4) Every State Dam Safety Cell shall:—
(a) keep perpetual surveillance;
(b) monitor maintenance;
(c) carry out routine inspection,
of all specified dams falling within its State, to ensure continued safety of such specified
dams and take such measures as may be necessary to address safety concerns that are
noticed.
(5) Every State Dam Safety Cell shall provide information regarding all specified dams
under its jurisdiction and shall act with prior approval from the Authority as and when
required by the Authority.
(6) Every State Dam Safety Cell shall submit an audit report every three months, of all
specified dams under its jurisdiction, to the Authority.
8. (1) The Authority shall constitute a permanent expert redressal committee consisting
of three members selected by the Steering Committee from amongst persons who have
served as a Judge of the Supreme Court of India.
(2) If it appears to the Government of any State that the decision of the Authority is in
any way against the interests of the particular State or if any State refuses to implement the
terms proposed by the Authority, the said State shall have the right to approach the expert
redressal committee.
(3) The redressal committee shall submit its report on any case that arises before it
within a period of six months to the Authority.
9. The Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make such order or give such
direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for the removal of any difficulty.
11. The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Dispute
Resolution
within the
Authority.
Government to
provide funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Rivers are rich sources of habitat. People from past, have migrated and settled around
rivers. Thus it shows how important water sources are for survival of humans. Our country,
has 14 major rivers. All of them are inter state rivers. More than 21 states have at least one or
more inter state rivers flowing through them. Conflicts arising between States in sharing the
river water has been at the forefront of issues in our country. A Central Control over inter
state dams is lacking and river water tribunals, which adjudicate on disputes, have prolonged
the cases without any fruitful results.
As civilizational damand increases, river water which was mainly used for irrigation
purposes, now also has to cater to needs of fast growing industries. Today, each State is
competing for the welfare of its own people and hence trying to maximise utilisation of the
river water flowing within their territory. Compunded by the situation of uneven monsoons,
our farmers, who are the backbone of this country, are the worst affected. Disputes between
states have led to bad blood between its people thereby in a subtle way compromising the
integrity of the nation. Our founding fathers had put their minds into this problem and had
enshrined certain powers in the Constitution for the Union Government in this regard. The
provision under Article 262, gives the parliament the power to create laws on adjudicating
disputes between state regarding river water.
Therefore it is proposed in this Bill to constitute an Inter-State River Water Authority
consisting of members from the concerned Ministries, expert bodies and from all States
having at least one inter-state river within their territory. It is proposed that this authority will
have the exclusive powers to regulate flow of water and monitor water levels on all dams
present over inter-state rivers. Any dispute arising between the State and the Authority will
be taken up by a Committee formed under the Authority consisting of three retired Supreme
Court judges. This committee should give its decision in six months and it will be bonding on
the States. Any new projects on inter-state rivers will require the prior approval of the
Authority. It will also have the powers to issue detailed guidelines regarding dam safety by
establishing Dam safety councils in states to carry out regular audits and frame guidelines
advising the Government on issues relating to rehabilitation and compensation for people
affected due to dams on inter-state rivers.
This Bill, by providing the power to regulate dams on inter-state rivers, to an independent
body comprising of the union, states and other experts, will help solve  the problem of states
acting on their own accord. This will result in an atmosphere of better cooperation among the
stakeholders, leading to greater efficient usage of our water resources.
Hence this Bill.
VIVEK GUPTA

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of Inter-State River Water Authority
and also appointment of such number of officers and staffs for its functioning. Clause 9
makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enancted will involve recurring expenditure of
one hundred crore rupees per annum which shall be not from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make necessary rules
for making rules, by notification in the official gazette for carrying out the purposes of the
Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Inter-State River Water Authority to look into
regulation and development of dams on inter-State rivers, controlling
developmental activities on inter-State rivers, monitoring the safety
and effects on habitat of dams  on inter-State rivers and for
all matters connected therewith and
 incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3645RS(S3)—02.12.2016.