THE PROHIBITION OF LOTTERIES  BILL,  2015
A
BILL
to prohibit any organization in conduct and promotion of lotteries and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Lotteries Act,  2015.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “lottery” means a scheme, in whatever form and by whatever name called, for
distribution of prizes by lot or chance to those persons participating in the lots or
chances of prize by purchasing tickets either in paper form or through online;
(b) ‘‘organisation’’ means any local or other authority functioning under the
control of the Central Government or a State Government and includes an undertaking
Short title
and extent.
Definitions.
Bill No. LIV of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON
THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2015
5

2
established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act or which is controlled or
financed wholly or substantially by funds, provided directly or indirectly by the
Central Government or a State Government or a Government company as defined in
the Companies Act, 2013.
3. No. organization shall organise, conduct or promote any lottery or sell or distribute
or put for sale any lottery ticket either in paper form or through online, in any manner
whatever or receive or remit any money in pursuance thereof.
Prohibition of
lotteries.
18 of 2013.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Lotteries are a species of gambling. It generates a false sense of security among the
poor who get addicted to it and often ruining their lives. At present, twelve States including
Sikkim, Nagaland, Mizoram, Maharashtra, Punjab, West Bengal and Goa promote lottery.
The paper lottery business in India is estimated to be more than 500 billion rupeess annually
and everyday nearly 20 million people buy lottery tickets issued by various organizations.
The online lottery tickets like playwin, lotto India, dhan dhana dhan, etc. are doing a brisk
business and overtaking paper based lotteries. These lotteries are now infesting the
community of the young and old alike by entering through the electronic media.
The first attempt to ban lottery in India came in 1998 when the Government brought in
the Lotteries (Regulation) Act, 1998(17 of 1998) which bans single digit and pre-announced
number lotteries besides imposing stipulation for conduct of lotteries. The Parliamentary
Standing Committee also recommended a total ban on the trade across the country. The Bill
proposes to ban on all kinds of lotteries including online across the country with a view to
ensure that gullible people are not looted by bogus claim of making them rich overnight.
Hence, this Bill.
VIJAY GOEL
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit any organization in conduct and promotion of lotteries and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vijay Goel, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3386RS (S3)—07-12-2015.