AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. LIV of 2025 
THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS (REGISTRATION 
AND REGULATION) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 2025 
A  
BILL 
 to amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Clinical Establishments ( Registration and
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
23 of 2010. 
10 
2. In  section 1 of the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation)
Act, 2010 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after the proviso to
sub-section (3), the following new proviso shall be inserted, namely: —
“Provided further that the Central Government may incentivise 
the adoption and implementation of this Act in non-participating States 
through financial grants, capacity-building assistance, digitisation 
infrastructure, and other technical support.” 
Amendment of 
section 1.  

2 
 
Amendment of 
section 2. 
 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act, — 
(i)  after clause ( c), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“(cc)  “Committee” means the District Grievance Redressal  
Committee established under section 43E;”; 
(ii) after clause (d),  the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“( dd)  “minimum standards” means the mandatory standards 
as notified under this Act relating to, inter alia , infrastructure 
requirements, human resource qualifications and rat ios, 
availability of medical equipment, infection preven tion and 
control measures, maintenance of electronic health record, 
patient care protocols, and grievance redressal mec hanisms, to be 
specified for each category of clinical establishme nt by the 
Central Government in consultation with the National Council;”; 
(iii)  after clause ( f), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“(ff)  “patient” means any individual, whether inpatient or 
outpatient, who is registered with or seeks to rece ive 
consultation, diagnosis, examination, treatment, ad mission, 
surgery, or follow-up care at a clinical establishment;”; and 
(iv) for clause ( o), the following shall be substituted, namely: —   
“( o) “to stabilise or stabilisation” means the provisi on of 
urgent and appropriate medical treatment required t o prevent the 
worsening of a patient’s emergency medical conditio n, and to 
facilitate either the safe discharge or medically supervised 
transfer of the patient to another facility, as per  clinical protocols 
notified by the Central Government in consultation with the 
National Medical Commission or such other authority  as may be 
designated by it.”. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
 
Amendment of 
section 10. 
 
4. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for clause (c),  the 
following shall be substituted, namely: — 
“( c)  three members, each fulfilling the following crite ria, to be 
nominated by the State Government on such terms and  c onditions as 
may be prescribed: — 
(i)  one elected representative from a local self- government 
institution, who has held elected office for a mini mum of three 
years and has demonstrable engagement in the health , sanitation, 
or public welfare sectors;  
(ii)  one representative of a civil society organisation , 
registered for not less than five years and having demonstrable 
work experience in patient rights, public health ad vocacy, or 
social accountability in healthcare delivery; and 
(iii)  one medical practitioner registered with the respe ctive 
State Medical Council, possessing a recognised MBBS  or 
equivalent degree, and a minimum of seven years of clinical 
experience, who shall not own or operate a clinical  establishment 
subject to registration under this Act.” 
35 
40 
45 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. In Section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) –– 
(i)  after clause (iii) , the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“( iiia) prominently display, at the entrance or in the pu blic 
waiting area, the Charter of Patients’ Rights as ma y be notified 
50 
 

3 
5 
10 
by the Central Government, in the official language of the State 
and in English, and in a format that is accessible to persons with 
disabilities;”; and 
(ii) after clause (iv), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely: — 
“Provided that every clinical establishment shall, at the time 
of registration and renewal, be classified under one of the four 
categories specified in section 13 and such classification shall 
determine the extent of compliance required with respect to 
standards, documentation, registration fee, and frequency of 
inspections, in such manner as may be prescribed.”. 
1
5 
20 
6. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be
inserted, namely: —
“12A. (1) Every clinical establishment shall mandatorily register 
on the Health Facility Registry maintained under the Ayushman 
Bharat Digital Mission and obtain a Unique Health Facility Identifier.  
(2) Every clinical establishment shall maintain electronic health
records and ensure real- time, secure, and interoperable data sharing 
with the national health information architecture as per the standards 
and protocols as may be prescribed by the Central Government.” 
Insertion of 
n
ew section 
12A. 
Integration with 
the Ayushman 
Bharat Digital 
Mission. 
25 
30 
35 
7. In section 13 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following shall be
substituted, namely: —
“(1)  Clinical establishment of different systems shall be 
classified and notified by the Central Government into the following 
categories for the purpose of proportionate registration, regulat ion, 
compliance and inspection: — 
(i) Category A – Multi- speciality hospitals with more than
one hundred inpatient beds; 
(ii) Category B – Medium hospitals and nursing homes with
thirty to one hundred beds; 
(iii) Category C – Small clinics, maternity homes, or
nursing homes with up to  twenty-nine beds; 
(iv) Category D – Standalone diagnostic centres, imaging
laboratories, and single-speciality outpatient clinics: 
Provided that the Central Government may, from time to time, 
prescribe such new categories or make changes in the categories 
above, as may be required.” 
Amendment of 
s
ection 13. 
40 
45 
8. In section 24, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
“Provided that such application shall also be accompanied by 
documentary proof of registration on the Ayushman Bharat Digital 
Mission platform and the corresponding Unique Health Facility 
Identifier and a self- declared statement of compliance with digital 
health standards and minimum requirements for infrastructure, 
personnel, and record-keeping, as applic able to the category of the 
establishment.” 
 Amendment 
o
f section 24. 
50 
9. In section 33 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following new
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
“(1A) The authority in exercise of the powers conferred under 
sub-section (1)shall conduct an inspection of every registered clinical 
establishment at least once in every two years and t he report of such 
Amendment 
o
f section 33.  

4 
inspection shall be finalised and uploaded on the official website of the 
State Council within ninety days from the date of inspection, in a 
format accessible to the public.” 
Amendment of 
section 39. 
10. For section 39 of the principal Act, the following shall be subst ituted,
namely: —
“39. The Central Government shall maintain in digital format an 
All India Register to be called as the National Register of c linical 
establishments that shall be an amalgam of the State Register of 
clinical establishments maintained by the State Governments and shall 
cause the same to be published in digital format on an online portal 
providing public access thereto:  
Provided that such portal shall enable users to conduct category-
wise, location-wise, and service-specific searches, and download 
updated information relating to the registration and compliance data of 
all registered clinical establishments in the country.” 
5 
10 
15 
Insertion of new 
Chapter VA. 
Constitution of 
District 
Grievance 
Redressal 
Committees 
(DGRCs). 
11. After section  46 of the principal Act, the following new Chapter VA
containing new sections 43A to 43E shall be inserted, namely: —
CHAPTER VA 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 
“43A. (1) Every State Government shall establish a District 
Grievance Redressal Committee  in each revenue district, which shall 
consist of —  
(a) a retired District Judge or a retire d senior civil service
officer  —   Chairperson; 
(b) a nominee of the State Health Department, to be
nominated by the State Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed  —  Member;  
(c) a representative from a registered civil society
organisation with domain experience in healthcare, to be 
appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed  —  Member;  
(d) a representative from a registered civil society, to be
appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed - Member; and 
(e) a medical expert possessing not less than fifteen years of
professional experience and reputation for clinical ethics, to be 
appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed  —  Member. 
(2) Any person may file a written complaint against a registered
clinical establishment for contravention of the provisions of this Act 
before the Committee in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Jurisdiction and 
powers of the 
Committee. 
4 3B.  The Committee shall have the jurisdiction to receive, 
inquire into, and adjudicate complaints pertaining to —  
(i) denial of emergency medical treatment or stabilization in
accordance with the provisions of this Act; 
(ii) overcharging or non-transparency in billing;
(iii) medical negligence;
(iv) refusal  to  discharge  patients  or  release  medical
documents without valid reason; 
(v) violation of the Charter of Patients’ Rights; and
(vi) any other breach of the provisions of this Act.
45 
50 

5 
5
 
10 
4 3C.  The Committee, shall upon inquiry into a complaint and 
after giving the concerned clinical establishment a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, issue written orders including, but not 
limited to —  
(i) refund of unauthorised charges;
(ii) imposition of warnings or compliance directions;
(iii) recommendation for disciplinary action against guilty
persons; and 
(iv) recommendation for prosecution or imposition of
penalty under section 42 of the Act. 
Reliefs and 
d
irections. 
15 
4 3D. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Committee  
prefer an appeal to the State Council of Clinical Establishments within 
a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The decision of the State Council shall be final and binding,
and shall not be called in question in any court except by way of a 
petition under article 226 or 32 of the Constitution before the High 
Court having jurisdiction or the Supreme Court, as the case may be. 
Appeal 
m
echanism. 
20 
25 
30 
4 3E. (1) Every State Government shall , after due appropriation 
made by the State Legislature by law in this behalf, allocate a separate 
budgetary head for the constitution, functioning, and administrative 
maintenance of the Committee in that State.  
(2) Each Committee shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such 
form as may be prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The accounts of the Committee, as audited and certified by
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person 
appointed by him in this b ehalf, together with the audit report thereon, 
shall be forwarded annually by the Committee to the State 
Government, which shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is received, before the Legislature of that State, where it 
consists of one House, or where it consists of two Houses, before both 
Houses of the Legislature. 
Funding, 
A
ccounts and 
Audit. 
35 
40 
4 3F. (1) Each Committee shall submit an annual report 
containing data on complaints received, disposed of, pending, and 
actions taken, to the State Health Department, in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed, which shall publish the same on its 
website insuch manner so as to facilitate easy public access. 
(2) The State Government shall cause the report under sub-
section (1), as soon as may be after it is received, to be laid before the 
Legislture of that State, where it consists of one House, or where it 
consists of two House, before both Houses of the Legislature.” 
Annual Report. 

6 
 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regul ation) Act, 2010 was 
enacted to provide a framework for mandatory regist ration of clinical 
establishments and to prescribe minimum standards for their functioning. However, 
over a decade later, sev eral deficiencies persist in its implementation, es pecially 
with respect to standardisation, digital compliance , enforcement, and grievance 
redressal. In India, private health facilities larg ely remain unregistered under the 
Act, particularly in non-partic ipating states, leading to regulatory fragmentation  
and unmonitored healthcare practices.  
In light of rapid growth in private healthcare, ris ing patient grievances, and 
the digital transformation under the Ayushman Bhara t Digital Mission (ABDM), 
this Amen dment Bill seeks to strengthen the principal Act by  introducing 
categorisation of clinical establishments, digital registration mandates, and real-
time integration with ABDM's Health Facility Regist ry. Further, it seeks to define 
and enforce minimum standards for infrastructure, p ersonnel, infection control, and 
patient rights compliance tailored to the scale and  function of each facility, 
ensuring proportionate regulation for both small clinics and large hospitals.  
One of the persistent challenges in healthcare deli very is lack of 
transparency and accountability. Patients frequentl y face issues of overcharging, 
denial of emergency services, and inadequate care s tandards. The Bill proposes the 
constitution of District Grievance Redressal Commit tees (DGRCs) to provide 
timely, decentralised adjudication of patient compl aints, with representation from 
legal, medical, and civil society domains. These Co mmittees are empowered to 
recommend disciplinary action and refunds, ensuring  an institutional mechanism 
for accountability and trust-building in healthcare.  
Additionally, the Bill proposes public disclosure o f inspection reports and a 
searchable national register, enabling citizens to make informed choices. With 
India’s healthcare ecosystem increasingly dependent  on private clinical 
establishments, there is an urgent need for a uniform, enforceable, and tech-enabled 
regulatory regime. This Amendment Bill responds to that need by aligning the Act 
with digital health reforms, promoting patient-cent ric governance, an d empowering 
state authorities with tools for effective compliance monitoring and redressal. 
Hence, this Bill. 
                                                                              SANJAY SETH.  
 
  
 
  

7 
 
  FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM  
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the Central Gove rnment may incentivise 
the adoption and implementation of this Act in non- participating States through 
financial grants, capacity-building assistance, dig itisation infrastructure, and other 
technical support. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both  recurring and non-
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of  India. However, it is not 
possible to estimate the exact quantum of recurring  and non-recurring expenditure 
likely to be involved at this stage. 
 
  
 
  

8 
A NNEXURE 
[EXTRACTS FROM THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS (REGISTRATION AND 
REGULATION) ACT, 2010] 
(23 OF 2010) 
S
hort title, 
application and 
commencement. 
1. * *  * *  * 
(3) It shall come into force at once in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal
Pradesh, Mizoram and Sikkim and the Union territories, on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification, appoint and in any other State which adopts this
Act under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution, on the date of such
adoption; and any reference in this Act to the commencement of this Act shall, in
relation to any State or Union territory, mean the date on which this Act comes into
force in such State or Union territory:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different categories of 
clinical establishments and for different recognised systems of medicine.     
D
efinitions. 2. * *  * *  * 
(o) “to stabilise (with its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions)” means, with respect to an emergency medical condition 
specified in clause (d), to provide such medical treatment of the condition as 
may be necessary to assure, within reasonable medical probability, that no 
material deterioration of the condition is likely to result from or occur during 
the transfer of the individual from a clinical establishment. 
A
uthority for 
registration. 
10. (1) The State Government shall, by notification, set- up an authority to be called the
district registering authority for each district for registration of clinical
establishments, with the following members, namely:—
(a) District Collector— Chairperson;
(b) District Health Officer—Convenor;
(c) three  members  with  such  qualifications  and  on  such  terms  and
conditions  as  may  be prescribed by the Central Government. 
* *  * *  * 
C
ondition for 
registration. 
12. (1) For registration and continuation, every clinical establishment shall fulfil the
following conditions, namely:—
(i) the minimum standards of facilities and services as may be
prescribed; 
(ii) the minimum requirement of personnel as may be prescribed;
(iii) provisions for maintenance of records and reporting as may be
prescribed; 
(iv) such other conditions as may be prescribed.
* *  * *  * 
C
lassification 
of clinical 
establishments. 
13. (1) Clinical establishment of different systems shall be classified into such
categories, as may be prescribed by the Central Government, from time to time.
 * *  * *  * 
A
pplication for 
permanent 
registration. 
24. Application for permanent registration by a clinical establishment shall be made to
the authority in such form and be accompanied by such fees, as may be prescribed.

9 
33. ( 1) The authority or an officer authorised by it  shall  have  the  right  to  cause  an
inspection  of,  or  inquiry  in  respect  of  any  registered  clinical establishment,
its building, laboratories and equipment and also of the work conducted or done b y
the clinical establishment, to be made by such multi- member inspection team as it
may direct and to cause an inquiry to be made in respect of any other matter
connected with the clinical establishment and that establishment shall be entitled
to be represented thereat.
*                               *                               *                            *                             *
Inspection of 
r
egistered 
clinical 
establishments. 
39. The Central Government shall maintain in  digital  format  an  All  India  Register
to  be  called  as  the  National  Register  of  clinical establishments that shall be
an amalgam of the State Register of clinical establishments maintained by the
State Governments and shall cause the same to be published in digital format.
Maintenance of 
N
ational 
Register of 
clinical 
establishments. 

RAJYA SABHA 
______________ 
A 
BILL 
 t
o amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010. 
______________ 
(S hri Sanjay Seth, M.P. ) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–059–10.02.2026. 