Bill No. LIX of  2006
THE VOLUNTARY ORGANIZATIONS REGULATORY AUTHORITY
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a Voluntary Organizations Regulatory Authority for
recognition and regulation of voluntary organizations in the country and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it  enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the V oluntary Organizations Regulatory Authority Act,
2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force immediately.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) "authority" means the V oluntary Organizations Regulatory Authority
established under section 3;
(c) "fund"  means Voluntary Organizations Assistance Fund established under
section 8.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.

S4 \ BILLS \ RS \1434RS.PM5
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "V oluntary Organization" means any organization or institution or society
whether incorporated or registered or not, which is engaged in any of the following
activities without any commercial gain:—
(i) Promoting education including adult education;
(ii) Involved in relief operations during natural calamities like drought,
floods, cyclones, earthquakes, storms, squalls;
(iii) Organizing camps for free distribution of medicines, promoting health
awareness among general public or charitable dispensaries;
(iv) Providing assistance to orphaned, vagabond and street children and
running homes for these children;
(v) Running schools for orphaned and destitute children and providing
them with all necessary facilities;
(vi) Helping destitute and old women and providing them shelter;
(vii) Helping aged and old persons and providing them shelter;
(viii) creating awareness among the public regarding:—
(a) pollution hazards;
(b) family planning;
(c) diseases like AIDS, cancer, etc.;
(d) social evils like dowry, sati, child marriage, etc.
(ix) Any other activity so declared by the appropriate Government.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish an
authority to be known as Voluntary Organizations Regulatory Authority for the purpose of
performing functions assigned under this Act.
(2) The authority shall consist of—
(i) a Chairman who shall have experience in social service for a period of not less
than twenty years, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(ii) four other members who shall have experience in social service for a period
of not less than ten years, to be nominated by Central Government on rotation basis
from States;
(3) The Chairman and other members shall be appointed for a term of five years.
4. (1) The headquarter of the authority shall be at Lucknow.
(2) The authority shall establish offices in the capital city of every State and Union
territory.
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
authority as may be necessary to enable it to discharge its functions.
5. The authority shall perform the following functions:—
(a) Register and regulate the functioning of voluntary organisations in the
country;
(b) Record the grants that may be sanctioned to any voluntary organization;
(c) Monitor the activities of voluntary organisations;
2
Establishment
and
composition
of V oluntary
Organization
Regulatory
Authority.
Offices of
the
authority.
Functions of
the authority.

(d) Impose restrictions on the number of voluntary organisations working in
any district or State in a particular field;
(e) Hear complaints about the voluntary organisations and make
recommendations to Government;
(f)  Take suo motu  the working of any voluntary organization for
examination;
(g) Any other function assigned to it by the Central Government.
6. (1) Every voluntary organisation shall within a period of three months from the
date of commencement of this Act, apply to the authority for registration with such particulars
and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) No new V oluntary Organisation shall be permitted to undertake its activities unless
registered under this Act.
7. (1) The authority shall, within one month from the date of receipt of an application
from a voluntary organization, declare whether the application for registration has been
accepted or rejected and in case the application has been rejected, the reasons in this regard
shall be recorded.
(2) On accepting the application the authority shall issue a certificate in this regard.
8. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Voluntary Organizations Welfare
Fund for the purpose of making grants to voluntary organisations.
(2) The Central Government and all the State Governments shall contribute to the
fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
9. (1) The Central Government shall administer the fund in such a manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall make a grant to each voluntary organization every
year or at such intervals as it may determine.
(3) Before making a grant to any voluntary organisation under sub-section (2), the
Central Government shall consult the authority.
10. Every voluntary organization which is in receipt of grant from the Central
Government shall send an annual report to the authority about its activities during the year
and a statement of accounts showing receipts and expenditure of the organization in such
form and in such manner as may be prescribed.
11. The Central Government may, after due consultation with authority, reduce the
amount of grant or withhold the total amount of grant payable to a voluntary organization
for such period as it may determine.
12. (1) If on a complaint and inquiry, it is found that a voluntary organization does not
utilize the money for the purpose for which it was granted or involves itself in any activities
other than for which it was formed, the authority may take such action against the voluntary
organization as it may deem fit including the cancellation of registration.
(2) The authority may also suo motu  institute an inquiry against any voluntary
organization in such manner as may be prescribed.
13. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Registration
of voluntary
organisations.
Declaration
regarding
acceptance of
rejection of
registration.
V oluntary
Organisation
Welfare Fund.
Administering
funds and
grant to each
voluntary
organisation
by Central
Government.
Annual
Report.
Power to
reduce or
withhold the
grant.
Cancellation
of
Registration.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
3

S4 \ BILLS \ RS \1434RS.PM5
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
14. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions in any other law for the time being in force relating to voluntary organizations.
15. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Savings.
Powers to
make rules.
4

S4 \ BILLS \ RS \1434RS.PM5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
V oluntary organisations today are the part and parcel of the society. These
organizations have come a long way in contributing in the development of the society and
the nation as a whole. They supplement the activities of the government in various fields and
at times of crisis and natural calamities, voluntary organizations come to relief and rescue of
persons affected by acts of God. These voluntary organizations are providing education,
health care, running homes for orphaned children, old age homes, providing free food and
medicines to the needy people. Many of the voluntary organisations mainly depend upon
funds received through contributions and donations which are not enough to meet their
expenditure. Therefore, most of them lack funds to carry out their activities.
There are about 10 lakh voluntary organizations registered in India of which about
17,145 voluntary organizations are receiving foreign funds. As the competition between
these voluntary organisations is increasing, they are choosing to bend rules and by pass law
to survive.
Recently, irregularities have come to the notice wherein many voluntary organisations
have violated the Foreign Exchange Management Act. They were found to be having Swiss
bank accounts and foreign money across continents. In 2005, the Ministry of Home Affairs
has blacklisted 8673 Non-governmental organisations for violation of the Foreign Exchange
Management Act. Further, there are cases of nepotism in various Government Departments
in the distribution of grants. It has been reported that in many Departments, the persons
giving the grants are the same who indirectly own voluntary organizations. Therefore, it has
become very difficult to receive grants since the genuine organizations find it difficult to
appease so many persons for receiving the much desired grants for benevolent purposes.
The Governments at Centre and State levels are providing them money, but there is no
monitoring as to how these funds are used. As a result, many voluntary organisations, run
by unscrupulous elements, are siphoning of a lot of government money which is denied to
genuine voluntary organisations. Many organizations do not have enough infrastructure
and means  to perform their activities but they seek grant only to be misused.
The whole system of the working of voluntary organisations is not regulated. Therefore,
there has to be a centralized system of registration and regulation of voluntary organizations
so that their efforts could contribute to the nation building in an effective way.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
KALRAJ  MISHRA
5

S4 \ BILLS \ RS \1434RS.PM5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a V oluntary Organizations
Regulatory Authority. Clause 4 provides for the setting up of offices of the authority in every
State and UT. Clause 8 provides for the constitution of a Voluntary Organizations Welfare
Fund to which both Central and State Governments will contribute. Clause 9 provides for
making grants to voluntary organizations every year. The Bill, therefore, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.
6

S4 \ BILLS \ RS \1434RS.PM5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.
The rules will relate to details only. The delegation of legislative power is of normal
character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to   provide for establishment of a Voluntary Organizations  Regulatory Authority for
recognition and regulation of voluntary organizations in the country and for
matters  connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Kalraj Mishra, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1434RS(S4)—19.07.2006.