AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

BilNo. LIX of 2000
THE DROUGHT PRONE, POOR AND BACKWARD AREAS
(DEVELOPMENT ON PRIORITY) BILL, 2000
A
BILL

to provide for overall development on priority of drought prone, poor, underdeveloped
and backward areas particularly of rural parts and tribal belts of the country which are
lagging behind in social, economic, educational, infrastructural and industrial
development by establishing an autonomous Central Authority for rapid, accelerated
and assured development of such areas in a planned manner and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Drought Prone, Poor and Backward Areas
(Development on Priority) Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;

1

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Declaration of
drought prone,
poor and back-
ward areas,

Central Gov-
ernment to for-
mulate special
development

plans,

Establishment
of Drought
Prone, Poor
and Backward
‘Areas Develop-
ment Authority.

Composition of
the Authority.

(b) “authority” means the Drought Prone, Poor and Backward Areas
Development Authority established under section 5;

(c) “drought prone areas” and includes the areas where average rainfall is
consistently below normal and also includes such areas which in the opinion of the
Central Government are drought prone and declared as such, by notification in the
official Gazette, in consultation with the Government of the States where such areas
exist for the time being;

(4) “poor and backward areas” means the economically, socially, educationally
and industrially underdeveloped and non-developed areas so declared by the
appropriate Government under section 3;

(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, and in consultation with the concerned States, declare such areas or regions, as the
case may be, as drought prone, poor and backward, which in its opinion require priority
attention to bring them at par with the rest of the developed areas of the country.

4. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year from the date
of commencement of this Act, formulate special development plans for the rapid development
of areas identified and notified under section 3 for providing necessary infrastructure for the
development particularly of industrial growth with immunity of investments, roads, railways,
post and telegraph and other means of communications, agriculture, irrigation facilities by
watershed management, rain harvesting, construction of wells, bore wells, canals etc., drinking
water through wells, hand pumps and taps, fodder facilities, electricity through hydel, solar,
wind and thermal power, development of forests, livestock, orchards, poultry, milk
cooperatives, small and cottage industries, health services including family welfare
schemes, education and vocational training, network of public distribution system,

‘tourism in such areas in the country particularly in rural and tribal areas of Andhra

Pradesh like, Rayalaseema, Telangana and other drought prone and backward areas
of the State, and areas of Bihar, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Chhatisgarh, Gujarat,
Rajasthan etc.

5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
an Authority to be known as the Drought Prone, Poor and Backward Areas Development
Authority.

(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
moveable and immoveable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be
sued.

(3) The Headquarter of the Authority shall be at Hyderabad in the State of Andhra
Pradesh, and the Authority may, with the consent of the appropriate Government, establish
offices at other places in the Country.

6. The Authority shall consist of:—

(a) The Prime Minister, who shall be the ex-officio Chairperson;

(b) The Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission, who shall be Vice-
Chairperson;

(०) five Members of Parliament representing the drought prone, poor and
backward areas of the States, of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two from the
Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the tespective Houses;

(व) twelve Members to be appointed by the Central Government representing

the Ministries or Departments, as the case may be, of Planning Commission, Rural
Development, Agriculture, Industry, SSI, Finance, Railways, Surface Transport,

15

45


3

Communications, Human Resource Development, Water Resources, and Power of
the Union Government;

(e) not more than four Members to be appointed by the Central Government by
rotation in the alphabetical order to represent the Governments of the States having
the drought prone, poor and backward areas.

7, (1) The Authority shall have a Secretariat consisting of such officers, employees
and establishment, as may be prescribed.

(2) The conditions of service, emoluments and other perks of the officers and
employees shall be such, as may be prescribed from time to time.

8. (/) The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, adequate funds for the purposes of this Act.

(2) The State Governments shall also contribute to fund in such manner as may be
prescribed.

(3) The fund shall also consist of moneys received from international financial
institutions, industrial houses, individuals etc.

9. It shall be the duty of the Authority to take such special steps as it may deem
necessary to implement the special development plans formulated under section 4.

10. The Authority shall submit an annual report, in such form and in such manner, as
may be prescribed, of its activities of development in the drought prone, poor and backward
areas of the Country to the President of India who shall cause the Report to be laid before
both the Houses of Parliament, as soon as may be, after it is received by him.

11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.

12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Secretariat of
the Authority.

Funds of the
Authority.

Authority to
implement the
special

development

plans.
Annual report.

Savings.

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

More than five decades have elapsed since our Independence but the poverty, hunger
and backwardness still persists in many areas and even in regions of the Country.
Unprecedented drought conditions play havoc in various parts of the country killing pedple,
livestock and cause untold miseries and sufferings. Mahboobnagar in Andhra Pradesh,
Kalahandi in Orissa, Saurashtra and Kutch in Gujarat, Jaisalmer in Rajasthan, Palamu in
Bihar and Chattisgarh have become synonimous of persistent droughts where raingod 1s
consistently evasive resulting in acute shortage of even drinking water what to speak of
irrigation and other facilities. In Andhra Pradesh alone as many as 18 districts including :
Mahboobnagar are drought prone, poor and backward as those of other areas in various
parts of the Country. The farmers in these areas can not sow crops as the lands become dry
and parched and there are no irrigation, facilities. The people do not get food to eat and
water to drink resulting in their exodus.

In many places particularly in Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and Gujarat Starvation deaths
have also been reported and it has become a regular phenomena. Though concerned State
Governments as usual deny starvation deaths but the reality remains what it is. The worst
affected are the mute live stock dying unnatural death in the absence of fodder and water.
The old, weak and physically challenged citizens too face the same situation. As a result
these areas have remained underdeveloped uncared for and backward. The situation has
gone from bad to worse due to apathy of Central and State Governments.

Development of such areas should be our prime concern. Special steps should be
taken for better water management through forestry and other water harvesting means,
canals etc. Other development activities should also be initiated in these areas. If an Authority
is established exclusively for this purpose it is felt that rapid development of such areas can
be achieved.

Hence this Bill.
DR. DASARI NARAYANA RAO


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of the Drought Prone, Poor and
Backward Areas Development Authority. Clause 8 provides for the funds to be made
available by the Central Government. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupee one thousand crores may
be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.

A sum of rupees ore hundred crores may also involve as non recurring expenditure.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for overall development on priority of drought prone, poor, underdeveloped and
backward areas particularly of rural parts and tribal belts of the Country which are
lagging behind in social, economic, educational, infrastructural and industrial
development by establishing an autonomous Central Authority for rapid, accelerated
and assured development of such areas in a planned manner and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.

(Dr. Dasari Narayana Rao, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—4518RS—9- 11-2000.