AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

20 DEC 2004

Bill No. LIX of 2004

THE PAREL INVESTMENTS AND TRADING PRIVATE LIMITED AND
DOMESTIC GAS PRIVATE LIMITED (TAKING OVER OF
MANAGEMENT) REPEAL BILL, 2004

A
BILL

to repeal the Parel Investments and Trading Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private
Limited (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1979.

Wuereas for giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principle
specified in clause (6) of article 39 of the Constitution, it was proposed to acquire the
undertakings of the Parel Investments and Trading Private Limited (hereinafter referred to as
“PITCL") as well as Domestic Gas Private Limited (hereinafter referred to as "DGPL") and

5 collectively referred to as "the said Companies" so that the means and resources as to
bottling, transporting, marketing and distribution of liquefied petroleum gas of the said
Companies become vested in the State and thereby, are so distributed as best to subserve
the common good;

Anb Wuereas pending the acquisition of the undertakings of the said Companies for
‘othe purpose of nationalisation of the business of bottling, transporting, marketing and
distribution of liquid petroleum gas carried on by them, the management of the undertakings

sciences acosasennsntenmacamssesontnestme


2

of the said Companies was taken over by the Central Government by the Parel Investments
and Trading Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private Limited (Taking Over of Management)

Act, 1979, and the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited was appointed as the Custodian 29 of 19°
of the said undertakings;

Ano Wuereas in terms of a Memorandum of Compromise entered into on the 11th ४

April, 2002 by the said Companies and its certain shareholders on the one part and the
Central Government and the Custodian on the other part, two separate Deeds of Assignment
both dated the 2nd April, 2004 were executed between PITCL and DGPL respectively through

the Custodian as the Assignors and the Central Government as the Assignee and registered
with the Sub-Registrar of Assurances at Mumbai on the 2nd August, 2004, to assign, transfer 10
and vest in the Central Government, the undertakings and business of the said Companies
together with their assets and properties and more particularly described in sub-section (2)
of section 3 of the said Actand in the manner set out in the said Memorandum of Compromise,
but excluding the assets not to be taken over and to be handed over back to PITCL and DGPL
respectively for the consideration and in the manner set out in the said Deeds;

is

Ano Wuereas in terms of the said Memorandi
Deeds of Assignment both dated the 2nd April, 20
Government and the Hindustan Petroleum Corporati
Registrar of Assurances at Mumbai on the 2nd Aug
the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited the
Companies together with their assets and
over and to be handed over back to PITCL
in the manner set out the said Deeds;

lum of Compromise two other separate

104 were executed between the Central

ion Limited and registered with the Sub-

ust, 2004, to assign, transfer and vest in
undertakings and business of the said 2०
Properties excluding the assets not to be taken

and DGPL respectively for the consideration and

Ano Wuereas in pursuance of the execution of the aforesaid Deeds of Assignment
and acquisition of undertakings of the said Companies by the Central Government and 2६7
thereafter by the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, it has become necessary to
tepeal the said Act and to revest the management of the said Companies in respect of their
business and assets other than those relating to liquefied petroleum gas through their

respective board of directors, as may be appointed in accordance with the law for the time
being in force.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fi ifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

Short title. 1. This Act may be called the Parel Investments and Trading Private Limited and
Domestic Gas Private Limited (Taking Over of] Management) Repeal Act, 2004.

Repeal and 2. (/) The Parel Investments and Trading Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private

savings.

Limited (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1979 is hereby repealed. 38 29 of 1979,

(2) On the repeal of the Parel Investments and Trading Private Limited and Domestic
Gas Private Limited (Taking Over of | Management) Act, 1979, the management of the Parel
Investments and Trading Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private Limited shall be vested
and deemed to have been vested in the tespective board of directors of the said Companies

to be appointed after such repeal and possession of the assets of the said Companies yo
relating to their business other than the business relating to liquefied petroleum gas and not
taken over by the Central Government by the Act so repealed shall be deemed to have been
taken over by, and continued with, the said Companies through their respective board of

directors, as may be appointed in accordance with the law for the time being in force,

(3) Notwithstanding such repeal and without Prejudice to the provisions contained in 4 $7
the General Clauses Act, 1897 with respect to repeals, anything done or action taken including 10 of 1897.
any agreement entered into under any provision of the Parel Investments and Trading
Private Limited and Domestic Gas Private Limited (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1979,

by the Central Government or the Custodian appointed by it shall continue to be in force and 29 of 1979.
have effect as if this Act had not been passed. 5०

29 of 1979.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Parel Investments and Trading Company Limited (PITCL) and Domestic Gas Private
Limited (DGPL) were distributors of Caltex (India) Limited for sale of its packed liquefied
petroleum gas in southern and eastern India. The management of the said two companies
was taken over by the Government and the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL)
was appointed as the custodian by the Parel Investments and Trading Company Limited and
Domestic Gas Private Limited (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1 979, pending acquisition
of their liquefied petroleum gas business.

2. Due to long standing litigation, a Memorandum of Compromise dated 11th April,
2002 was executed between the Parel Investments and Trading Company Limited and the
Domestic Gas Private Limited on the one part and the Central Government and the Hindustan
Petroleum Corporation Limited on the other Part and two other separate Deeds of Assignment
dated the 2nd April, 2004 were executed by which the conveyancing of liquefied petroleum
gas business and related assets of the said two companies in favour of the Central Government
and the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited has since been effected.

3. It is proposed to reinvest the management of undertakings of the said two companies
in so far as their non-liquefied petroleum gas business and assets are concerned as it was not
the intention of the Central Government to acquire such business or assets. It is, therefore,
Proposed to give effect to the memorandum of. compromise and Deeds of Assignment and
return the non-liquefied petroleum gas business and assets of the said two companies to
them by repealing the Parel Investments and Trading Company Limited and Domestic Gas
Private Limited (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1979,

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

MANI SHANKAR AIYAR.
New DeLut;

The 16th, December, 2004.



RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to repeal the Parel Investments and Trading Private Limited and Domestic Gas
Private Limited (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1979.

(Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Panchayati Raj)

MGIPMRND—3700RS—17-12-2004.