1
THE E-COMMERCE (REGULA TION) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide for protection of rights of consumers against marketing of products and
services through e-commerce and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the E-Commerce (Regulation) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "e-commerce" means buying or selling of products or services by digital or
electronic network;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
Bill No. LIX of 2019
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019

2
(b) "observation period" means a fixed time period given to a consumer to
examine the products or services availed by him through e-commerce without inviting
any liabilities; and
(c) words and expressions, used but not defined under this Act, shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them under the Consumer Protection Act, 2019.
3. (1) Every consumer who buys or sells any product or opts for any service through
e-commerce shall have an observation period of fifteen days from the date of buying or
selling of such product or service.
(2) The consumer shall have the right to return the product or the service to the
company offering the same within the observation period if he is not satisfied with the
quality and performance of the product or service, without giving any reason for returning
the product or refusing the service.
(3) The company which has offered the products or services shall refund the full
amount, if any, charged for the same within seven working days from the date of return of
product or refusal of service by the consumer within the observation period.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this sub-section "full amount" includes the
packaging cost, delivery cost and the cost of returning the product.
(4) Every consumer shall have the right to get a full refund of money including the
delivery charges, the cost of return or the installation charges, if the product or services
purchased are found to be faulty.
4. (1) Every company shall give full and clear information including manufacturing
date, expiry or best before date, about the product and services being offered through
e-commerce.
(2) Any condition, agreement or contract whatsoever, shall not be enforceable by the
company unless it gives the required information to the consumer, prior to purchase of the
products or services.
5. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term, which may extend upto one year or with
fine, which may extend upto five lakh rupees or with both.
(2) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or
of any rule, made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time the contravention
was committed, was in-charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of
business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to
punishment, if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he
exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
Explanation.—for the purpose of this section:—
(i) "company" means anybody corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
Right of
consumer to
return the
product or
service
purchased
through
e-commerce.
Companies to
give full and
clear
information
to consumer
regarding
products and
services.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
35 of 2019.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

3
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the
provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating to e-commerce selling.
8. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Indian is the fastest growing market for e-commerce sector. The e-commerce has trans-
formed the way the business is done in India. The Indian e-commerce market is expected to
grow to US $ 200 billion by 2026 from the current US $39 billion. Much growth of the industry
has been triggered by increasing internet and smart phone penetration. The ongoing digital
transformation in the country is expected to increase India's total internet users based to 829
million by 2021 from 604 million as of  2018. India's e-commerce revenue is expected to
increase to US $120 billion in 2020 from the present US $ 39 billion, growing at an annual rate
of 51 per cent, the highest in the world. The Government has announced various timely
initiatives namely, digital India, make in India, Start up India, Skill India and Innovation Fund
to support the e-commerce growth industry including increased participation of foreign
players in the e-commerce field and other policy initiatives.
The emergence of supply chain, rise in trade and development in e-commerce have led
to a new delivery system for goods and services and have provided opportunities for the
customers. Equally the person who is buying goods or services through this e-commerce
selling does not get any chance of a face to face contact with the person selling the goods
and the opportunity to feel or examine it, hence there are chances that he may fall into a false
trap. Many cases have been reported of this nature where the goods and services purchased
by an individual do not match in quality and appearance with those displyed on television,
magazines, hoarding, etc. This unfair trade and unethical business practice, misleading
advertisement, telemarketing, direct selling and e-commerce pose new challenges to consumers
rights and protection in our country. The Bill therefore, seeks to provide for the rights of the
customer to return the goods or services purchased through e-commerce within the
observation period of fifteen days without inviting any liabilities and imposing duties on the
companies to provide full, fair and complete information to the customer while selling goods
and services through e-commerce selling.
Hence this Bill.
SHANTA  CHHETRI
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

MGIPMRND—4321RS—11-12-2019.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection of rights of consumers against marketing of products and
services through e-commerce and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Shanta Chhetri, M.P .)