1
THE COACHING CENTRES (REGULATION AND CONTROL)
BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for regulation and control of  coaching centres providing coaching for
various kind of entrance examinations for higher educational and professional
course including medical and engineering education and for jobs in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coaching Centres (Regulation and Control) Act,
2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the State
Government and the Central Government in all other cases;
Bill No.  LIX of  2007
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 30TH  NOVEMBER, 2007
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.

2
(b) “competent authority” means any office or officer notified by the
appropriate Government under Section 4  to perform functions assigned under
this Act;
(c) “Coaching Centre” means any institution by whatever name called
providing coaching or giving guidance for admission into higher education or
any professional course including engineering or medical or for appearing in any
examination conducted by appropriate Government or any private institution for
the purpose of securing jobs;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint, no person or establishment shall run a coaching centre
without prior registration with the competent authority.
(2) Any person or establishment running a coaching centre before the
commencement of this Act shall apply to the competent authority within a period of
thirty days from the date of commencement of this Act in such form and manner as may
be prescribed.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint a competent authority for the purposes of registration of coaching centers in
each district with in its jurisdiction.
Provided that the appropriate Government depending upon the size and population
of the district may appoint one authority for two or more districts.
(2) On receipt of an application for registration of coaching centre, the competent
authority shall scrutinize the application and may call for such other information or
document from the applicant as may be prescribed.
(3) The competent authority shall before registering any coaching centre, inspect
the site of the centre to have the first hand information of the infrastructure available
with the coaching centre and the compliance of the norms and standards fixed by the
appropriate Government in this regard.
(4) The competent authority shall after being satisfied with the various
requirements under this Act grant a registration certificate to the applicant in such
manner and form as may be prescribed which shall be valid for three years.
(5) The competent authority may renew the certificate only after re-inspecting the
coaching centre and fulfillment of requirements fixed in this behalf by the appropriate
Government under this Act.
(6) The competent authority may refuse to register a coaching centre or renew its
certificate if the Centre fails to comply with the norms and standards fixed by the
appropriate Government.
Provided that in case of non-registration or non-renewal of certificate of a coaching
centre, the competent authority shall record reasons in writing and communicate the
same to the applicant.
(7) The competent authority shall take a decision on the application filed under
sub-section ( 2) within a period of thirty days.
5.  The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) fix the fee to be charged by the coaching centres for various programmes;
(b) prescribe minimum qualification for the faculty members for different
courses;
Compulsory
registration
of Coaching
Centres.
Procedure for
registration.
Appropriate
Government
to prescribe
norms for
coaching
centres.

3
(c) fix the teacher-student ratio for every coaching centre;
(d) lay down norms for minimum infrastructure for starting and running
coaching centre;
(e) prescribe such other norms as may be necessary for the purpose.
6.  Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and
also with fine which may extend to twenty five lakh rupees.
7. ( 1) Where a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule,
direction or order made thereunder has been committed by a company , every person who, at
the time the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the
company for the conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty
of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention was committed without his knowledge
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule direction or order made thereunder has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the
consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company such director, manager, secretary or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Explanation:—For the purpose of this section:—
(i) “company” means anybody corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm,
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. The provisions of this act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force on the subject and save
aforesaid the provisions of the Act shall be in addition to and not derogation of any other law
for the time being in force.
10. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Penalty.
Offences by a
Company.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to make
rules.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Coaching Centres providing coaching to students for cracking various competitive
examinations such as engineering, medical and civil services are doing big business now-a-
days. Of late, their number has also increased to a very high level. Newspapers are full of
advertisements of these coaching centres in order to attract maximum students. These centres
charges a very hefty amount for various kinds of coaching programmes being run by them.
Though there is no doubt that there are some very good coaching centres but many of these
centres are fly by night operator who charge heavy money as fee but do not provide proper
coaching nor do they have proper infrastructure for the purpose. These Coaching Centres
fleece the students and their parents by giving lucrative offers for joining them. Similar is the
case with the coaching centres providing coaching to lakhs of aspirants for various jobs in
Government and Private Sector. As of now there is no law to regulate the functioning of
these coaching centres.
Some of these centres are actually playing with the fate of lakhs of youth of the
country. Therefore, time has come to regulate and control their activities in order to protect
the interest of students aspiring to become professionals or secure jobs.
Hence this Bill.
MAHENDRA MOHAN
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint competent
Authority for the purposes of registration of coaching centres. The expenditure in respect of
Union Territories shall be borne by the Central Government. It is expected that an annual
recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore may be involved.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of powers is
therefore of normal character.
6

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation and control of coaching centres providing coaching for various
kind of entrance examinations for higher educational and professional courses
including medical and engineering education and for jobs in the country and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5055RS(S5)—30-11-2007.