THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HUMAN RESOURCES
FOR HEALTH BILL, 2011
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HUMAN RESOURCES FOR HEALTH
3. Establishment of Commission.
4. Qualification for appointment of Chairperson and Members of the Commission.
5. Selection Committee.
6. Tenure and terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.
7. Declaration of interest.
8. Restrictions on re-employment.
9. General superintendence, direction and management of affairs.
10. Member to act as Chairperson, or to discharge his functions, in certain
circumstances.
11. Resignation.
12. Removal and suspension of Chairperson or Member from office in certain
circumstances.
13. Meetings of Commission.
14. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission.
15. Chief Executive Officer and other officers and employees of Commission.
16. Powers and functions of Commission.
17. Establishment of  institution for imparting health education or new course of study.
18. Recognition of qualifications granted by health educational institutions in India.
19. Non-recognition of qualifications in certain cases.
20. Entry and operation of foreign health educational institutions.
21. Withdrawal of recognition.
22. Fees.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL BOARD FOR HEALTH EDUCATION
23. National Board for Health Education.
24. Composition of Board.
25. Selection Committee for selection of President and members of Board and committee.
26. Transitory provision relating to Board.
27. Appointment and terms and conditions of office of President and members of
Board.
Bill No. LIX of  2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN RAJYA SABHA

28. Executive Director and other officers and employees of Board.
29. Meetings of Board.
30. Functions of Board.
31. Power to conduct certain examination.
32. Power to require information as to courses of study and examinations.
33. Screening test.
CHAPTER IV
N
ATIONAL EV ALUATION AND ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE
34. National Evaluation and Assessment Committee.
35. Composition of Committee.
36. Terms and conditions of office of President and members of Committee.
37. Functions of Committee.
38. Power of audit and inspection of evaluation and assessment agency.
39. Executive Director and other officers and employees of Committee.
40. Meetings of Committee.
CHAPTER V
N
ATIONAL COUNCILS AND STATE COUNCILS
41. Constitution of corresponding National Councils.
42. Existing Councils to vest in Commission.
43. President, Vice-President and other members of Council to vacate their offices.
44. Corresponding new National Councils to be guided by the directions of Central
Government.
45. References to existing Councils on and from commencement of this Act.
46. Composition of National Councils.
47. Elections to National Councils and its term.
48. President and Vice-President of National Council.
49. Settlement of disputes regarding election.
50. Meetings of National Council.
51. Functions of National Council.
52. Registrar and other officers and employees of National Council.
53. Constitution of State Councils.
54. President and Vice-President of State Council.
55. Meetings of State Council.
56. Registrar and other officers and employees of State Council.
57. Enrolment of persons.
58. Registers.
59. Duty to serve in India.
60. Prohibition to practice, etc., without enrolment.
61. Privileges of persons enrolled on National Register or State Registers.
62. Persons enrolled to notify change of place of residence or practice.
63. Supply of copies of State Register.
C
LAUSES
(ii)

64. Liability of persons enrolled with respective National Councils.
65. Provisional registration of persons possessing required qualification from any
institution outside India.
66. Entry of additional qualifications.
67. Code of ethics.
68. Professional misconduct.
69. Power of National Council and State Councils to institute inquiry and to impose
penalties.
70. Appeals against decision under section 69.
71. Removal of names from National Register or State Register and restoration thereof.
72. Grievance Redressal Mechanism.
73. Power of National Council to make regulations.
74. Power of State Council to make regulations.
CHAPTER VI
A
UDIT AND ACCOUNTS
75. Grants by Central Government.
76. Constitution of Fund of Commission.
77. Accounts and audit.
78. Furnishing of returns and reports to the Central Government.
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
79. Punishment for establishing institution, etc., without permission.
80. Penalty for contravention of section 57.
81. Penalty for contravention of section 33.
82. Punishment for furnishing information contrary to which published by institutions.
83. Offences by companies.
84. Offences by societies or trusts.
85. Cognizance of offences.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
86. Power of Central Government to supersede Commission, Board, Committee or
National Council.
87. Power of State Government to supersede State Council.
88. Declaration of interest.
89. Restrictions on re-employment.
90. Member to act as President, or to discharge his functions, in certain circumstances.
91. Restriction on holding office for more than two terms.
92. Resignation of President, Vice-President or a member of Board, Committee, National
Council or State Council.
93. Suspension and removal of President, Vice-President or a member of Board,
Committee, National Council or State Council.
94. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board, Committee, National Council
or State Council.
C
LAUSES
(iii)

95. Power to appoint committees or experts.
96. Reporting by universities and institutions.
97. State or regional administrative offices.
98. Reference of dispute to Central Government.
99. Appeal against decisions of Commission.
100. Bar of Jurisdiction.
101. Protection of action taken in good faith.
102. Members, etc., to be public servants.
103. Powers of Commission, Board, Committee or National Council to call for information
or conduct investigations, etc.
104. Completion of courses of studies in health educational institutions.
105. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
106. Power of State Government to issue directions.
107. Commission, Board, Committee and National Council to furnish information to
Central Government.
108. Power to amend Schedules.
109. Review.
110. Act to have overriding effect.
111. Power of Central Government to make rules.
112. Power of Commission to make regulations.
113. Power of State Government to make rules.
114. Laying of rules and regulations.
115. Powers of Central Government to direct regulations to be made or to make or amend
regulations.
116. Power to remove difficulties.
117. Repeal and savings.
118. Provisions in respect of officers and other employees of existing Council and National
Board of Examinations.
119. Transitory provisions.
120. Resolution of difference of openion by Joint Mechanism.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE.
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE.
C
LAUSES
(iv)

1
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HUMAN RESOURCES FOR
HEALTH BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to consolidate the law in certain disciplines of health sector and promote human
resources in health sector and provide for mechanism for the determination,
maintenance, coordination and regulation of standards of health education
throughout the country to ensure adequate availability of human resources in
all States and for the said purpose to  establish  the  National  Commission  for
Human  Resources for Health and to supervise and regulate  professional Councils
in various disciplines of  health sector and  for matters connected  therewith  or
incidental  thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Human Resources for Health
Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a
reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LIX of  2011
AS INTRODUCED IN RAJYA SABHA
5
10

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate statutory regulatory body” means the University Grants
Commission established under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the All
India Council for Technical Education established under the All India Council for
Technical Education Act, 1987, the National Council for Teacher Education established
under the National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993 or any other corresponding
statutory regulatory body by whatever name called regulating the higher education
under any law for the time being in force;
(b) “approved course” means a course recognised and approved by the  National
Board for Health Education under this Act;
(c) “approved institution” means a medical college, hospital, health centre or
such other institution recognised by a university as an institution in which a person
may undergo the training, if any, required by his course of study for the award of any
recognised qualification to him;
(d) “Board” means the National Board for Health Education constituted under
section 23;
(e) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Commission, appointed under
section 3;
(f) “code of ethics” includes integrity, objectivity, professional competence,
professional conduct, avoidance of conflict of interest, transparency and information
disclosure and such other ethical principles as may be specified by the regulations
made by the National Council;
(g) “Commission” means the National Commission for Human Resources for
Health established under section 3;
(h) “Committee” means the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee
constituted under section 34;
(i) “corresponding new National Council” in relation to an existing Council
means the body corporate specified against such Council in column (2) of the First
Schedule;
(j) “diploma” means such award, not being a degree, granted by a health
educational institution certifying that the recipient has successfully completed a course
of study of not less than nine months duration;
(k) “discipline of health” includes medicine, dental, nursing, pharmacy,
paramedical or any other discipline as the Central Government may notify in this
behalf;
(l) “distance education” means the distance education system as defined in
clause (e) of section 2 of the Indira Gandhi National Open University Act, 1985;
(m) “evaluation and assessment” with its grammatical variations means the
process of quality control and assurance in health education, whereby, as a result of
inspection or assessment, or both of the health educational institution and the hospital
affiliated thereto or any programme conducted in such institution is recognised as
conforming parameters of academic quality and benchmarking of such academic quality
determined by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority;
(n) “evaluation and assessment agency” means an agency recommended by the
Commission under section 37;
(o) “existing Council” means the councils specified in column (1) of the First
Schedule;
(p) “foreign health educational institution” means an institution imparting health
education situated outside India;
(q) “foreign qualifications” means the recognised qualification obtained from
any university or institution situated outside India;
Definitions.
50 of 1985.
3 of 1956.
52 of 1987.
73 of 1993.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

3
(r) “health educational institution” or “health institution” means an institution
of learning including a university, an institution deemed to be university, a college, an
institute, an institution of national importance declared as such by an Act of Parliament,
or a constituent unit of such institution, which is imparting education in the discipline
of health (whether through conduct of regular classes or distance education system)
beyond twelve years of schooling leading to the award of a degree or diploma;
(s) “health professional” means any person possessing the recognised
qualification who is eligible to be enrolled in the National Register or the State Register
in any of the discipline of health and the expression “health practitioner” shall be
construed accordingly;
(t) “medical practitioner” or “medical professional” means a person who holds a
qualification granted by an authority notified under section 3 of the Indian Medical
Degrees Act, 1916 or recognised qualification under this Act and has enrolled himself
as a medical practitioner under this Act;
(u) “medicine” means modern scientific medicine in all its branches and includes
surgery and obstetrics, but does not include veterinary medicine and surgery;
(v) “Member” means a Member of the Commission and includes Chairperson;
(w) “National  Council” means the Medical Council of India or the Dental Council
of India or the Nursing Council of India or the Pharmacy Council of India constituted
under sub-section ( 1), or the Paramedical Council of India, as the case may be,
constituted under sub-section (2), of section 41;
(x) “National Register” means the National Register maintained under section 58
and shall include—
(i) the Indian Dentistry Register maintained by the Dental Council of India;
(ii) the Indian Medical Register maintained by the Medical Council of
India;
(iii) the Indian Nursing Register maintained by the Nursing Council of
India;
(iv) the Indian Pharmacy Register maintained by the Pharmacy Council of
India;
(v) the Register of Paramedics maintained by the Paramedical  Council of
India;
(y) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly;
(z) “overseas Citizen of India” means such person registered as an overseas
citizen of India under section 7A of the Indian Citizenship Act, 1955;
(za) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government
under this Act;
(zb) “programme” means a course or programme of study leading to the award of
a degree or diploma in a health educational institution;
(zc) “recognised qualification”,—
(a) in relation to medicine, means the qualification included in the Second
Schedule;
(b) in relation to dentistry, means the  qualification included in the Third
Schedule;
(c) in relation to nursing, means the qualification included in the Fourth
Schedule;
(d) in relation to pharmacy, means the qualification included in the Fifth
Schedule; and
(e) in relation to paramedics, means the qualification included in the Sixth
Schedule;
7 of 1916.
57 of 1955.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

4
(zd) “regulations” means  regulations made under this Act;
(ze)  “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to this Act;
(zf) “screening test” means a mandatory qualifying examination for the purpose
of recognition of foreign qualifications under section 33;
(zg) “State  Council” means the State Council constituted under section 53 or
under any other law for the time being force;
(zh) “State register” means the State register maintained under this Act or any
other law for the time being in force in any State regulating the registration of practitioners
in the discipline of health;
(zi) “trained specialist” means a medical professional possessing a masters degree
and clinical training in the specific area;
(zj) “university” means any university recognised as such by the University
Grants Commission or any university or institute established by law for the time being
in force imparting education in the discipline of health for the award of degree or
diploma as a recognised qualification.
CHAPTER II
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HUMAN RESOURCES FOR HEALTH
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a body to be called the
National Commission for Human Resources for Health to exercise the powers conferred
on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall be a body  corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by
the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The Commission shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) four whole-time members; and
(c) eight part-time members.
to be appointed, by the Central Government, on the recommendations of the Selection
Committee constituted under section 5.
(4) The president of the National Board for Health Education referred to in sub-section
(1) of section 24, the president of  the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee
referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 35, the president of the each National Council
referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 41 and the Chairperson or a Member of the
National Commission for Higher Education and Research referred to in section 5 of the
National Commission for Higher Education and Research Act, 2011—Members, ex officio.
(5) All the Members including ex officio Members hall have voting rights.
4. (1) The Chairperson shall be a person of eminence, integrity, administrative capability
and outstanding ability with a post graduate degree in the discipline of medical science from
a university, and having not less than twenty-five years experience in the profession, out of
which at least fifteen years shall be in a leadership role, in the area of health care delivery,
growth and development of modern medicine or medical education.
(2) The other Members shall be persons of eminence, integrity, administrative capability
and outstanding ability with a post graduate degree in the discipline of medical education,
dental education, nursing education, pharmacy education, public health, management, science
and technology, or law from a university, and having not less than twenty years experience
in the profession, out of which at least fifteen years shall be in a leadership role, in the area
of health care delivery, growth and development of modern medicine or medical education:
Provided that out of  twelve Members,—
(a) four whole-time Members shall be appointed by the Central Government
from  the disciplines of medicine, dentistry, nursing, pharmacy, paramedics; and
Establishment
of Commis-
sion.
Qualification
for
appointment
of
Chairperson
and Members
of the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

5
(b) eight part-time Members shall be appointed from the disciplines of medicine,
dentistry, nursing, pharmacy, paramedics, management, science and technology and
law.
(3)  No person, who is not a citizen of India, shall be eligible to be appointed as the
Chairperson or a Member.
5. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Selection Committee consisting of,—
(a)   a person of eminence having qualification and experience of at least twenty-
five years in medical profession as Chairperson;
(b) five other experts of eminence from the discipline of medical and allied health
sciences, management, science and technology having qualification and experience of
at least twenty years in the discipline, as members,
to be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Union Ministry of Health
(Department of Health and Family Welfare) shall be the Convenor.
(3) The term of the Selection Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the Chairperson and Members
of the Commission within two months from the date on which the reference is made to it by
the Central Government in this behalf.
(5) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two names for every vacancy
referred to it.
(6) Before recommending any person for appointment as a Chairperson or a Member of
the Commission, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that such person does not have
any financial or other conflict of interest, which is likely to affect prejudicially his functions
as Chairperson or Member, as the case may be.
(7) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the Commission shall be invalid
merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
(8) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1) to (7), the Selection Committee may
regulate its own procedure.
(9) The Central Government shall initiate the process of appointment in respect of any
vacancy due to arise in the office of the Chairperson or of other Members of the Commission,
six months prior to the date of arising of such vacancy:
Provided that in case a vacancy arises  in the Selection Committee for the reason of
death or removal, or resignation from office, such vacancy shall be filled expeditiously,
within six months from the date on which the vacancy has arisen.
6. (1) A person appointed as the Chairperson or a Member of the Commission  shall
hold office for a term of four years from the date on which he enters upon his office and be
eligible for reappointment for another term:
Provided that a person shall not hold office as a Chairperson or Member after he has
attained the age of seventy years.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the Chairperson and other Members
shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. The Chairperson and other Members, shall immediately after entering office and
every year thereafter, make a declaration to the extent of their interest, whether direct or
indirect and whether financial or otherwise, in any health institution or any other institution
Selection
Committee.
Tenure and
terms and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and Members.
Declaration
of interest.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
which comes under the purview of the Commission and the same shall be displayed on the
website of the Commission.
8. (1) The Chairperson and other Members, on ceasing to hold office shall not, for a
period of two years, accept any employment (including as consultant or expert or otherwise)
in any health educational institution whose matter has been dealt with by such Chairperson
or Member, as the case may be, or has been before the Commission when he held office as
such Chairperson or Member.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prevent the Chairperson or a Member, as the case
may be, to accept any employment in any health educational institution controlled or
maintained by the Central Government or the State Government.
9. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the general superintendence, direction
and control of the administration shall vest in the Chairperson.
10. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
by reason of death, removal, suspension or resignation, the seniormost whole-time Member
shall act as the Chairperson till such time the Chairperson is appointed, to fill the vacancy.
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on
account of leave or otherwise, the seniormost whole-time Member shall discharge the
functions of the Chairperson till the Chairperson is able to discharge his functions.
11.   The Chairperson or a Member may, by notice given in writing under his hand of
not less than a period of  thirty days, addressed to the Central Government, resign from his
office:
Provided that the Chairperson or the Member shall, unless permitted by the Central
Government to relinquish office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of a period of
thirty days from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his
successor enters upon office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is earliest.
12. (1)  The Central Government may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson or
any Member, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) being a whole-time Member, has engaged at any time, during his term of
office, in any paid employment; or
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d)  has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson
or other Member; or
(e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(f) has been removed or dismissed from the service or office of the Central
Government or of a State Government or from a body owned or controlled by the
Central Government or a State Government or from any Central or State statutory
body; or
(g) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as Chairperson or other Member, as the case may be; or
(h) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to public interest; or
(i) has been guilty of proved misconduct; or
Restrictions
on re-
employment.
General
superintendence,
direction and
management
of affairs.
Member to
act as
Chairperson,
or to
discharge his
functions, in
certain
circumstances.
Resignation.
Removal and
suspension of
Chairperson
or Member
from office in
certain
circumstances.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(j) has been guilty of proved conflict of interest in the discharge of his functions.
(2) The Chairperson or any Member shall not be removed from his office under clause
(g) or clause ( h) of sub-section ( 1), unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard in the matter:
Provided that the Central Government may, if it considers necessary in the public interest,
suspend such Chairperson or other Member.
13. (1) The Commission shall meet at least twice every month at such time and place as
it may appoint.
(2) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Commission.
(3) The decisions of the Commission shall be by consensus, failing which by a majority
of votes of Members present and voting and in the event of equality of votes, the Chairperson
or in his absence, the Member presiding shall have a second or casting vote.
(4) The quorum of a meeting of the Commission shall be seven members.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Commission may make regulations for
the conduct of business at its meetings.
14. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Commission; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Commission;
or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the merits
of the case.
15. (1) There shall be a Chief Executive Officer of the Commission, not below the
rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India, who shall be the Member-Secretary
of the Commission, to be appointed by the Central Government for a fixed term of four years
who shall not be eligible for reappointment.
 (2) The Chief Executive Officer shall discharge such functions as may be specified by
regulations made by the Commission or may be assigned to him by the Commission from time
to time.
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall report to the Commission, through the Chairperson,
on actions taken by him in performance of his duties.
(4) The Commission may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, appoint
such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its
functions under this Act.
(5) The salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chief
Executive Officer and other officers and employees of the Commission shall be such as may
be prescribed.
16. (1) The Commission shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, take measures to
determine, maintain and coordinate the minimum standards of and promote the human
resources, in discipline of health  education and training commensurate with the requirement,
of such resources in different States and Union territories.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the measures
referred to in sub-section (1) may  provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) carry out studies and collect data required to assess the needs and
requirements of human resources for health in different States and Union territories;
(b) assess the requirement (including the number, type and geographical location)
of health training facilities for education and training in medical and allied discipline;
Meetings of
Commission.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of
Commission.
Chief
Executive
Officer and
other officers
and employ-
ees of
Commission.
Powers and
functions of
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(c) formulate action plans for development of human resources for health in
accordance with the policy and priorities laid down by the Central Government from
time to time;
(d) formulate a plan for financial and other resources required for creation of
human resources;
(e) make recommendations on the measures to strengthen the healthcare delivery,
operational efficiency and healthcare infrastructure;
(f) coordinate existing healthcare infrastructure in Central and State Government
for effective utilisation thereof;
(g) facilitate coordination among bodies or National Councils constituted under
this Act, conduct or cause to conduct their social audit and obtain public feedback on
their performance and achievements;
(h) grant permission for establishing of health educational institution, ensure
compliance of its terms and conditions, or withdraw such permission;
(i) regulate, in accordance with the law, for the time being in force, the entry and
operation of foreign health educational institutions if permitted under the law for the
time being in force in consultation with the Board or such other authority as may be
specified by the Central Government;
(j) conduct the elections to the National Councils established under this Act;
(k) promote and regulate inter-professional cooperation amongst health
professions;
(l) specify by regulations the continuous medical education and the courses,
workshops and training activities;
(m) provide such grants and moneys to the Board, Committee and National
Council as they may require for efficient discharge of their powers and functions under
this Act;
(n) transfer such assets, properties or liabilities to the Board, Committee or
National Council, as the case may be, as it may consider necessary;
(o) provide such officers and other employees to the Board, Committee or National
Council, as the case may be, required for efficient discharge of their powers and
functions under this Act;
(p) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
(3) The Commission shall exercise the powers and discharge the functions under this
section in such manner which does not interfere with the autonomous and self-regulatory
nature of universities or institutions.
17. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time
being in force,—
(a) no person shall, without obtaining letter of permission from the Commission,
establish an institution for a course of study or training in the discipline of health
(including a postgraduate or doctoral or post doctoral or super speciality course of
study or training), for grant of recognised qualification; and
(b) no institution, which has been granted permission under sub-section ( 1),
shall increase its admission capacity in any course of study or training (including a
post graduate or doctoral or post doctoral or super speciality course of study or
Establishment
of institution
for imparting
health
education or
new course of
study.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
training), without obtaining the letter of permission from the Commission:
Provided that any person who has been granted permission for establishment of the
health educational institution or an institution which has been granted permission to increase
of its admission capacity in course of study or training under the provisions of the Indian
Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956 and the rules and regulations made thereunder, or any other law
for the time being in force, shall be deemed to be the health educational institution established
under the provisions of this Act or deemed to have validly increased their admission capacity
and the qualifications granted by such institutions shall be the recognised qualification for
the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every person shall, for the purpose of obtaining permission under sub-section (1),
submit to the Commission a scheme in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) and
the Commission shall refer the scheme to the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee
for its recommendations.
(3) The scheme referred to in subsection ( 2) shall be in such form and contain such
particulars and be preferred in such manner and accompanied with such fees as may be
specified by regulations made by the Commission.
(4) On receipt of the scheme under sub-section ( 2), the Committee may obtain such
other particulars from the applicant as it  may  consider necessary and thereafter, Committee
may,—
(a) if the scheme is defective and does not contain any required particulars, give
a reasonable opportunity to the person concerned for making a written representation
and it shall be open to such person to rectify the defects, if any, specified by it;
(b) consider the scheme, having regard to the factors referred to in sub-section
(8), and submit the scheme together with its recommendations thereon to the
Commission.
(5) The Commission may, after considering the scheme and the recommendations of
the Committee under sub-section ( 4) and after obtaining, where necessary, such other
particulars as may be considered necessary by it from the applicant, and having regard to the
factors referred to in sub-section ( 8), by an order either approve (with such conditions, if
any, as it may consider necessary) or disapprove the scheme and any such approval shall be
a permission under sub-section (1):
Provided that no scheme shall be disapproved by the Commission under this sub-
section without giving such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent any person, whose
scheme has not been approved by the Commission, to submit a fresh scheme and the
provisions of this section shall apply to such scheme, as if such scheme has been submitted
for the first time under sub-section (2).
(6) Where no order passed by the Commission has been communicated to the person
submitting the scheme, within a period of one year from the date of submission of such
scheme to the Commission under sub-section (2), the scheme shall be deemed to have been
approved by the Commission in the form in which it had been submitted, and, accordingly,
the permission of the Commission required under sub-section ( 1) shall also be deemed to
have been granted.
(7) In computing the period specified in sub-section (6), the time taken by the person
concerned submitting the scheme, in furnishing any particulars called for by the Committee
or by the Commission, shall be excluded.
(8) The Committee, while making its recommendations under clause (b) of sub-section
(4) and the Commission, while passing an order, either approving or disapproving the scheme
48 of 1947.
8 of 1948.
16 of 1948.
102 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
under sub-section (5), shall have due regard to the following factors, namely:—
(a) whether the proposed health educational institution or the existing health
educational institution seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training or
increase its admission capacity, would be in a position to offer the course of study or
training in the discipline of health (including a post graduate or doctoral or post
doctoral or super speciality course of study or training) with the minimum standards of
health education as specified by the Board under this Act;
(b) whether the person seeking to establish a health educational institution or
seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training or to increase its admission-
capacity has adequate financial resources;
(c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment, accommodation,
training and other facilities to ensure proper functioning of the health educational
institution or conducting the new course of study or training or accommodating the
increased admission capacity have been provided or would be provided within the
time limit specified in the scheme;
(d) whether adequate hospital facilities, having regard to the number of students
likely to attend such health educational institution or course of study or training or as
a result of the increased admission capacity have been provided or would be provided
within the time limit specified in the scheme;
(e) whether any arrangement has been made or programme drawn to impart
proper training to students likely to attend such health educational institution or
course of study or training by person having the recognised medical qualifications;
(f) the requirement of manpower in the field of practice of medicine; and
(g) any other factors as may be prescribed.
(9) Where the Commission passes an order either approving or disapproving a scheme
under this section, a copy of the order shall be delivered to the person concerned.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “person” includes any university or
a trust or other body corporate, but does not include the Central Government  or a State
Government.
18. (1) The educational qualifications granted by any health educational institution in
India which are included in the Second Schedule  or the Third Schedule or the Fourth
Schedule or the Fifth Schedule or the Sixth Schedule, as the case may be, shall be recognised
qualifications of the respective discipline of health for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that any qualification recognised under the provisions of the Indian Nursing
Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical
Council Act, 1956 and the rules and regulations made thereunder, shall continue to be the
recognised qualifications of the respective discipline of health for the purposes of this Act,
unless such qualifications are derecognised by the amendment of the relevant Schedule
under this Act.
(2) Any health educational institution in India, which grants any qualification in the
discipline of health not included in the Second Schedule  or the Third Schedule or the Fourth
Schedule or the Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule, as the case may be, may apply to the
Commission to have such qualification recognised, and the Commission, after consulting
the Committee, may recommend to the Central Government to amend the Second Schedule
or the Third Schedule or the Fourth Schedule or the Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule, as the
case may be, so as to include such qualification therein and any notification amending any
of the said Schedules may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the
Second Schedule or Third Schedule or the Fourth Schedule or the Fifth Schedule or the Sixth
Schedule, as the case may be, against such qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised
qualification only when granted after a specified date.
48 of 1947.
8 of 1948.
16 of 1948.
102 of 1956.
Recognition
of qualifica-
tions granted
by health
educational
institutions in
India.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

11
19. (1) No qualification granted by any health educational institution to any student of
such institution shall be recognised qualification for the purposes of this Act, unless such
institution has been established with the approval of the Commission in accordance with the
provisions of this Act or rules or regulations made thereunder.
(2) Where any health educational institution offers a new or higher course of study or
training (including a post graduate or doctoral or post doctoral or super speciality course of
study or training), such qualification shall not be a recognised qualification for the purposes
of this Act, unless such course of study or training offered has been approved by the
Commission before offering the same to the students.
(3) Where any health educational institution increases its admission capacity in any
course of study or training (including a post graduate or doctoral or post doctoral or super
speciality course of study or training), such qualification granted to any student by such
institution on the basis of the increase in its admission capacity shall not be a recognised
qualification for the purposes of this Act, unless such increase in its admission capacity in
any course of study or training offered has been approved by the Commission before offering
the same to the students.
20. The Commission shall regulate the entry and operation of foreign health educational
institutions in consultation with the Board and in accordance with the law, for the time being
in force:
Provided that in case no such law is in force, the Central Government shall regulate the
entry and operation of foreign health institutions in consultation with the Board till such law
comes into force.
 21. When, upon recommendation of  the Committee  or the Board, it appears to the
Commission that—
(a) the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency
required from candidates at any examination held by any university or other health
institution for an approved course in health education; or
(b) the faculty, staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for
instruction and training provided in such university or other health educational
institution, or in any college or other institution affiliated to any such university,
do not conform to the standards specified by the Commission, the Commission may, after
making such inquiry as it may consider necessary, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
withdraw recognition of the course or qualification in respect of the university or other
health institution, or college or other   institution affiliated to such university, as the case may
be, with such cut-off date as it thinks fit:
Provided that no such recognition shall be withdrawn unless the university or the
institution or college, as the case may be, has been given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard.
22. The Commission may levy such fees and other charges in respect of such functions
as may be specified by regulations made by it.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL BOARD FOR HEALTH EDUCATION
23. The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Board to be known as
the “National Board for Health Education” to assist the Commission in discharge of its
powers and functions for the purposes of health education.
24. (1) The Board shall consist of—
(a) a President;
Non-
recognition
of qualifica-
tions in
certain cases.
Entry and
operation of
foreign health
educational
institutions.
Withdrawal
of recogni-
tion.
Fees.
National
Board for
Health
Education.
Composition
of Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(b) two whole-time members; and
(c) four part-time members,
to be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of the Selection Committee
constituted under section 25.
(2) The Chairperson or a Member of the National Commission for Higher Education
and Research referred to in section 5 of the National Commission for Higher Education and
Research Act, 2011—Member, ex officio.
(3) The President and whole-time members shall be chosen from the persons possessing
a post graduate degree in the discipline of medicine or medical education from a recognised
university or health institutions, having at least fifteen years of standing in the profession or
teaching and training, out of which seven years of experience shall be in the discipline of
medical education, training, curriculum design or development and conduct of examinations.
(4) The part-time members shall be chosen from persons possessing a post graduate
degree in the discipline of medical education from a recognised university or medical institution
having at least twelve years of standing in the profession from the discipline of health or
health education out of which seven years of experience shall be in education, training,
curriculum design or development and conduct of examinations in the discipline of health.
25. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Selection Committee for appointment
of the President and members of the Board and the Committee, consisting of,—
(a)   a person of eminence having qualification and experience of at least twenty
years in medical profession as Chairperson;
(b) three other experts of eminence from the discipline of medical and allied health
sciences, management, science and technology having qualification and experience of
at least fifteen years in the discipline, as members,
to be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Union Ministry of Health
(Department of Health and Family Welfare) shall be ex officio member of the Selection
Committee.
(3) The Chairperson of the Commission shall be the Convenor.
(4) The term of the Selection Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the President and members
of the Board and the Committee within two months from the date on which the reference is
made to it by the Central Government in this behalf.
(6) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two names for every vacancy
referred to it.
(7) Before recommending any person for appointment as a President or a member of
the Board or the Committee, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that such person
does not have any financial or other conflict of interest, which is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as President or member of the Board or the Committee, as the case may be.
(8) No appointment of the President or member of the Board or the Committee shall be
invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
(9) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1) to (8), the Selection Committee may
regulate its own procedure.
(10) The Central Government shall initiate the process of appointment in respect of
any vacancy due to arise in the office of the President or of other members of the Board or
Committee, six months prior to the date of arising of such vacancy:
Provided that in case a vacancy arises  in the Selection Committee for the reason of
death or removal, or resignation from office, such vacancy shall be filled expeditiously,
within six months from the date on which the vacancy has arisen.
Selection
Committee
for selection
of President
and members
of Board and
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
26. On and from the date of constitution of the Board,—
(a) the National Board of Examinations registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 shall be dissolved;
(b) any reference to the existing National Board of Examinations in any law other
than this Act or in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to
the Board;
(c) all properties and assets, movable and immovable, of, or belonging to, the
existing National Board of Examinations, shall vest in the Board;
(d) all rights and liabilities of the existing National Board of Examinations shall be
transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the Board;
(e) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( c), all debts, obligations and
liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be
done by, with or for the existing National Board of Examinations immediately before
that date, for or in connection with the purpose of the said existing National Board of
Examinations shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be
done by, with or for, the Board;
(f) all sums of money due to the existing National Board of Examinations
immediately before that date shall be deemed to be due to the Board; and
(g) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been
instituted by or against the existing National Board of Examinations immediately before
that date may be continued or may be instituted by or against the Board.
27. (1) A person appointed as the President or a member shall hold office for a term of
four years from the date on which he enters upon his office or till the date he attains the age
of seventy years, whichever is earlier and be eligible for re appointment for another term.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the President or a member shall hold
office during the pleasure of the Central Government.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the President and other members shall be such as may be prescribed.
28. (1) The Board shall appoint an Executive Director to perform such functions as
may be assigned to it by the Board.
(2) The Board may with the previous approval of the Commission appoint such other
officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions
under this Act.
(3) The term of the Executive Director shall be four years from the date of his appointment.
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the other officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be specified by
regulations made by the Commission.
29. (1) The Board shall meet at least once in every month.
 (2) Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the meetings.
(3) Every meeting of the Board shall be presided over by the President or, if for any
reason he is unable to attend, such other member as may be chosen by the members present
at the meeting from among themselves.
(4) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent, without
permission, and without sufficient cause in the opinion of the Board, from three consecutive
meetings of the Board.
Transitory
provision
relating to
Board.21 of 1860.
Appointment
and terms and
conditions of
office of
President and
members of
Board.
Executive
Director and
other officers
and
employees of
Board.
Meetings of
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(5) Subject to the provisions of the foregoing sub-sections, the Board may regulate its
own procedure for the transaction of business at its meeting.
30. (1) The Board shall take measures to facilitate and promote academic studies and
research in emerging areas of health education with focus on professional health education
and to ensure uniform augmentation of trained specialists and super specialists, to achieve
excellence in these and connected areas.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the measures
referred to in sub-section (1) may  provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) determine, coordinate and maintain standards for health  education and
research;
(b) specify minimum requirements for faculty, infrastructure and clinical workload
for establishment of  institutions for discipline of health;
(c) specify curriculum for examinations which may be conducted under this Act;
(d) design and approve new courses of study as recommended by institutes,
hospitals, colleges or universities for imparting training and conducting courses therein;
(e) organise seminars, trainings or conferences for continuous medical education
and such other courses, workshops or programme as may be specified by regulations
made by the Commission;
(f) to undertake faculty development programmes;
(g) specify schedule of admissions for admission to various courses of study;
(h) specify calendar of examinations and scheme of examinations;
(i) conduct examinations for entry to any under graduate, post graduate, doctoral,
post doctoral, super speciality or diploma courses, fellowship examination and screening
test;
(j) take such steps as may be desirable to elevate the standards of training and
development of quality health professionals;
(k) coordinate with institutes, universities, bodies at international level for
discharge of its functions;
(l)  advise the Commission regarding  establishment of laboratories, institutes
and training centres for continuous medical education;
(m)  recognise and encourage merit in all branches of health sciences, technology
and basic sciences and foster research;
(n) coordinate between medical and other scientific academies, societies,
associations, institutions and Government medical and scientific departments and
services;
(o) publish journals, memoirs, transactions and other publications;
(p) promote and maintain a liaison between health and other sciences;
(q) appoint such number of visitors as it may consider fit to visit any university
or other health educational institution imparting a recognised course in discipline of
health, or to attend any examination held by any such university or other health
educational institution for the purposes of granting recognition thereof;
(r) to specify parameters for equivalence between academic qualifications granted
by different health institutions in the discipline of health  whether in India or abroad;
(s) to specify norms and mechanisms for transparent, efficient and accountable
governance in a health university or higher health educational institution empowered
by or under any law to award recognised qualifications only in the discipline of health
education and research;
Functions of
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(t) to approve and notify norms and standards of maintenance of academic
quality for accreditation and benchmarking of education in recognised health
educational institutions imparting approved courses in the discipline of health
throughout the period of accreditation:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall prevent the National
Commission for Higher Education and Research established under the National
Commission for Higher Education and Research Act, 2011 to specify higher standards
for health educational institutions other than those specified by the appropriate
statutory regulatory body referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the
National Commission for Higher Education and Research Act, 2011;
(u) to prescribe norms for compulsory disclosure by health educational
institutions engaging in discipline of health  education on all aspects related to their
functioning that has a bearing on the interests of students, faculty, parents, the
community and the Government;
(v) promote autonomy of health educational institutions for the free pursuit of
knowledge and innovation;
(w) facilitate access, inclusion and opportunities to all;
(x) promote development of a curricular framework with specific reference to
new or emerging or inter-disciplinary field of knowledge;
(y) promote, through the development of a flexible academic frame, the exercise
of choice for students for self-development, entrepreneurship, acquisition of skills
and pursuit of learning;
(z) promote joint and cross-disciplinary programmes among universities and
other health educational institutions;
(za) develop measures to effectively connect health education to the needs of
society;
(zb) encourage universities to enable colleges to evolve into health institutions
with powers to award degrees;
(zc) take measures to enhance access  to, and inclusion in,  health education to
remove regional imbalances in the provision of health educational institutions for
such education as well as in access of students to such health educational institutions;
(zd) advice the Commission and the Central Government on any matter that may
be referred;
(ze) discharge such other functions as may be prescribed.
31. The Board may, in consultation with the concerned State Government and university,
conduct, with effect from such date as may be notified by the Central Government, either by
itself or by an authority authorised by it, examinations for entry to any under graduate, post
graduate, doctoral, post doctoral, super speciality or diploma courses or examination for
fellowship in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
32. Every health educational institution which grants any recognised qualification
shall furnish such information as to courses of study and examinations as the Board may
require from time to time.
33. (1) No person, being a citizen of India or a registered Overseas citizen of  India, who
obtains the recognised qualification granted by medical institution in any country outside
India recognised for enrolment as medical practitioner in that country shall be entitled for
enrolment by the National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, unless he
qualifies the screening test in India to be conducted by the Board.
Power to
conduct
certain
examination.
Power to
require
information
as to courses
of study and
examinations.
Screening
test.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(2) No person being a citizen of India shall, after the commencement of this Act, obtain
any medical qualification from any medical institution in a country outside India without
obtaining an eligibility certificate from the Board and any person, who obtains such
qualification without obtaining the eligibility certificate, shall not be eligible to appear in the
screening test referred to in sub-section (1):
Provided that any person being a citizen of India who acquired the recognised
qualification or obtained admission in the medical institution outside India during the period
between 15
th March, 2002 and the date of commencement of this Act, after obtaining an
eligibility certificate from the Medical Council of India under the Indian Medical Council Act,
1956, shall, subject to other provisions of this Act, be eligible to be enrolled in the National
Register or State Register.
(3) Any person, being a citizen of India or a registered Overseas citizen of India, who
obtains a recognised qualification in the discipline of health other than medicine from any
health educational institution in any country outside India recognised for enrolment as
practitioner in that country shall not be entitled to be enrolled in the National Register or
State Register unless he qualifies the screening test in India.
(4) The Commission may, by notification, exempt any person, who possesses the
recognised qualification and enrolled as health practitioner in a country outside India for a
period of not less than three years, from the requirement of the screening test under this
section.
CHAPTER IV
N
ATIONAL EV ALUATION AND ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE
34. The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Committee to be
known as the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee for evaluation and assessment
of any university or institution seeking permission under section 17 or imparting education
in the discipline of health to assist the Commission in discharge of its powers and functions
under this Act.
35. (1) The Committee shall consist of the following, namely:—
(a) a President;
(b) two whole-time members; and
(c) four part-time members,
to be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of the Selection Committee
constituted under section 25.
(2) The President and members referred to in sub-section (1) shall be chosen from the
persons of eminence, integrity and outstanding calibre having post graduate degree in the
discipline of health, health policy, public health, management, technology, law or finance
from a recognised university or institution having ten years of experience in the respective
field.
36. (1) A person appointed as the President or a member of the Committee shall hold
office for a term of four years from the date on which he enters upon his office or till the date
he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier and be eligible for reappointment for
another term.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 1), the President or a member of the
Committee shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the President and other members of the Committee shall be such as may be specified by
regulation made by the Commission.
102 of
1956.
National
Evaluation
and
Assessment
Committee.
Composition
of Commit-
tee.
Terms and
conditions of
office of
President and
members of
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
37. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in any law for the time being in force
relating to accreditation, the  Committee shall take measures to develop and regulate the
process of evaluation and assessment of institutions imparting health education and
programmes conducted therein, and monitor the functioning of agencies recommended by
the Commission.
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in any law for the time being in force relating
to accreditation, the measures referred to in sub-section ( 1), may  provide the following
matters, namely:—
(a) without prejudice to any law for the time being in force specify standards,
norms and processes for registration of evaluation and assessment agencies under
any law for the time being in force;
(b) undertake audit and cause to be audited the adherence to code of ethics
including policies on obviating conflict of interest, disclosure of information, evolving
transparency in processes and procedures of evaluation and assessment;
(c) lay down policies for providing information to the public with regard to all
aspects of quality and performance of institutions providing health education and
programmes conducted therein;
(d) specify and monitor standards on selection and training of experts for the
purposes of evaluation and assessment;
(e) scrutinise the report of the evaluation and assessment agency on the
applications for consideration of grant of permission for establishing of college, institute
or university and make its recommendations to the Commission;
(f) submit a report to the Commission for taking up the matter with the appropriate
statutory regulatory authority dealing with the accreditation for review of registration
granted or cancellation of registration thereof;
(g) levy of fees or other charges for matters relating to evaluation and assessment;
(h) recommend for improvement of academic quality;
(i) advise the Central Government or any State Government or the appropriate
statutory regulatory authority on any policy matter concerning evaluation and
assessment which may be referred to it;
(j) develop methodologies of evaluation and assessment in collaboration with
other agencies;
(k) promote research and innovation in evaluation and assessment;
(l) collect, compile and disseminate information regarding accreditation of health
institutions and programmes conducted therein to the public;
(m) monitor adherence to such norms, guidelines and standards of academic
quality, as may be specified under any law for the time being in force by the appropriate
statutory regulatory authority, in health educational institutions;
(n) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Commission.
(3) The process of selection of evaluation and assessment agency for evaluation and
assessment shall be in a transparent manner and the information relating to the selection of
such agency shall be put in the public domain.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being
in force, the Commission or Committee shall not engage the same evaluation and assessment
agency for successive inspections or audit inspections, to carry out audit or review inspection
of any institute at least for five years.
(5)  The evaluation and assessment of a health educational institution shall be done by
the evaluation and assessment agencies having such qualifications and experience and in
such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
Functions of
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
38. (1) The Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government, appoint an
audit committee consisting of such number of persons having such qualifications and
experience as may be prescribed, for the purpose of audit, inspections or inquiry into the
affairs of any evaluation and assessment agency or any health educational institution in so
far it relates to their evaluation and assessment.
(2) The Commission may, on the recommendations of the National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee, at any time, by order in writing, direct the audit committee specified
in the order to audit or inspect or inquire into the affairs of any evaluation and assessment
agency or any health educational institution in so far it relates to evaluation and assessment
and to report its findings and recommendations to the National Evaluation and Assessment
Committee or the Commission, as the case may be.
(3) On receipt of the report from the audit committee under sub-section ( 2), the
Commission may, after giving such opportunity to the evaluation and assessment agency to
make a representation in connection with the report, in the opinion of the Commission seems
reasonable, by order in writing—
(a) take such action in respect of any matter arising out of the report as the
Commission may think fit; or
(b) modify the terms and conditions of certificate of registration as it thinks fit,
and terms or conditions so modified shall be binding upon and be observed by the
evaluation and assessment agency and shall be of like force and effect as if they were
contained in the certificate of registration or approval, as the case may be; or
(c) revoke the certificate of registration of the evaluation and assessment agency
or the approval granted to the health educational institution, as the case may be, under
this Act.
(4) It shall be the duty of every evaluation and assessment agency and every health
educational institution, as the case may be, to produce before the audit committee all such
papers and other documents in its custody or power and to furnish any statement and
information relating to its affairs, as the audit committee may require of such agency or
institution, as the case may be, within such time   as the audit committee may specify.
(5) The audit committee may examine on oath, any chief executive or officer or other
employee of the evaluation and assessment agency in relation to evaluation and assessment
of any health educational institution or programme conducted therein, and may administer
oaths accordingly.
(6) The audit committee shall submit its report to the Committee and the Committee
shall place the report and the action taken thereon by it or the Commission, on its website.
39. (1) There shall be an Executive Director to the National Evaluation and Assessment
Committee to be appointed by the Central Government for a period of four years.
(2) The Committee may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, appoint
such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of
its functions under this Act.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Executive Director and other officers and employees of the Committee shall
be such as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
40. (1) The Committee shall meet at least once in every three months, at such time and
place as it may appoint.
(2) The quorum of a meeting of the Committee shall be two members.
(3) The President of the Committee shall preside over its meetings or, if for any reason
he is unable to attend, such other member as may be chosen by the members present at the
meeting from among themselves.
Power of
audit and
inspection of
evaluation
and
assessment
agency.
Executive
Director and
other officers
and employ-
ees of
Committee.
Meetings of
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
(4) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent, without
permission, and without sufficient cause in the opinion of the Committee, from three
consecutive meetings of the Committee.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Committee may regulate its own
procedure for transaction of business at its meetings.
CHAPTER V
N
ATIONAL COUNCILS AND STATE COUNCILS
41. (1) On the commencement of this Act, there shall be constituted, from such date
as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint, such corresponding new National
Councils as are specified in the First Schedule.
(2) On the commencement of this Act, the Central Government shall, by notification,
constitute the Paramedical Council of India for the disciplines of paramedics:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, constitute National Council
for any other discipline of health as may be notified by it under clause (k) of section 2.
(3) Each corresponding new National Council referred to in sub-section ( 1) and the
Paramedical Council of India and the National Council for any other discipline of health
referred to in sub-section  (2) shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act,
to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and
shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(4) The head office of each National Council referred to in sub-sections ( 1) and (2)
shall be in the National Capital Region referred to in clause (f) of section 2 of the National
Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985.
42. On the commencement of this Act, every existing Council shall be transferred to,
and shall vest in the Commission.
43. Every person holding office, immediately before the commencement of this Act, as
President or Vice-President or other members of an existing Council shall, on such commencement,
vacate their offices as such President or Vice-President or other members, as the case may be,
and no such President or Vice-President or other member, as the case may be, shall be entitled
to claim any compensation for premature termination of the term of his office.
44. Every corresponding new National Council shall, in the discharge of its functions,
be guided by such directions in regard to matters of policy involving public interest as the
Central Government may, after consultation with the Chairperson of the Commission, give.
45.  Any reference to any existing Council in any law, other than this Act, or in any
contract or other instrument shall, in so far as it relates to the undertaking which has been
transferred by section 42 be construed as a reference to the corresponding new National
Council.
46. (1) Each National Council referred to  in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of
section 41 shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) one member from each State (other than a Union territory), to be nominated
by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government concerned;
Constitution
of corre-
sponding
National
Councils.
2 of 1985.
Existing
Councils to
vest in
Commission.
President,
Vice President
and other
members of
Council to
vacate their
offices.
Correspond-
ing new
National
Councils to
be guided by
the directions
of Central
Government.
References to
existing
Councils on
and from
commence-
ment of this
Act.
Composition
of National
Councils.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

20
(b) one member from each University, to be elected from amongst the members
of the faculty of the concerned discipline of health by members of the Senate of the
University or in case the University has no Senate, by members of the Court;
(c) one member from each State in which a State Register in the respective
discipline is maintained, to be elected from amongst themselves by persons enrolled
on such Register;
(d) five members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst
heads of medical institutions in the respective discipline owned, controlled or managed
by the Central Government;
(e) five members to be nominated from amongst professionals of respective
disciplines by the Central Government;
(f) President of the Board shall be ex officio member of the National Council for
each discipline of health;
(2) A member of the National Council shall cease to be such member if he ceases to be
a person enrolled on the concerned State Register or to hold office by virtue of which he was
elected or nominated, as the case may be, as such member to the Council.
47. (1) The Commission shall conduct elections for each National Council, within a
period of six months from the date of commencement of this Act for constituting the National
Councils under section 40 in accordance with such procedure and manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) Each National Council constituted under sub-section (1) shall continue for a period
of four years from the date on which it is constituted:
Provided that the said period may be extended by the Commission, with the prior
approval of the Central Government, for a period not exceeding six months in case it is not
possible for any reason to reconstitute the National Council after the expiration of the said
period.
(3) The Commission shall commence the process of conducting the next elections for
National Council six months before the expiration of the term of the National Council or any
extended period as may be provided under sub-section (2).
(4) The Commission shall conduct elections to any vacancy that may arise in the
membership of any National Council on account of death, resignation or removal, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
48. (1) Each National Council referred to in section 41 shall have a President and a Vice-
President to be elected by the members of the National Council from among themselves in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The powers to be exercised, and the functions to be performed, by the President or
the Vice-President of the National Council shall be such as may be specified by regulations
made by the National Council.
49. In case of any dispute regarding any election under section 47 or section 48, the
aggrieved person may make an application within a period of thirty days from the date of
declaration of the result of election, to the Chairperson of the Commission who shall forward
the same to the Central Government.
50. (1) The quorum of a National Council for a meeting shall be one-third of its total
membership.
(2) The National Council shall meet at least twice in each year at such time and place as
may be appointed by the National Council.
Elections to
National
Councils and
its term.
President and
Vice-President
of National
Council.
Settlement of
disputes
regarding
election.
Meetings of
National
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
(3) The meetings of the National Council shall be presided over by the President or, if
for any reason he is unable to attend, by the Vice-President, and in case he is also unable to
attend, such other member as may be chosen by the members present at the meeting from
among themselves.
(4) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent, without
permission, and without showing sufficient cause in the opinion of the National Council,
from three consecutive   meetings of the National Council.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this section, the National Council may make regulations
for the transaction of business at its meetings.
51. (1) The National Council shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, take measures
to enrol persons having recognised qualifications to enable them to practice in respective
discipline of health and to regulate the profession of respective discipline of health.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the measures
referred to in sub-section (1) may, inter alia, provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) enrol persons having recognised qualifications to enable them to practice in
the respective discipline of health and renew the enrolment from time to time;
(b) maintain and publish the National Register;
(c) organise and conduct seminars, conferences, workshops or other programme
from time to time;
(d) grant certificate of good standing to the persons enrolled by it;
(e) levy fees or other charges to be paid by the persons seeking enrolment or
persons enrolled by it;
(f) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
(3) A person enrolled under this Act, before going abroad for the purpose of employment,
service, professional assignment or post or position or for exploration of career opportunities
or for carrying out any professional or related work, shall obtain the certificate of good
standing from the respective National Council or the State Council.
52. (1) Every National Council shall have a Registrar to be appointed by the Central
Government for a fixed term of four years who shall not be eligible for re-appointment
under this Act.
(2) The National Council may, with the prior approval of the Central Government,
appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient
discharge of its functions under this Act.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the other officers and employees of the National Council shall be such as may be
specified by regulations made by the National Council.
53. (1) Where there is no State Council in any State, the State Government shall, by
notification, constitute the State Councils for the following disciplines of health, within a
period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act, in such manner and with
such composition as may be prescribed by the State Government,  namely:—
(a) the Medical Council of .................... (name of the State) for medicine;
(b) the Dental Council of .................... (name of the State) for dentistry;
(c) the Nursing Council of .................... (name of the State) for nursing;
(d) the Pharmacy Council of .................... (name of the State) for pharmacy;
(e) the Paramedical Council of .................... (name of the State) for paramedics:
Functions of
National
Councils.
Registrar and
other officers
and
employees of
National
Council.
Constitution
of State
Councils.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

22
Provided that the State Government may, by notification, constitute State Councils for
any other discipline of health notified under clause (k) of section 2.
(2) Untill the State Council is constituted in a State under sub-section (1), the National
Council of respective discipline of health shall enrol the persons, in respect of that State,
having recognised qualification in the manner provided under this Act:
Provided that the person enrolled under this sub-section shall be entitled to practice in
the respective discipline of health only in the State for which he has applied for enrolment.
(3) Each State Council referred to in sub-section (1) shall be a body corporate by the
name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable,
and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(4) The head office of each State Council referred to in sub-section (1) shall be at such
place as the State Government may decide.
(5) Each State Council constituted under sub-section (1) shall continue for a period of
four years from the date on which it is constituted or, such period as may be prescribed by
the State Government.
54. (1) Each State Council referred to in section 53 shall have a President and a Vice-
President to be elected by the members of the State Council from among themselves in such
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(2) The powers to be exercised, and the functions to be performed, by the President or
the Vice-President of the State Council shall be such as may be specified by regulations made
by the State Council.
(3) No person shall be eligible to hold office in any capacity in the State Council
whether as a President or Vice-President or member for more than two terms.
55. (1) The quorum of a State Council for a meeting shall be one-third of its total
membership.
(2) The State Council shall meet at least twice in each year at such time and place as
may be appointed by the State Council.
(3) The meetings of the State Council shall be presided over by the President or, if for
any reason he is unable to attend, by the Vice-President, and in case he is also unable to
attend, such other member as may be chosen by the members present at the meeting from
among themselves.
(4) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent, without
permission, and without showing sufficient cause in the opinion of the State Council, from
three consecutive meetings of the State Council.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this section, the State Council may make regulations
for the transaction of business at its meetings.
56. (1) Every State Council shall have a Registrar to be appointed by the State
Government for a fixed term of four years who shall not be eligible for re-appointment under
this Act or as may be provided under regulations made by it.
(2) The State Council may, with the prior approval of the State Government, appoint
such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its
functions under this Act.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the other officers and employees of the State Council shall be such as may be
specified by regulations made by the State Council.
President and
Vice-President
of State
Council.
Meetings of
State Council.
Registrar and
other officers
and
employees of
State Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

23
57. (1) Every National Council and every State Council shall enrol the persons having
recognised qualification, in such form, manner and on payment of such fees and fulfilment of
such other criteria or conditions as may be specified by regulations by the National Council,
for a period of ten years and the person so enrolled shall be entitled to practice in the
respective discipline of health.
(2) Before the expiry of the period of ten years referred to in sub-section ( 1), the
National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, may renew the enrolment of such
persons for a further period of ten years, on showing the proof that he has attended such
seminar, conference, workshop or any other programme as may be specified by the
Commission for the purpose of updating his professional knowledge and skill.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no person shall
be required to appear and pass any qualifying examination for the purpose of renewal of his
enrolment under this sub-section.
(3) For the purpose of computing the period of ten years, the period of absence of a
person enrolled under this section from India, if any, shall also be taken into account.
(4) Any person enrolled under this section by the National Council shall be entitled to
practice in the respective discipline of health anywhere in India and the persons enrolled by
the State Council shall be entitled to practice in the respective discipline of health anywhere
in the State in which he is enrolled.
(5) Any person enrolled with the existing Medical Council of India or the Dental
Council of India or the Nursing Council of India or the Pharmacy Council of India or any State
Council, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been enrolled under this Act and be
eligible to continue to practice for a period of ten years and thereafter he shall be required to
renew his enrolment under this Act.
58. (1) Every National Council shall enter the name of persons enrolled by it under
section 57 in the National Register to be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Every State Council shall enter the name of persons enrolled by it under section 57
in the State Register to be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
(3) Every National Council shall collect data of persons enrolled in the State Register
from each State Council and enter the same in separate National Register to be maintained in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The National Council and the State Councils shall maintain the register by such
data capturing method as may be prescribed by the Central Government or State Government,
as the case may be, and shall, inter alia, contain the biometric and other details of each
health professional which shall be verified at the time of renewal of enrolment.
(5) The National Council and the State Council shall maintain the Register in accordance
with the provisions of this Act and update it from time to time, and publish the same in the
Official Gazette and in such other manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government or
State Government, as the case may be.
(6) The National Register and the State Register maintained under this section shall be
deemed to be public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
(7) The National Register and the State Register shall also be maintained in electronic
form and wherever admissible, be subject to disclosure in the public domain and made
amenable for electronic voting for selection of representatives of the profession or for such
other purposes as may be prescribed.
(8) No person who is not registered with the State Council or the National Council shall
falsely represent that his name is so entered in the State Register or the National Register, or
Enrolment of
persons.
Registers.
1 of 1872.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

24
use in connection with his name or title, any words or letters reasonably calculated to
suggest that his name is so entered.
59. (1) Any person,—
 ( a) who obtains a degree at graduate or post graduate or doctoral or post
doctoral or super speciality from a university or institution which receives grants from
the Central Government or State Government or institutions owned or controlled by
the Central or State Government; and
(b) leave India for the purposes of updating or acquiring higher education in the
discipline of health,
shall endeavour to serve in India for a period of three years after such updating or acquiring
such higher education outside India, failing which his name shall be removed from the
National Register or the State Register, as the case may be.
(2) Any person whose name has been removed under sub-section ( 1), who opts to
return to India shall be entitled to get his name re-entered subject to payment of such fees
and fulfilment of such conditions as may be specified by regulations by the Commission.
(3) Any person,—
(a) who obtains a degree at graduate or post graduate or doctoral or post doctoral
or super speciality from a university or institution other than the university or institution
referred to in sub-section (1); and
(b) leaves India for the purposes of updating or acquiring higher education in
the discipline of health or for employment and does not return within the period of
three years or does not inform the respective Councils of his whereabouts during such
period,
then, it shall be construed as professional misconduct.
60. (1) No person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National Register or the State
Register, as the case may be, as a medical practitioner,—
(a) hold office as physician or surgeon or any other office as a medical professional
in Government or in any health institution maintained by a local or other authority; or
(b) practice medicine; or
(c) sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or any other certificate
required by any law for the time being in force; or
(d) give evidence in any court of law as an expert on any matter relating to
medicine.
(2) No person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National Register or the State Register,
as the case may be, as a dentist,—
(a) hold any appointment in the field of dentistry or dental hygienist in any
dispensary, hospital or other health institution which is supported wholly or partially
from public or local funds; or
(b) practice dentistry;
(c) sign or authenticate a certificate required under any law for time being in
force from a dentist; or
(d) give evidence in any court of law as an expert in any matter relating to
dentistry.
(3) No person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National Register or the State Register,
as the case may be, as a nurse, hold any appointment in the field of nursing as teacher in
Duty to serve
in India.
Prohibition
to practice,
etc., without
enrolment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

25
nursing, nurse, auxiliary nurse, midwife, health visitor, or public health nurse, in any dispensary,
hospital or other health institution which is supported wholly or partially from public or local
funds.
(4) No person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National Register or the State Register,
as the case may be, as a pharmacologist, practice pharmacy.
(5) No person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National Register or the State Register,
as the case may be, of Paramedics,—
(i) hold any appointment as paramedic in any dispensary, hospital or other
health institution which is supported wholly or partially from public or local funds; or
(ii) practice as a paramedics.
61. Every person, whose name is for the time being borne on the National Register or
the State Register, as the case may be, shall subject to the conditions and restrictions laid
down by or under this Act, be entitled to practice in the discipline of his enrolment and to
recover in respect of such practice any expenses, charges in respect of medicaments or other
appliances, or any fees to which he may be entitled.
62. (1) Any person enrolled under section 57 shall inform transfer of his place of
residence or practice to the Council concerned, within a period of thirty days of such
transfer.
(2) If the person referred to in sub-section (1) fails to comply with the requirements of
that sub-section, his right to participate in the elections to the Council concerned shall be
liable to be suspended by an order of that Council, for such period as may be specified by
regulations made by the Council.
63. Each State Council shall supply to the National Council printed copies of the State
Register as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act and subsequently after the
first day of April of each year and the State Council shall inform the National Council without
delay of all additions to and other amendments in the State Register made from time to time.
64. A person enrolled with the respective National Council shall be liable for all the acts
of omission, commission, or professional misconduct arising in the State in which the cause
of action has arisen.
65. (1) A citizen of India or a registered overseas Citizen of  India possessing recognised
qualification in the discipline of medicine granted by a medical institution outside India, who
is required to undergo practical training, on such terms and conditions as the commission
may specify,  shall, on production of evidence that he has been selected for such practical
training in an approved institution, be entitled to enroll himself provisionally in a State
Register and shall be entitled to practice medicine in the approved institution for the purposes
of such training and for no other purpose.
(2) A person who has passed the qualifying examination of any university or  Institution
in India in the discipline of medicine for the grant of a recognised qualification shall be
entitled to enroll himself provisionally in a State Register for the purposes of enabling him to
be engaged in employment in a resident medical capacity in any approved institution or in
the Medical Service of the Armed Forces of the Union, and for no other purpose, on production
of proper evidence that he has been selected for such employment.
(3) The names of all persons provisionally enrolled under sub-section ( 1) or sub-
section (2) in the State Register shall be entered therein separately from the names of other
persons enrolled therein.
(4) A person enrolled provisionally as aforesaid who has completed practical training
referred to in sub-section (1) or who has been engaged for the specified period in employment
Privileges of
persons
enrolled on
National
Register or
State
Registers.
Persons
enrolled to
notify change
of place of
residence or
practice.
Supply of
copies of
State Register
Liability of
persons
enrolled with
respective
National
Councils.
Provisional
registration of
persons
possessing
required
qualification
from any
institution
outside India.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

26
in a resident medical capacity in any approved institution, or in the medical service of the
Armed Forces of the Union, as the case may be, shall be entitled to enroll himself in the State
Register.
66. If any person whose name is entered in the National Register or the State Register,
as the case may be, obtains any title, diploma or other qualification for proficiency in sanitary
science, public health or medicine which is a recognised medical qualification, he shall, on
application made in this behalf in such manner as may be prescribed, be entitled to have any
entry stating such other title, diploma or other qualification made against his name in such
Register either in substitution for or in addition to any entry previously made.
67. The National Council shall specify, by regulations, the standards of professional
conduct, etiquette and code of ethics to be observed by the persons enrolled under this Act.
68. For the purposes of this Act, the expression, “professional misconduct” shall be
deemed to include any act or omission provided in the Seventh Schedule but nothing in this
section shall be construed to limit or abridge in any way the power conferred or duty cast on
the respective Councils under this Act to inquire into the professional conduct of any
person whose name is included in the National Register or State Register, under any other
circumstances.
69. (1) Every National Council and every State Council shall have power to institute an
inquiry into any complaint, charge or allegation of professional misconduct against any
person enrolled by it under this Act and on finding such person guilty of such conduct, to
impose any one or more of the following penalties, namely:—
(a) a warning or a reprimand or a reprimand and a warning;
(b) suspension of registration for a period not exceeding two years; or
(c) removal of his or her name from the register;
(d) impose a monetary penalty not exceeding ten lakh rupees;
(e) a compulsory period of such professional service as may be specified by
regulations made by the Council.
(2) Every National Council or State Council, as the case may be, shall give an
opportunity of being heard to the concerned person before imposing upon him any of the
penalties referred to in sub-section (1).
70. (1) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the National Council may, within a
period of ninety days from the date of communication of such decision, prefer an appeal to
the ethics committee to be constituted by the Commission.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the State Council may, within a period of
ninety days from the date of communication of such decision, prefer an appeal to the ethics
committee to be constituted by the State Council.
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order of the ethics committee referred to in sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) may, within a period of sixty days from the date of receipt of the
order of the said Committee, prefer an appeal to the ethics appellate committee to be constituted
by the National Council.
(4) The composition of, and the procedure to be followed by, the ethics committee and
the ethics appellate committee and terms and conditions of such members shall be such as
may be prescribed.
71. (1) The National Council, or as the case may be, the State Council may remove the
name of any person enrolled by it in such circumstances and in such manner as may be
specified by regulations made by the Commission.
Entry of
additional
qualifications.
Code of
ethics.
Professional
misconduct.
Power of
National
Council  and
State Councils
to institute
inquiry and to
impose
penalties.
Appeals
against
decision under
section 69.
Removal of
names from
National
Register or
State Register
and restora-
tion thereof.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

27
(2) The Commission may, in case of removal of name of any person from the National
Register or the State Register (except in case of professional misconduct), on an application,
if it is satisfied on the grounds mentioned therein and after making such inquiry as it deems
necessary, may direct, by order, the National Council or the State Council, as the case may be,
to restore the name of such person on payment of such fees or fulfillment of such conditions
which it may impose in the order.
72. (1) Any person aggrieved from the professional services rendered by the persons
enrolled under this Act may file a complaint with the State Council, within a period of sixty
days from the date of rendering of such service, in such manner as may be specified by
regulations made by the Commission:
Provided that the complaint may be admitted after expiry of the said period of sixty
days if the complainant satisfies the Council that he had sufficient cause for not preferring
the complaint within the said period.
(2) The Council shall decide the complaint within a period of one hundred and twenty
days from date of its receipt.
73. (1) The National Council may, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
make regulations consistent with the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made
by the Commission.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of  foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) other ethical principles  under clause (b) of section 2;
(b) the powers to be exercised and the functions to be performed by the President
or the Vice-President of the National Council under sub-section (2) of section 48;
(c) the procedure for transaction of business at meetings of the National Council
under sub-section (5) of section 50;
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
the service  of the other officers and employee of the National Council under sub-
section (3) of section 52;
(e) the form and manner of enrolment of persons and the fees and such other
criteria or conditions for such enrolment under sub-section (1) of section  57;
(f) the standards of professional conduct, etiquette and code of ethics under
section 67;
(g) the professional service to be rendered under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of
section 69;
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations
or in respect of which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.
74. (1) The State Council may, with the previous approval of the State Government,
make regulations consistent with the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made
by the Commission and the National Council.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of  foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the powers to be exercised, and the functions to be performed, by the President
or the Vice-President of the State Council under sub-section (2) of section 54;
(b) the procedure for transaction of business at meetings of the State Council
under sub-section (5) of section 55;
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
the service  of the other officers and employee under sub-section (3) of section 56;
Grievance
Redressal
Mechanism.
Power of
National
Council to
make
regulations.
Power of
State Council
to make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

28
(d) the professional service to be rendered under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of
section 69;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations
or in respect of which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.
CHAPTER VI
AUDIT AND ACCOUNTS
75. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, make to the Commission grants of such sums of money as the Central
Government may think fit, for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
76. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called “the National Commission for
Human Resource for Health Fund” and there shall be credited thereto—
(a) all Government grants, fees and charges received by the Commission;
(b) all sums received by the Commission from such other source as may be
decided upon by the Central Government.
 (2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and
other employees of the Commission, Board, Committee and National Councils;
(b) the other expenses of the Commission in connection with the discharge of its
functions and for the purposes of this Act;
(c) the expenses of the Board, Committee and National Councils in connection
with the discharge of their functions and for the purposes of this Act.
77. (1) The Commission, Board, Committee, National Council and State Council shall
maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of
accounts in such form as may be prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission, Board, Committee, National Council and State
Council shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as
may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be
payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other persons appointed by
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission, Board, Committee,
National Council and State Council shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and
papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Commission, Board, Committee, National
Council and State Council.
(4) The accounts of the Commission, Board, Committee, National Council, State Council
as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed
by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually by
the Commission, Board, Committee, National Council and State Council to the Central
Government which shall cause the same to be laid as soon as may be after it is received,
before each House of Parliament.
78. (1) The Commission, Board, Committee, National Council, State Council, and other
committee shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such form as may be
prescribed, an annual report giving a summary of their activities during the previous year.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Constitution
of Fund of
Commission.
Accounts and
audit.
Furnishing of
returns and
reports to the
Central
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

29
(2) A copy of the report received by the Central Government under sub-section ( 1)
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
79. Whoever contravenes the provision of section 17 shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees, or with both for the first offence and in case of second or subsequent offence,
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend
to twenty-five lakh rupees, or with both.
80. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 57 relating to enrolment
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both for the first offence and in case of second
or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with
fine which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees, or with both.
81. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 33 shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees, or with both for the first offence and in case of a second or subsequent offence,
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or fine which may extend to
twenty five lakh rupees or with both.
82. Where on assessment under section 38 it is found that the information provided by
a university or an institution imparting health education, is not in conformity with the
information displayed at its website or information given to the concerned authorities for
evaluation and assessment, then the Head of the university or institution in case of
Government university or institution and in case of non-governmental university or institution,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, trusts, societies such director,
manager, secretary or other officer shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
83. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) “director” means a whole-time director in the company and in relation to a
firm, means a partner in the firm.
84. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a society or a trust,
every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible
Punishment
for
establishing
institution,
etc., without
permission.
Penalty for
contravention
of section 5 7.
Penalty for
contravention
of section 3 3.
Punishment
for furnishing
information
contrary to
which
published by
institutions.
Offences by
companies.
Offences by
societies or
trusts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

30
to, the society or trust for the conduct of the business of the society or trust, as well as the
society or trust, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a society or trust and it is proved that the offence has been
committed  with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary, trustee or other officer of the society or trust, such director,
manager, secretary, trustee or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “society” means any body corporate registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 and, “trust” means any body registered under the Indian Trusts
Act, 1882 or any other law for the time being in force;
(b) “director”, in relation to society or trust, means a member of its governing
board other than an ex officio member representing the interests of the Central or State
Government.
85. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act, save
on a complaint made by the Commission or by an officer authorised by it.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the
first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
86. (1) If,  at any time the Central Government is of the opinion,—
(a)  that,  on  account  of circumstances beyond the control  of  the Commission,
Board, Committee or National Council,  as the case may be, it  is  unable to discharge
the functions or  perform  the  duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this
Act;  or
(b) that  the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may
be, has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by the Central
Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or performance of the
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such
default the financial position of the Commission, the Board, the Committee or the
National Council, or the administration of  the Commission, the Board, the Committee
or the National Council, as the case may be,  has suffered;  or
(c)  that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the  public interest so
to do,
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the Commission, the Board, the
Committee or the National Council, as the case may be,  for  such period, not  exceeding six
months, as  may  be  specified  in the notification and appoint a person or persons as the
Chairperson or the President, as the case may be, to exercise powers and discharge functions
of the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be, under this
Act:
Provided  that  before  issuing  any such  notification,  the  Central Government shall
give a reasonable opportunity to the  Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National
21 of 1860.
2 of 1882.
Cognizance
of offences.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Commission,
Board,
Committee or
National
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

31
Council, as the case may be, to make representations  against  the proposed  supersession
and  shall consider the representations, if any, of the  Commission, the Board, the Committee
or the National Council, as the case may be.
(2) Upon  the  publication of a notification  under  sub-section ( 1) superseding the
Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case may be,—
 (a)  the  Chairperson, President, Vice-President  and other members shall, as from
the  date  of supersession, vacate their offices as such;
 (b)  all  the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under  the provisions
of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Commission, the Board, the
Committee or the National Council, as the case may be, shall,  until  the  Commission, the
Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case may be, is reconstituted
under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by the person or persons referred to
in sub-section (1);  and
(c)  all properties owned or controlled by the  Commission, the Board, the Committee
or the National Council, as the case may be, shall, until the Commission, the Board, the
Committee or the National Council, as the case may be, is  reconstituted under sub-
section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the  period  of  supersession specified  in  the
notification  issued under  sub-section  (1),  the Central Government  shall  reconstitute the
Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case may be, by a fresh
appointment of its Chairperson, President, Vice-President and other members and in such
case any person who had vacated his office under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall not be
deemed to be disqualified for reappointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub-
section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances
leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
87. (1) If,  at any time the State Government is of the opinion,—
(a)  that,  on  account  of circumstances beyond the control  of  the State Council,
it  is  unable to discharge the functions or  perform  the  duties imposed on it by or
under the provisions of this Act;  or
(b)  that  the State Council has persistently defaulted in complying with any
direction given by the State Government under this Act or in the discharge of the
functions or performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this
Act and as a result of such default the financial position of the State Council, or the
administration of  the State Council,  has suffered;  or
(c)  that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the  public interest so
to do,
the State Government may, by notification,  supersede the State Council  for  such period,
not  exceeding  six months,  as  may  be  specified  in  the notification  and  appoint a person
or persons as the President to exercise powers and discharge functions under this Act:
Provided  that  before  issuing  any such  notification,  the  State Government  shall
give a reasonable opportunity to the  State Council to make  representations  against  the
proposed  supersession  and  shall consider the representations, if any, of the  State Council.
(2)  Upon  the  publication of a notification  under  sub-section ( 1) superseding the
State Council,—
(a)  the  President  and other members shall, as from  the  date  of supersession,
vacate their offices as such;
Power of
State
Government
to supersede
State Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

32
 (b)  all  the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under  the provisions
of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the State Council shall, until
the State Council is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged
by the person or persons referred to in sub-section ( 1);  and
(c)  all properties owned or controlled by the State Council shall,  until the  State
Council is  reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest  in  the State Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the  period  of  supersession specified  in  the
notification  issued under  sub-section  ( 1),  the State Government  shall  reconstitute the
State Council, by a fresh appointment of its President and other members and in such case
any person who had vacated his office under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) shall not be
deemed to be disqualified for reappointment.
(4) The State Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub-
section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances
leading to such action to be laid before State Legislature at the earliest.
88. The President or Vice-President and other Members of the Board, Committee,
National Council or State Council, as the case may be, shall immediately after entering office
and every year thereafter, make a declaration to the extent of their interest, whether direct or
indirect and whether financial or otherwise, in any health institution which comes under the
purview of the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council, as the case may be, and
the same shall be placed in the public domain.
89. (1) The President or Vice-President and other members of the Board, Committee,
National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, on ceasing to hold office shall not
for a period of two years accept any employment (including as consultant or expert or
otherwise) in any health educational institution whose matter has been dealt with by such
President, Vice-President or member, as the case may be.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prevent the President, Vice-President or a member,
as the case may be, to accept any employment in any health educational institution controlled
or maintained by the Central Government or the State Government.
90. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the President or
other member of the Board, Committee, National Council or the State Council, as the case
may be, by reasons of death, removal, suspension or resignation, the senior most whole-time
member of such the Board, Committee, National Council or the State Council, as the case may
be, shall act as the President till such time the President is appointed, to fill the vacancy.
(2) When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on
account of leave or otherwise, the senior-most whole-time member shall discharge the functions
of the President till the President is able to discharge his functions.
91. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, no person shall be eligible to be appointed
or nominated or elected in any capacity in the Commission, Board, Committee, National
Council or State Council, whether as the Chairperson or President or Vice-President or member
for more than two terms.
92. The President, Vice-President or a member of the Board, Committee, National Council
or the State Council, as the case may be, may, by notice given in writing under his hand of not
less than a period of  thirty days, addressed to the Central Government or, as the case may be,
the State Government, resign from his office:
Provided that the President, Vice-President or a member of the Board, Committee,
National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, shall, unless permitted by the
Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government, to relinquish office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of
such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon office or until the
expiry of his term of office, whichever is earliest.
Declaration
of interest.
Restrictions
on re-
employment.
Member to
act as
President, or
to discharge
his functions,
in certain
circumstances.
Restriction
on holding
office for
more than
two terms.
Resignation
of President,
Vice-
President or a
member of
Board,
Committee,
National
Council or
State Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

33
93. (1) The Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government may, by
order, remove from office the President or Vice-President or any member of the Board,
Committee, National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) being whole-time member has engaged at any time, during his term of office,
in any paid employment; or
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d)  has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson
or other Member; or
(e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(f) has been removed or dismissed from the service or office of the Central
Government or of a State Government or from a body owned or controlled by the
Central Government or a State Government or from any Central or State statutory
body;
(g) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functioning as Chairperson or other Member, as the case may be; or
(h) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to public interest; or
(i)  has been guilty of proved misconduct; or
(j) has been guilty of proved conflict of interest in the discharge of functions.
(2) The President, Vice-President or a member of the Board, Committee, National Council
or State Council, as the case may be, shall not be removed from his office under clause (g) or
clause (h) or clause (i) of sub-section (1), unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity
of being heard in the matter:
Provided that the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government
may, if it considers necessary in the public interest, suspend such President, Vice-President
or other member.
94. No act or proceeding of the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council,
as the case may be, shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board, Committee,
National Council or State Council, as the case may be; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Board,
Committee, National Council or State Council, as the case may be; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board, Committee, new Council or
State Council, as the case may be, not affecting the merits of the case.
95. (1) The Board, Committee, National Council or State Council shall be competent to
constitute such other committees for general or special purposes, as it may consider necessary
to carry out the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Board, Committee, National Council or State Council may engage such experts
for discharging its functions under this Act for such period, on such qualification and on
payment of such fees and remuneration as may be specified by regulations made by
Commission.
96. (1) Every health educational institution under this Act shall at all times maintain a
website and display all such information as may be required by the Commission, Board or
Committee, as the case may be.
Suspension
and Removal
of President,
Vice-President
or a member
of Board,
Committee,
National
Council or
State Council.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of Board,
Committee,
National
Council or
State Council.
Power to
appoint
committees
or experts.
Reporting by
universities
and
institutions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

34
(2) The Commission, Board or Committee, as the case may be, shall either themselves
or through such other experts, at any time during the existence of the evaluation or assessment,
without any notice may assess the performance standards and benchmarks as displayed by
the University or health institution on its website.
(3) The Central Government may by notification specify such procedure as may be
necessary to prevent unfair practices by university or institutions imparting health education.
97. The Commission, Board, Committee or the National Council, may, with prior
approval of the Central Government, establish State or regional level administrative offices,
to perform such functions relating to information management, coordination and liaison in
the State or region for which such office is set up.
98. Where any dispute arises regarding any recommendation or advice of Board or
Committee or National Council made to the Commission, it shall be referred to the Central
Government whose decision thereon shall be final and binding.
99. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Commission under section 98
may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within such period as may be prescribed.
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed
therefor:
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed
therefore if the appellant satisfies the Central Government that he had sufficient cause for
not preferring the appeal within the prescribed period.
(3) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and shall be
accompanied by a copy of the order appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.
(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
100. No order refusing to enrol name of any person in the National Register or the
State Register, as the case may be, or removing a name therefrom shall be called in question
in any court.
101. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for
anything which has been done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act.
102. The Chairperson, President, Vice-President and Members and the Chief Executive
Officer, Executive Director and other officers and employees of the Commission, Board,
Committee, National Council or State Council, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
103. (1) Where the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the case
may be, consider it expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing—
(a) call upon any health educational institution at any time to furnish in writing,
such information or explanation relating to its affairs as the Commission, Board,
Committee or National Council, as the case may be, may require; or
(b) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of
any health educational institution; and
(c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect the books of account or
other documents of any health educational institution.
(2) Where any inquiry in relation to the affairs of a health educational institution has
been undertaken under sub-section ( 1),—
State or
regional
administrative
offices.
Reference of
dispute to
Central
Government.
Appeal
against
decisions of
Commission.
Bar of
Jurisdiction.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Members,
etc., to be
public
servants.
45 of 1860.
Powers of
Commission,
Board,
Committee or
National
Council to
call for
information
or conduct
investiga-
tions, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

35
(a) every officer of the Government Department, if such    health educational
institution is a department of the Government;
(b) every director, manager, secretary or other officer, if such health educational
institution is a company; or
(c) every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if such health educational
institution is a firm; or
(3) Every other person or body of persons who has had dealings in the course of
business with any of the persons mentioned in sub-section ( 2), shall produce before the
Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be, making the inquiry,
all such books of account or other documents in his custody or power relating to, or having
a bearing on the subject-matter of such inquiry and also to furnish to the Commission, Board,
Committee or National Council, as the case may be, with any such statement or information
relating thereto, as the case may be, required of him, within such time as may be specified by
the Commission.
(4) Every health educational institution shall maintain such books of account or other
documents as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
(5) The Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be, shall
have the power to issue such directions to health educational institution as it may consider
necessary for proper functioning of such institution.
104. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any student of health
educational institutions who, immediately before the commencement of this Act was studying
for a degree, diploma or certificate in any such institution shall continue and complete his
course for that degree, diploma or certificate, as the case may be, and such institutions shall
provide for the instruction and examination for such student in accordance with the syllabus
of studies as existed before the commencement of this Act and shall be deemed to have
completed his course of study and awarded degree, diploma or certificate, as the case may
be, under this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the health educational institution
in case of lapse of its recognition whether by efflux of time or by withdrawal by the Commission
or by its voluntary surrender or for any other reason whatsoever shall continue to maintain
and provide the minimum standards of infrastructure approved by the Commission till such
time that all the candidates are able to complete their study in such institutions.
105. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Commission,
Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be, shall, in exercise of its powers and
in performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of
policy, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may
be, shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views before any
direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the Commission, Board,
Committee or National Council, as the case may be, as to whether a question is or is not a
question of policy, the decision of the Central Government shall be final.
106. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the State Council
shall, in exercise of its powers and in performance of its functions under this Act, be bound
by such directions on questions of policy, as the State Government may give in writing to it
from time to time:
Provided that the State Council shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to
express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
Completion
of courses of
studies in
health
educational
institutions.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Power of
State
Government
to issue
directions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

36
(2) If any dispute arises between the State Government and the State Council as to
whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the State Government
shall be final.
107. The Commission, Board, Committee and National Council shall furnish to the
Central Government any information with respect to their activities as the Central Government
may from time to time require.
108. The Central Government may, after consultation with the Commission, by
notification, add to or otherwise amend any of the Schedules of this Act for the purposes of
the Act and thereupon the said Schedules shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
109. The Central Government may appoint an independent committee once in every
five years to review the functioning of the Commission, Board, Committee or National
Council, as the case may be.
110. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), the provisions of this Act shall
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for
the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this
Act.
(2) The provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to, and
not in derogation of, the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916.
111. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of appointment  of the Selection Committee under sub-section (1)
of section 5;
(b) the term of the Selection Committee under sub-section (3) of section 5;
(c) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other members under sub-section (3) of section 6;
(d) the salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the
Chief Executive Officer  and other officers and employees of the Commission under
sub-section (5) of section 15;
(e) such other functions to be performed by the Commission under clause (p) of
sub-section (2) of section 16;
(f) any other factors to be considered by the Committee and the Commission
while passing an order for approving or disapproving the scheme under clause (g) of
sub-section (8) of section 17;
(g) the manner of appointment of the chairperson and members of the Selection
Committee under sub-section (1) and their term under sub-section (4) of section 25;
(h)
 the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the President and other members of the Board under sub-section ( 3) of
section 27;
(i) such other functions to be performed by the Board under clause (ze) of sub-
section (2) of section 30;
(j) the number of persons to be appointed  and the qualifications and experience
of the audit committee under sub-section (1) of section 38;
Commission,
Board,
Committee
and National
Council to
furnish
information
to Central
Government.
Power to
amend
Schedules.
Review.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
7 of 1916.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

37
(k) the procedure and the manner in which the National Councils are to be
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 47;
(l) the manner of conducting elections under sub-section (4) of section 47;
(m) the manner of elections of the President and Vice-President of each National
Council under section 48;
(n) such other functions which the National Council may perform under clause
(f) of sub-section (2) of section 51;
(o) the manner in which the National  Register shall be maintained under sub-
section (1) of section 58;
(p) the manner in which a separate National Register shall be maintained under
sub-section (3) of section 58;
(q) the data capturing method by which the National Councils shall maintain the
register under sub-section (4) of section 58;
(r) the manner in which the National Council shall update and publish the Register
under sub-section (5) of section 58;
(s) such other purposes for which the National Register may be used under sub-
section (7) of section 58;
(t) the manner in which an application may be   made  for entry of additional
qualifications  under section 66;
(u) the composition of and the procedure to be followed by the ethics committee
and the ethics appellate committee and terms and conditions of such members under
sub-section (4) of section 70;
(v) the form in which an annual statement of accounts shall be maintained under
sub-section (1) of section 77;
(w) the time and the form in which an annual report shall be furnished under sub-
section (1
) of section 78;
(x) the period within which appeal may be preferred  to the Central Government
under sub-section (1) of section 99;
(y) the form  of application and the fees  to be paid under sub-section (3), and the
procedure for disposing of an appeal under sub-section (4)  of section 99;
(z)  any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which
provision is to be, or may be made by rules.
112. (1) The Commission may, with prior approval of the Central Government, by
notification,  make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to
carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision,
such regulation may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the conduct of business at the meetings of the Commission under sub-
section (5) of section 13;
(b) the functions to be discharged by the Chief Executive officer under sub-
section (2) of section 15;
(c) the continuous medical education and the courses workshops and training
activities under clause (l)  and such other functions under clause (p) of sub-section (2)
of section 16;
(d) the form, particulars and  manner in which the scheme shall be made and the
fees for submission of the  scheme  under sub-section (3) of section 17;
Power of
Commission
to make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

38
(e) the  functions  in respect of which fees and charges may be levied under
section 22;
(f) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the other officers and employees of the Board under sub-section ( 4) of
section 28;
(g) the manner of conducting examination for entry to graduate, post graduate,
doctoral, post doctoral, super speciality or diploma courses and fellowship examination
by the Board under section 31;
(h) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the President and other members of the Committee under sub-section (3) of
section 36;
(i) the qualifications and experience of, and the manner of evaluation and
assessment of health educational institutions by, the evaluation and assessment
agencies under sub-section (5) of section 37;
(j) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Executive Director and other officers and employees  of the Committee
under sub-section (3) of section 39;
(k) the fees and the conditions for re-entry of   name of the person under sub-
section (2) of section 59;
(l) the period of suspension of the right of person  to participate in  elections to
council under sub-section (2) of section 62;
(m) the circumstances and manner of removal of name of any person enrolled by
the National Council, or as the case may be, the State Council under sub-section (1) of
section 71;
(n) the manner of filing a complaint with the State Council under sub-section (1)
of section 72;
(o) the period for which the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council
may engage committees or experts, the qualifications of such  experts  and the fees and
remunerations   to be paid under sub-section (2) of section 95;
(p) the books of account and other documents to be maintained by health
educational institutions under sub-section (4) of section 103;
(q)  any other matter for which provision may be made by regulations by the
Commission under this Act.
113. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner in which the State Councils are to be constituted and its
composition under sub-section (1) of section 53;
(b) the period of State Council to continue under sub-section (5) of section 53;
(c) the manner of election of the President and Vice-President of the State Council
to be elected by the members under sub-section (1) of section 54;
(d) the manner in which the State Register shall be maintained under sub-section
(2) of section 58;
(e) the data capturing method by which the State Councils shall maintain the
register under sub-section (4) of section 58;
Power of
State
Government
to make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

39
(f) the manner in which the State Council shall update  and publish the Register
under sub-section (5) of section 58;
(g) any other matter for which provision may be made by rules by the State
Government under this Act.
114. (1) Every rule and every regulation made and every notification issued by the
Central Government under this Act,  shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made  or
issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or
notification or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation or notification should not be
made or issued, the rule or regulation or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule or regulation or notification.
(2) Every rule made by the State Government and every regulation made by the State
Council shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the state
legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one
House, before that House.
115. (1) Where the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, it may, by
order in writing, direct the Commission or Board or Committee or National Council, as the
case may be, to make any regulations or to amend or revoke any regulations already made
within such period as it may specify in this behalf.
(2) If the Commission or Board or Committee or National Council, as the case may be,
fails or neglects to comply with such order within the specified period, the Central Government
may make the regulations or amend or revoke the regulations made by the Commission or
Board or Committee or National Council, as the case may be, either in the form specified in
the order or with such modifications thereof as the Central Government thinks fit.
116. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
117. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may appoint in this
behalf, the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948
and the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 shall stand repealed and the Nursing Council of
India, the Pharmacy Council of India, the Dental Council of India and Medical Council of
India shall stand dissolved:
Provided that during the period between the date of coming into force of this Act and
date of repeal of the enactments mentioned in this sub-section, the existing Nursing Council
of India, the Pharmacy Council of India, the Dental Council of India and the Medical Council
of India, as the case may be, shall not take any decision or action, except with the prior
approval of the Commission on any matter specified by it.
(2) On the commencement of this Act, every existing Council shall be transferred to,
and shall vest in, the Commission.
(3) Each existing Council which is transferred to, and which vest in, the Commission
shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all
property, movable and immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, investments and all other
Laying of
rules and
regulations.
Powers of
Central
Government
to direct
regulations to
be made or to
make or
amend
regulations.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Repeal and
savings.48 of 1947.
8 of 1948
16 of 1948.
102 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

40
rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before the
commencement of this Act in the ownership, possession, power or control of the existing
Council, whether within or without India, and all books of account, registers, records and all
other documents of whatever nature relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all
borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting of the existing Council.
(4) If, according to the laws of any country outside India, the provisions of this Act
by themselves are not effective to transfer or vest any asset or liability situated in that
country which forms part of  an existing Council to, or in, the Commission, the affairs of the
existing Council in relation to such asset or liability shall, on and from the commencement of
this Act, stand entrusted to the Chief Executive Officer for the time being of the Commission,
and the Chief Executive Officer may exercise all powers and do all such acts and things as
may be exercised or done by the existing Council for the purpose of effectively transferring
such assets and discharging such liabilities.
(5) The Chief Executive Officer of the Commission shall, in exercise of the powers
conferred on him by sub-section (4), take all such steps as may be required by the laws of
any such country outside India for the purpose of effecting such transfer or vesting, and
may either himself or through any person authorised by him in this behalf realise any asset
and discharge any liability of the existing Council.
(6) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all contracts, deeds, bonds,
agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal representation and other instruments of
whatever nature subsisting or having effect immediately before the commencement of this
Act and to which the existing Council is a party or which are in favour of the existing
Council shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the Commission, and may
be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if in the place of the existing Council,
the Commission had been a party thereto or as if they had been issued in favour of the
Commission.
(7) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature
in relation to any existing Council which has been transferred under sub-section ( 2) is
pending by or against the existing Council, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be,
in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the existing Council or of
anything contained in this Act but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued,
prosecuted and enforced by or against the Commission.
(8) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as applying to the assets, rights, powers,
authorities and privileges and property, movable and immovable, cash balances and
investments in any country outside India (and other rights and interests in, or arising out
of, such property) and borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind subsisting at
the commencement of this Act, of any existing Council operating in that country if, under
the laws in force in that country.
(9) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the
provisions of the aforesaid Acts shall, insofar as such thing or action is not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions
of this Act as if the said provisions were in force when such thing was done or such action
taken, and shall continue in force.
118. (1) Every officer or other employee of the existing Council (except the President,
Vice-President and members of the existing Council) or the National Board of Examinations,
as the case may be, serving in the employment immediately before the appointed day shall
become, as from the appointed day, an officer or, as the case may be, other employee of the
Commission and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same
remuneration, upon the same terms and conditions, with the same obligations and with the
same rights and privileges as to leave, leave fare concession, welfare scheme, medical
benefit scheme, insurance, provident fund, other retirement funds, voluntary retirement,
gratuity and other benefits as he would have held under the existing Council if its undertaking
Provisions in
respect of
officers and
other
employees of
existing
Council and
National
Board of
Examina-
tions.
14 of 1947.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

41
had not vested in the Commission and shall continue to do so as an officer or, as the case
may be, other employee of the existing Council or until the expiry of a period of six months
from the appointed day if such officer or other employee opts not to continue to be the
officer or other employee of the existing Council within such period.
(2) The Commission may transfer any officer or other employee or the services of
such officers or other employees as it may deem fit, to the Board, Committee or the National
Council.
(3) Where an officer or other employee of the existing Council opts under sub-section
(1) not to be in employment or service of the Commission, such officer or other employee
shall be deemed to have resigned.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or in any
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other
employee of the existing Council or the National Board of Examinations, as the case may be,
to the Commission shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation
under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.
(5) The officer and other employees who have retired before the appointed day from
the service of the existing Council or the National Board of Examinations, as the case may
be, and are entitled to any benefits, rights or privileges shall be entitled to receive the same
benefits, rights or privileges from the Commission.
(6) The provident fund or the gratuity fund of the existing Council or the National
Board of Examinations, as the case may be,  and any other bodies created for the welfare of
officer or other employees would continue to discharge their functions in the Commission
as was being done hitherto in the existing Council or the National Board of Examinations, as
the case may be,  and any tax exemption granted to the provident fund or the gratuity fund
would continue to be applied to the Commission.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the Companies Act, 1956 or
in any other law for the time being in force or in the regulations of the existing Council or the
National Board of Examinations, as the case may be, the President or Vice-President or
member or the trustees, executive trustee or any other person entitled to manage the whole
or substantial part of the business and affairs of the existing Council or the National Board
of Examinations, as the case may be, shall not be entitled to any compensation against the
Commission for the loss of office or for the premature termination of any contract of
management entered into by him with the Commission.
119. (1) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the
Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, the
educational standards, requirements and other provisions of the Indian Nursing Council
Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956 and the rules and regulations made thereunder shall continue to be in force and
operate till new standards are specified under this Act or the rules and regulations made
thereunder:
Provided that anything done or any action taken as regards the educational standards
and requirements under the enactments under repeal and the rules and regulations made
thereunder shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions
of this Act and shall continue in force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything
done or by any action taken under this Act:
Provided further that all such courses that are being conducted by the National Board
of Examinations shall continue till the Central Government on the advice of the Commission
notifies the constitution of the Board under this Act.
1 of 1956.
Transitory
provisions.
14 of 1947.
48 of 1947.
8 of 1948
16 of 1948.
102 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

42
(2) The Central Government may, if considered necessary by notification, take such
appropriate measures as may be necessary for smooth transition of repealed Councils to
the corresponding new Councils and the existing National Board of Examination to the
Board under this Act.
120. In case of any difference of opinion with the National Commission for Higher
Education constituted under the National Commission for Higher Education and Research
Act, 2011, the same may be referred to the Joint Mechanism constituted under section 52 of
the National Commission for Higher Education and Research Act, 2011 for resolution of
such difference of opinion in accordance with the provisions of that Act.
Resolution of
difference of
opinion by
Joint
Mechanism.
5

43
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sections 2(i) and (o) and section 41(1)]
Existing Council Corresponding new National Council
(1) (2)
The Medical Council of India for medicine The Medical Council of India for
medicine
The Dental Council of India for dentistry The Dental Council of India for dentistry
The Nursing Council of India for nursing The Nursing Council of India for
nursing
The Pharmacy Council of India for pharmacy The Pharmacy Council of India for
pharmacy
5
10

44
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
SCHEDULE OF MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS
[See section 2 (zc) (a) and section 18]
Part 1—Graduate Medical Qualifications
Graduate Medical Courses —Courses where entry is permitted after passing the
10+2 examination;
Part 2—Post Graduate Medical Qualifications
Post Graduate Medical Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing
the graduate medical examination;
Part 3—Super Speciality Medical Qualifications
Super Speciality Medical Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing
the Post Graduate Medical examination;
Part 4—Doctoral Medical Qualifications
Doctoral Medical Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing the
Post graduate medical examination;
Part 5—Post Doctoral Medical Qualifications
Post Doctoral Medical Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing
the Doctoral medical examination;
Part 6—Foreign Medical Qualifications
5
10
15

45
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
SCHEDULE OF DENTAL QUALIFICATIONS
[See section 2 (zc) (b) and section 18]
Part 1—Graduate Dental Qualifications
Graduate Dental Courses —Courses where entry is permitted after passing the
10+2 examination;
Part 2—Post Graduate Dental Qualifications
Post Graduate Dental Courses —Courses where entry is permitted after passing
the graduate Dental examination;
Part 3—Doctoral Dental Qualifications
Doctoral Dental  Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing the
Post graduate Dental examination;
Part 4 —Post Doctoral Medical Qualifications
Post Doctoral Dental Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing the
Doctoral Dental examination;
Part 5 – Foreign Dental Qualifications
5
10
15

46
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
SCHEDULE OF NURSING QUALIFICATIONS
[See section 2 (zc) (c) and section 18]
Part 1—Graduate Nursing Qualifications
Graduate Nursing Courses —Courses where entry is permitted after passing the
10+2 examination;
Part 2—Post Graduate Nursing Qualifications
Post Graduate Dental Courses —Courses where entry is permitted after passing
the graduate Nursing examination;
Part 3—Doctoral Nursing Qualifications
Doctoral Dental  Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing the
Post graduate Nursing examination;
Part 4 – Foreign Nursing Qualifications
5
10

47
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
SCHEDULE OF PHARMACY QUALIFICATIONS
[See section 2 (zc) (d) and section 18]
Part 1—Graduate Pharmacy Qualifications
Graduate Pharmacy Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing the
10+2 examination;
Part 2—Post Graduate Pharmacy Qualifications
Post Graduate Pharmacy Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing
the graduate Pharmacy examination;
Part 3—Doctoral Pharmacy Qualifications
Doctoral Pharmacy Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing the
Post graduate Pharmacy examination;
Part 4 – Foreign Pharmacy Qualifications
5
10

48
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
SCHEDULE OF PARAMEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS
[See section 2 (zc) (e) and section 18]
Part 1—Graduate Paramedical Qualifications
Graduate Paramedical Courses —Courses where entry is permitted after passing
the 10+2 examination;
Part 2—Post Graduate Paramedical Qualifications
Post Graduate Paramedical Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing
the graduate Paramedical examination;
Part 3 —Foreign Paramedical Qualifications
5
10

49
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE
PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT
[See section 68]
PART I
A health practitioner shall be deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct, if he–
(1) allows any person to practice in his name as a health professional unless
such person is also a health practitioner and is in partnership with or employed by
him;
(2) pays or allows or agrees to pay or allow, directly or indirectly, any share in
the fees or profits of his professional business, to any person other than a member of
the National Council or the State Council or a partner or a retired partner or the legal
representative of a deceased partner, or a member of any other professional body or
with such other persons having the recognised qualifications for the purpose of
rendering such professional services from time to time in or outside India.
Explanation.—In this clause, “partner” includes a person residing outside
India with whom a health practitioner has entered into partnership which is not in
contravention of clause ( 4);
(3) accepts or agrees to accept any part of the profits of the professional work
of a person who is not a member of the National Council or the State Council:
Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting a
member from entering into profit sharing or other similar arrangements, including
receiving any share or commission in the fees, with a member of the National Council
or State Council or other person having the recognised qualifications referred to in
clause (2);
(4) enters into partnership, in or outside India, with any person other than a
health practitioner or such other person who is a member of any other professional
body having the recognised qualifications, including a resident, who but for his
residence abroad would be entitled to be enrolled as a member of the National Council
or the State Council;
(5) secures any professional business, either through the services of a person
who is not an employee of such health professional or who is not his partner or by
means which are not open to a health professional:
Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting any
arrangement permitted in terms of clauses (2) and (3);
(6) solicits patients or professional work, either directly or indirectly, by circular,
advertisement, personal communication or interview or by any other means:
Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing or
prohibiting—
(i) any health professional from applying or requesting for or inviting or
securing professional work from another health practitioner;
(ii) a member from responding to tenders or enquiries issued by various
users of professional services or organisations from time to time and securing
professional work as a consequence;
(7) advertises his professional attainments or services, uses any designation or
expressions other than health professional on professional documents, visiting cards,
letterheads or sign boards, unless it be a degree of a University established by law in
India or recognised by the Central Government or by the Commission or of any other
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

50
institution that has been recognised by the Central Government or may be recognised
by the Commission:
Provided that a health practitioner may advertise through a write up setting out
the services provided by him or his health Institute and particulars of his health
Institute subject to such guidelines as may be issued by the Commission;
(8) accepts a position as a health practitioner previously held by another health
practitioner without first communicating with him in writing;
(9) charges or offers to charge, accepts or offers to accept, in respect of any
professional employment, fees which are based on a percentage of profits or which
are contingent upon the findings, or result of such employment, except as permitted
under the Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder;
(10) engages in any business or occupation other than health profession unless
permitted by the Commission so to engage:
Provided that nothing contained herein shall disentitle a health professional
from being a director of a company except as provided in the Companies Act, 1956;
(11) allows a person not being a member of the National Council or the State
Council, or a member not being his partner to sign on his behalf or on behalf of his
health Institute, anything which he is required to certify as a health professional; or
any other statements relating thereto;
(12) discloses information acquired in the course of his professional engagement
to any person other than his patient so engaging him, without the consent of his
patient, or otherwise than as required by any law for the time being in force;
(13) certifies or submits in his name, or in the name of his health Institute, a
report of an examination of the matters relating to his health and related statements
unless the examination of such statements has been made by him or by a partner or an
employee in his health Institute or by another health practitioner;
(14) permits his name or the name of his health Institute to be used in connection
with any report or statement contingent upon future treatment in a manner which may
lead to the belief that he vouches for the accuracy of the diagnosis;
(15) fails to disclose a material fact known to him in his report or diagnosis but
the disclosure of which is necessary in making such report or statement, where he is
concerned with such report or statement in a professional capacity;
(16) fails to report a material mis-statement known to him and with which he is
concerned in a professional capacity;
(17) does not exercise due diligence, or is grossly negligent in the conduct of
his professional duties;
(18) fails to obtain sufficient information which is necessary for expression of
an opinion or its exceptions are sufficiently material to negate the expression of an
opinion;
(19) fails to invite attention to any material departure from the generally accepted
procedure relating to the health practice;
(20) fails to keep moneys of his patient other than fees or remuneration or
money meant to be expended in a separate banking account or to use such moneys
for purposes for which they are intended within a reasonable time.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

51
PART II
A health professional shall be deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct, if he—
(1) does not maintain the health records of his indoor patients for a period of
three years or refuses to provide the same within a period of 72 hours after the patient
or his authorised representative makes a request for it;
(2) does not display the registration number accorded to him by the National
Council or the State Council, or maintain prescriptions and certificates, etc., issued by
him, in his clinic;
(3) abuses his professional position by committing adultery or improper conduct
with a patient or maintaining an improper association with a patient;
(4) is convicted by a court of law for offences involving moral turpitude or
criminal acts;
(5) conducts sex determination test with the intent to terminate the life of a
female foetus developing in her mother’s womb, unless there are other absolute
indications for termination of pregnancy as specified in the Medical Termination of
Pregnancy Act, 1971;
(6) signs or issues certificates, notification, reports and other documents of
similar character in his professional capacity for subsequent use in the courts or for
administrative purposes which is untrue, misleading or improper;
(7) contravenes the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the
rules or regulations made thereunder by  prescribing steroids or psychotropic drugs
when there is no absolute medical indication; or sells Schedule ‘H’ and ‘L’ drugs and
poisons to the public, except to his patient;
(8) performs or enables unqualified person to perform an abortion or any illegal
operation for which there is no medical, surgical or psychological indication; 
(9) issues certificates of efficiency in modern medicine to unqualified or non-
medical person:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall restrict the proper training and
instruction of bona fide students, midwives, dispensers, surgical attendants, or skilled
mechanical and technical assistants and therapy assistants under the personal
supervision of the health professional;
(10) contributes to the press articles and give interviews regarding diseases
and treatments which may have the effect of advertising himself or soliciting practices:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall restrict him from writing to the press
under his own name on matters of public health, hygienic living or to deliver public
lectures, give talks on the radio or television or internet chat;
(11) advertises about an institution run by him such as a maternity home,
nursing home, private hospital, rehabilitation centre or any type of training institution
in the press, and such advertisements contains anything more than the name of the
institution, type of patients admitted, type of training and other facilities offered and
the fees;
(12) uses an unusually large sign board containing anything other than his
name, qualifications obtained from a University or a statutory body, titles and name
of his speciality, registration number including the name of the National Council or
the State Council under which registered, or affixes a sign-board on a chemist’s shop
or in places where he does not reside or work;
(13) discloses the secrets of a patient that have been learnt in the exercise of his
profession except—
(i) in a court of law under orders of the Court; or
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

52
(ii) in circumstances where there is a serious and identified risk to a
specific person or community; or
(iii) in case of communicable or notifiable diseases, in which case public
health authorities shall be informed immediately;
(14) refuses on religious grounds alone, to give assistance in or conduct of
sterility, birth control, circumcision and medical termination of pregnancy when there
is medical indication, unless the health practitioner feels himself incompetent to do
so;
(15)  fails to obtain in writing, before performing an operation, the consent from
the husband or wife, parent or guardian in the case of minor, or the patient himself, as
the case may be, or in an operation which may result in sterility, the consent of both
husband and wife;
(16) publishes photographs or case reports of his patients without their
permission, in any medical or other journal in a manner by which their identity could
be made out:
Provided that if the identity is not to be disclosed, the consent is not needed;
(17) uses touts or agents for procuring patients;
(18) claims to be a specialist without a special qualification in that branch;
(19) undertakes invitro fertilisation or artificial insemination without the informed
consent in writing of the female patient, her spouse as well as the donor, with sufficient
information about the purpose, methods, risks, inconveniences, disappointments of
the procedure and possible risks and hazards;
(20) conducts  clinical drug trials or other research involving patients or
volunteers in violation of the guidelines of the Indian Council of Medical Research;
(21)  being a health professional posted in rural area, is found absent on more
than two occasions during inspection by the Head of the District Health Authority or
the Chairman, Zila Parishad and the same is recommended to the National Council or
the State Council, as the case may be, by the State Government for action;
(22)  being a health professional posted in a health college or institution both
as teaching faculty or otherwise, is found absent on more than two occasions during
the assigned duty hours and the same is certified by the Principal or Medical
Superintendent and forwarded through the State Government to National Council or
the State Council, as the case may be, for action.
5
10
15
20
25
30

53
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011 seeks to
consolidate the law in certain disciplines of health sector and promote human resources in
health sector and provide for mechanism for the determination, maintenance, co-ordination
and regulation of standards of health education throughout the country to ensure adequate
availability of human resources in all States and for the said purpose to establish the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health to supervise and regulate professional Councils
in various disciplines of health sector.
2. At present various disciplines of health are supervised and regulated by their
respective professional Council’s, namely, the Medical Council of India, the Dental Council
of India, the Pharmacy Council of India and the Indian Nursing Council. The broad vision of
human resources in terms of quantity, composition and quality required for enabling the
country’s health system to provide health care for all, is hidden from the perspective of these
individual regulatory bodies.  Any effort to make piecemeal changes in the statutes of the
existing regulatory bodies is not likely to bring any substantial reform in the field of health
education and services.  To address these issues it is felt necessary to establish a National
Commission for Human Resources for Health to provide an institutional framework to promote
availability of health care providers in all parts of the country to reduce shortages, standardise
quality and bridge the uneven distribution of existing work force in the health sector.
3. In view of the above, it is proposed to enact a law, namely,  the National Commission
for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011 which, inter-alia, makes provision that  the
Central Government shall by notification establish the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health with three constituent bodies, namely the National Board of Health
Education, the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee and the National Councils,
with distinct responsibilities for regulating educational standards; enforcing the standards
and assuring quality and governing medical practice along ethical norms. It would also be
the task of the Commission to ensure effective use of linkages in the entire health system, act
as the controlling and co-ordinating agency that ensures accountability in the system and to
facilitate interconnectivity among and between disciplines to meet the needs of a diverse
and growing health system in the country.
4.  The National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011 inter alia,
provides for the following, namely:—
(a) to establish the National Commission for Human Resources for Health
consisting of a Chairperson, four whole-time members and eight part-time members to
be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendations of the Selection
Committee;
(b) to enable the Commission to formulate action plans for development of
human resources for health in accordance with the policy and priorities laid down by
the Central Government from time to time and  to determine, maintain and coordinate
the minimum standards of and promote the human resources, in discipline of health
education and training commensurate with the requirement, of such resources in
different States and Union territories;
(c) to constitute the National Board for Health Education in the place of the
National Board of Examinations to take measures to facilitate and promote academic
studies and research in emerging areas of health education with focus on professional
health education and to ensure uniform augmentation of trained specialists and super
specialists to achieve excellence in these and connected areas;

54
(d) to constitute the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee to take
measures to develop and regulate the process of evaluation and assessment of
institutions imparting health education and programmes conducted therein, and monitor
the functioning of agencies recommended by the Commission;
(e) to establish new National Councils to be known as the Medical Council of
India for medicine, the Dental Council of India for dentistry, the Nursing Council of
India for nursing, the Pharmacy Council of India for pharmacy in the place of existing
Councils and also to establish a new Paramedical Council of India for the discipline of
paramedics and to confer powers upon the State Governments to constitute the
respective State Councils;
(f) to enable the National Councils and the State Councils to take measures to
enrol persons having recognised qualifications to enable them to practice in respective
discipline of health and to regulate the profession of respective discipline of health;
(g) to constitute a fund to be called “the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health Fund” ;
(h) to transfer the assets, liabilities, rights, duties, etc., of the existing Councils to
the Commission;
(i) to provide for punishment, penalty or both  for contravening the provisions
of the proposed legislation;
(j) to empower the Central Government to supersede the Commission, Board,
Committee or National Council and also to empower the State Governments to
supersede the State Councils;
(k) to repeal the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the
Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and to dissolve the
Nursing Council of India, the Pharmacy Council of India, the Dental Council of India
and the Medical Council of India.
5. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
GHULAM NABI AZAD.
N
EW DELHI;
The 20th December,  2011

55
Notes on clauses
Clause 2.—This clause defines various expressions used in the Bill. It, inter alia,
defines expressions  “appropriate statutory regulatory body”, “approved institution”, “code
of ethics”, “corresponding new National Council”, “discipline of health”, “evaluation and
assessment”, “foreign qualifications”, “health professional”, “National Register”, “recognised
qualification”,  “trained specialist” and “university” used in the Bill.
Clause 3.—This clause relates to establishment of the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health.
It provides that the Central Government shall, by notification, establish a body to be
called the National Commission for Human Resources for Health to exercise the powers
conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it under the proposed legislation.
The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of the proposed
legislation, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to
contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
It further provides for the composition of the Commission. The Commission shall
consist of a Chairperson, four whole-time members; and eight part-time members to be
appointed, by the Central Government, on the recommendations of the Selection Committee
constituted under clause 5.
It also provides that the president of the National Board for Health Education, the
president of the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee, the president of the each
National Council and the Chairperson or a Member of the National Commission for Higher
Education and Research of the proposed legislation—Members, ex officio and all the Members
including ex officio Members shall have voting rights.
Clause 4.—This clause provides for qualifications for appointment of Chairperson
and Members of the Commission.
It provides that the Chairperson shall be a person of eminence, integrity, administrative
capability and outstanding ability with a post graduate degree in the discipline of medical
science from a university, and having not less than twenty-five years experience in the
profession, out of which at least fifteen years shall be in a leadership role, in the area of health
care delivery, growth and development of modern medicine or medical education and the
other Members shall be persons of eminence, integrity, administrative capability and
outstanding ability with a post graduate degree in the discipline of medical education, dental
education, nursing education, pharmacy education, public health, management, science and
technology, or law from a university, and having not less than twenty years experience in the
profession, out of which at least fifteen years shall be in a leadership role, in the area of health
care delivery, growth and development of modern medicine or medical education.
It further provides that out of  twelve Members, four whole-time Members shall be
appointed by the Central Government from  the disciplines of medicine, dentistry, nursing,
pharmacy and paramedics; and eight part-time Members shall be appointed from the disciplines
of medicine, dentistry, nursing, pharmacy, paramedics, management, science and technology
and law and no person, who is not a citizen of India, shall be eligible to be appointed as the
Chairperson or a Member.
Clause 5.— This clause provides for constitution of the Selection Committee.
It provides that the Central Government shall constitute a Selection Committee
consisting of a person of eminence having qualification and experience of at least twenty-
five years in medical profession as Chairperson and five other experts of eminence from the
discipline of medical and allied health sciences, management, science and technology having
qualification and experience of at least twenty years in the discipline, as members, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
It further provides that the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Union
Ministry of Health (Department of Health and Family Welfare) shall be the Convenor and the
term of the Selection Committee shall be in such manner as may be prescribed.

56
It also provides that the Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the
Chairperson and Members of the Commission within two months from the date on which the
reference is made to it by the Central Government in this behalf and shall recommend a panel
of two names for every vacancy referred to it and before recommending any person for
appointment as a Chairperson or a Member of the Commission, the Selection Committee shall
satisfy itself that such person does not have any financial or other conflict of interest, which
is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as Chairperson or Member. However, no
appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the Commission shall be invalid merely by
reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee and it may regulate its own procedure.
It also provides that the Central Government shall initiate the process of appointment
in respect of any vacancy due to arise in the office of the Chairperson or of other Members
of the Commission, six months prior to the date of arising of such vacancy. However, in case
a vacancy arises in the Selection Committee for the reason of death or removal, or resignation
from office, such vacancy shall be filled expeditiously, within six months from the date on
which the vacancy has arisen.
Clause 6.— This clause provides for the tenure, terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and Members.
It, inter alia, provides the Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall
hold office for a term of four years from the date on which he enters upon his office and be
eligible for re-appointment for another term. The Chairperson or Member shall not hold office
after he has attained the age of seventy years. The Chairperson and other Members shall
hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.
It further provides that the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
Clause 7.— This clause provides for declaration of interest.
It provides that the Chairperson and other Members, shall immediately after entering
office and every year thereafter, make a declaration to the extent of their interest, whether
direct or indirect and whether financial or otherwise, in any health institution or any other
institution which comes under the purview of the Commission and the same shall be displayed
on the website of the Commission.
Clause 8.—This clause relates to restrictions on re-employment.
It provides that the Chairperson and other Members, on ceasing to hold office shall
not, for a period of two years, accept any employment (including as consultant or expert or
otherwise) in any health educational institution whose matter has been dealt with by such
Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, or has been before the Commission when he
held office as such Chairperson or Member. It further provides that nothing shall prevent the
Chairperson or a Member, to accept any employment in any health educational institution
controlled or maintained by the Central Government or the State Government.
Clause 9.— This clause provides for general superintendence, direction and
management of affairs.
It provides that subject to the other provisions of the proposed legislation, the general
superintendence, direction and control of the administration shall vest in the Chairperson.
Clause 10.—This clause provides for Member to act as Chairperson, or to discharge
his functions, in certain circumstances.
It provides that in the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the
Chairperson by reason of death, removal, suspension or resignation, the senior most whole
time Member shall act as the Chairperson till such time the Chairperson is appointed, to fill
the vacancy. It further provides that when the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions
owing to absence on account of leave or otherwise, the senior most whole-time Member
shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson till the Chairperson is able to discharge his
functions.

57
Clause 11.—This clause provides for resignation of Chairperson or Member.
It provides that the Chairperson or a Member may, by notice given in writing under his
hand of not less than a period of thirty days, addressed to the Central Government, resign
from his office. It further provides that the Chairperson or the Member shall, unless permitted
by the Central Government to relinquish office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry
of a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly
appointed as his successor enters upon office or until the expiry of his term of office,
whichever is earliest.
 Clause 12.—This clause provides for removal and suspension of Chairperson or
Member from office in certain circumstances.
It provides that the Central Government may, by order, remove from office the
Chairperson or any Member, who, has been adjudged an insolvent; or being a whole-time
Member, has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any paid employment; or has
been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves
moral turpitude; or has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson
or other Member; or is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or has
been removed or dismissed from the service or office of the Central Government or of a State
Government or from a body owned or controlled by the Central Government or a State
Government or from any Central or State statutory body; has acquired such financial or other
interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as Chairperson or other Member, as
the case may be; or has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to public interest; or has been guilty of proved misconduct; or has been guilty of
proved conflict of interest in the discharge of his functions. It further provides that the
Chairperson or any Member shall not be removed from his office, unless he has been given
a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. It also provides that the Central
Government may, if it considers necessary in the public interest, suspend such Chairperson
or other Member.
Clause 13.—This clause provides for meetings of the Commission.
It provides that the Commission shall meet at least twice every month at such time and
place as it may appoint and the Chairperson shall preside over such meetings. It further
provides that the decisions of the Commission shall be by consensus, failing which by a
majority of votes of Members present and voting and in the event of equality of votes, the
Chairperson or in his absence, the Member presiding shall have a second or casting vote. It
also provides that the quorum of a meeting of the Commission shall be seven members and
the Commission may make regulations for the conduct of business at its meetings.
Clause 14.—This provides for vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of
Commission.
 This clause provides that no act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid
merely by reason of, (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Commission;
or (b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Commission; or (c) any
irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the merits of the case.
Clause 15. —This clause provides for appointment of the Chief Executive Officer and
other officers and employees of   Commission.
This clause confers power upon the Central Government to appoint a Chief Executive
Officer of the Commission, not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of
India, who shall be the Member-Secretary of the Commission, for a fixed term of four years
who shall not be eligible for re- appointment.
It further provides that the Chief Executive Officer, shall discharge such functions as
may be specified by regulations made by the Commission or may be assigned to him by the
Commission from time to time and, shall report to the Commission, through the Chairperson,
on actions taken by him in performance of his duties.

58
It also provides that the Commission may, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the
efficient discharge of its functions under the proposed legislation. It also provides that the
salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chief Executive
Officer and other officers and employees of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
Clause 16.— This clause provides for the powers and functions of the Commission.
This clause specifies the measures to be taken by the Commission, subject to the
provisions of the proposed legislation, to determine, maintain and coordinate the standards
of and promote the human resources, in discipline of health education and training
commensurate with the requirement, of such resources in different States and Union territories.
The functions to be performed by the Commission, inter alia,  shall be to, carry out studies
and collect data required to assess the needs and requirements of human resources for
health in different States and Union territories; assess the requirement (including the number,
type and geographical location) of health training facilities for education and training in
medical and allied discipline; formulate action plans for development of human resources for
health in accordance with the policy and priorities laid down by the Central Government from
time to time; formulate a plan for financial and other resources required for creation of human
resources; make recommendations on the measures to strengthen the health care delivery,
operational efficiency and health care infrastructure;  coordinate existing health care
infrastructure in Central and State Government for effective utilisation thereof; facilitate
coordination among bodies or Councils constituted under the proposed legislation, conduct
or cause to conduct their social audit and obtain public feedback on their performance and
achievements; grant permission for establishing of health educational institution, ensure
compliance of its terms and conditions, or withdraw such permission; regulate, in accordance
with the law, for the time being in force, the entry and operation of foreign health educational
institutions if permitted under the law for the time being in force in consultation with the
National Board or such other authority as may be specified by the Central Government;
conduct the elections to the National Councils established under proposed legislation;
promote and regulate inter-professional co-operation amongst health professions;  specify
by regulations the continuous medical education and the courses, workshops and training
activities;  provide such grants and moneys to the Board, Committee and National Council as
they may require for efficient discharge of their powers and functions under proposed
legislation; transfer such assets, properties or liabilities to the Board, Committee or National
Council, as the case may be, as it may consider necessary; provide such officers and other
employees to the Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be, as they may
require for efficient discharge of their powers and functions under the proposed legislation;
perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
It further provides that the Commission shall exercise the powers and discharge the
functions specified under this clause in such manner which does not interfere with the
autonomous and self-regulatory nature of universities or institutions.
Clause 17.—This clause provides for establishment of the Institution for imparting
health education or new course of study.
This clause provides that, notwithstanding anything contained in the proposed
legislation or any other law for the time being in force, provides for, (a) no person shall,
without obtaining letter of permission from the Commission, establish an institution for a
course of study or training in the discipline of health, (including a post-graduate or doctoral
or Post doctoral course of study or training), for grant of recognised qualification; and (b) no
institution, which has been granted permission under sub-clause (1), shall increase its
admission capacity in any course of study or training (including a post-graduate or doctoral
or Post doctoral course of study or training), without obtaining the letter of permission from
the Commission. However, any person who has been granted permission for establishment
of the health educational institution or an institution which has been granted permission to
increase of its admission capacity in course of study or training under the provisions of the

59
Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and the rules and regulations made thereunder, or any
other law for the time being in force, shall be deemed to be the health educational institution
established under the provisions of the proposed legislation or deemed to have validly
increased their admission capacity and the qualifications granted by such institutions shall
be the recognised qualification for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
It further provides that every person shall, for the purpose of obtaining permission
under sub-clause (1), submit to the Commission a scheme in accordance with the provisions
of sub-clause (3) and the Commission shall refer the scheme to the National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee for its recommendations and the scheme referred to in sub-clause (2)
shall be in such form and contain such particulars and be preferred in such manner and
accompanied with such fees as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
It also provides that on receipt of the scheme, the Committee may obtain such other
particulars as may be considered necessary by it from the applicant, and thereafter, it may,(a)
if the scheme is defective and does not contain any required particulars, give a reasonable
opportunity to the person concerned for making a written representation and it shall be open
to such person to rectify the defects, if any, specified by it; and ( b) consider the scheme,
having regard to the factors referred to in sub-clause ( 8), and submit the scheme together
with its recommendations thereon to the Commission.
It also provides that the Commission may, after considering the scheme and the
recommendations of the Committee under sub-clause (4) and after obtaining, where necessary,
such other particulars as may be considered necessary by it from the applicant, and having
regard to the factors referred to in sub-clause ( 8), either approve (with such conditions, if
any, as it may consider necessary) or disapprove the scheme and any such approval shall be
a permission under sub-clause ( 1). However, no scheme shall be disapproved by the
Commission without giving such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and nothing
shall prevent any person, whose scheme has not been approved by the Commission, to
submit a fresh scheme and the provisions of this clause shall apply to such scheme, as if
such scheme has been submitted for the first time under sub-clause (2).
It also provides that where no order passed by the Commission has been communicated
to the person submitting the scheme, within a period of one year from the date of submission
of such scheme to the Commission under sub-clause (2), the scheme shall be deemed to have
been approved by the Commission in the form in which it had been submitted, and, accordingly,
the permission of the Commission required under sub-clause ( 1) shall also be deemed to
have been granted and in computing the period specified in sub-clause (6), the time taken by
the person concerned submitting the scheme, in furnishing any particulars called for by the
Committee or by the Commission, shall be excluded.
It also provides that the Committee, while making its recommendations under clause
(b) of sub-clause ( 4) and the Commission, while passing an order, either approving or
disapproving the scheme under sub-clause (5), shall have due regard to the factors such as,
(a) whether the proposed health educational institution or the existing health educational
institution seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training or increase its
admission capacity, would be in a position to offer the course of study or training in the
discipline of health (including a post graduate or doctoral or post doctoral course of study or
training) with the minimum standards of health education as specified by the Board under
the proposed legislation; (b) whether the person seeking to establish a health educational
institution or seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training or to increase its
admission capacity has adequate financial resources; ( c) whether necessary facilities in
respect of staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities to ensure proper
functioning of the health educational institution or conducting the new course of study or
training or accommodating the increased admission capacity have been provided or would
be provided within the time-limit specified in the scheme; ( d) whether adequate hospital
facilities, having regard to the number of students likely to attend such health educational

60
institution or course of study or training or as a result of the increased admission capacity
have been provided or would be provided within the time-limit specified in the scheme; (e)
whether any arrangement has been made or programme drawn to impart proper training to
students likely to attend such health educational institution or course of study or training by
person having the recognised medical qualifications; (f) the requirement of manpower in the
field of practice of medicine; and (g) any other factors as may be prescribed.
It also provides that where the Commission passes an order either approving or
disapproving a scheme under this section, a copy of the order shall be delivered to the
person concerned and explains that the expression “person” used in this clause includes
any university or a trust or other body corporate, but does not include the Central Government
or a State Government.
Clause 18.— This clause provides for recognition of medical qualifications granted by
the health educational institutions in India.
It provides that the educational qualifications granted by any health educational
institution in India which are included in the Second Schedule  or Third Schedule or Fourth
Schedule or Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule, as the case may be, shall be recognised
qualifications of the respective discipline of health for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
However, any qualification recognised under the provisions of the Indian Nursing Council
Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956 and the rules and regulations made thereunder, shall continue to be the recognised
qualifications of the respective discipline of health for the purposes of the proposed legislation,
unless such qualifications are derecognised by the amendment of the Schedule under the
proposed legislation.
It further provides that any health educational institution in India, which grants any
qualification in the discipline of health not included in the Second Schedule  or Third Schedule
or Fourth Schedule or Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule, as the case may be, may apply to the
Commission to have such qualification recognised, and the Commission, after consulting
the Committee, may recommend to the Central Government to amend the Second Schedule
or Third Schedule or Fourth Schedule or Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule, as the case may
be, so as to include such qualification therein and any notification amending any of the said
Schedules may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the Second
Schedule  or Third Schedule or Fourth Schedule or Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule, as the
case may be, against such qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised qualification
only when granted after a specified date.
Clause 19.— This clause provides for non-recognition of qualifications in certain
cases.
It provides that no qualification granted by any health educational institution to any
student of such institution shall be recognised qualification for the purposes of the proposed
legislation, unless such institution has been established with the approval of the Commission
in accordance with the provisions of the proposed legislation or rules or regulations made
thereunder and where any health educational institution offers a new or higher course of
study or training (including a post-graduate course of study or training), such qualification
shall not be a recognised qualification for the purposes of the proposed legislation, unless
such course of study or training offered has been approved by the Commission before
offering the same to the students.
It further provides that where any health educational institution increases its admission
capacity in any course of study or training (including a post-graduate course of study or
training), such qualification granted to any student or such institution on the basis of the
increase in its admission capacity shall not be a recognised qualification for the purposes of
the proposed legisaltion, unless such increase in its admission capacity in any course of
study or training offered has been approved by the Commission before offering the same to
the students.

61
Clause 20.—This clause provides for entry and operation of foreign health educational
institutions.
 This clause provides that the Commission shall regulate the entry and operation of
foreign health educational institutions in consultation with the National Board and in
accordance with the law, for the time being in force. However, in case no such law is in force,
the Central Government shall regulate the entry and operation of foreign health institutions
in consultation with the Board till such law comes into force.
 Clause 21.—This clause provides for withdrawal of recognition.
This clause provides that when, upon recommendation of   the Committee  or the
Board, it appears to the Commission that, ( a) the courses of study and examination to be
undergone in, or the proficiency required from candidates at any examination held by any
university or other health institution for an approved course in health education; or (b) the
faculty staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for instruction and
training provided in such university or other health educational institution, or in any college
or other institution affiliated to any such university, do not conform to the standards specified
by the Commission, the Commission may, after making such inquiry as it may consider
necessary, for reasons to be recorded in writing, withdraw recognition of the course or
qualification in respect of the university or other health institution, or college or other
institution affiliated to such university, as the case may be, with such cut-off date as it thinks
fit. However, no such recognition shall be withdrawn unless the university or the institution
or college, as the case may be, has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Clause 22.— This clause provides for fees.
It provides that the Commission may levy such fees and other charges in respect of
such functions as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
Clause 23.— This clause provides for constitution of National Board for Health
Education.
It empowers the Central Government, by notification, constitute a Board to be known
as the ‘National Board for Health Education’ to assist the Commission in discharge of its
powers and functions for the purposes of health education.
Clause 24.—This clause provides for the composition of the Board.
The Board shall consist of a President, two whole-time members and  four part-time
members, to be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of the selection
Committee constituted under clause 25.
It further provides that the Chairperson or a Member of the National Commission for
Higher Education and Research referred to in section 5 of the National Commission for
Higher Education and Research Act, 2011—Member, ex officio.
It also provides that the President and whole-time members shall be chosen from the
persons possessing a post graduate degree in the discipline of medicine or medical education
from a recognised university or health institutions, having at least fifteen years of standing
in the profession or teaching and training, out of which seven years of experience shall be in
the discipline of medical education, training, curriculum design or development and conduct
of examinations and the part-time members shall be chosen from persons possessing a post
graduate degree in the discipline of medical education from a recognised university or medical
institution having at least twelve years of standing in the profession from the discipline of
health or health education out of which seven years of experience shall be in education,
training, curriculum design or development and conduct of examinations in the discipline of
health.
Clause 25.—This clause provides for the Selection Committee for selection of the
President and members of the Board and committee.

62
It provides that the Central Government shall constitute a Selection Committee for
appointment of the President and members of the Board and the Committee, consisting of, a
person of eminence having qualification and experience of at least twenty years in medical
profession as Chairperson; three other experts of eminence from the discipline of medical
and allied health sciences, management, science and technology having qualification and
experience of at least fifteen years in the discipline, as members, to be appointed in such
manner as may be prescribed.
It further provides that the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Union
Ministry of Health (Department of Health and Family Welfare) shall be ex officio member of
the Selection Committee and the Chairperson of the Commission shall be the Convenor and
It also provides that the term of the Selection Committee shall be such as may be
prescribed and the Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the President and
members of the Board and the Committee within two months from the date on which the
reference is made to it by the Central Government in this behalf and the Selection Committee
shall recommend a panel of two names for every vacancy referred to it.
It also provides that before recommending any person for appointment as a President
or a member of the Board or the Committee, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that
such person does not have any financial or other conflict of interest, which is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as President or member of the Board or the Committee, as the case
may be and no appointment of the President or member of the Board or the Committee shall
be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
It also provides that the Selection Committee may regulate its own procedure and the
Central Government shall initiate the process of appointment in respect of any vacancy due
to arise in the office of the President or of other members of the Board or Committee, six
months prior to the date of arising of such vacancy and in case a vacancy arises in the
Selection Committee for the reason of death or removal, or resignation from office, such
vacancy shall be filled expeditiously, within six months from the date on which the vacancy
has arisen.
Clause 26.—This clause provides for the transitory provisions relating to Board.
It provides that on and from the date of constitution of the Board, (a) the National
Board of Examinations registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 shall be dissolved;
(b) any reference to the existing National Board of Examinations in any law other than the
proposed legislation or in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to
the Board; (c) all properties and assets, movable and immovable, of, or belonging to, the
existing National Board of Examinations, shall vest in the Board; (d) all rights and liabilities of
the existing National Board of Examinations shall be transferred to, and be the rights and
liabilities of, the Board; (e) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered
into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the existing National Board
of Examinations immediately before that date, for or in connection with the purpose of the
said existing National Board of Examinations shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered
into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Board; (f) all sums of money due to the existing
National Board of Examinations immediately before that date shall be deemed to be due to the
Board; and (g) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been
instituted by or against the existing National Board of Examinations immediately before that
date may be continued or may be instituted by or against the Board.
Clause 27.—This clause provides for the appointment and terms and conditions of
office of the President and members of  the Board.
It provides that any person appointed as the President or a member shall hold office for
a term of four years from the date on which he enters upon his office or till the date he attains
the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier and be eligible for re-appointment for another
term and such President or a member shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central
Government.

63
 It further provides that the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of service of the President and other members shall be such as may be
prescribed.
Clause 28.—This clause provides for the Executive Director and other officers and
employees of Board.
It empowers the Board to appoint an Executive Director to perform such functions as
may be assigned to him and with the previous approval of the Commission appoint such
other officers and employees as the Board considers necessary for the efficient discharge of
its functions under proposed legislation.
It further provides that the number of, the salaries and allowances payable to, and the
other terms and conditions of service of the other officers and employees of the Board shall
be such as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
Clause 29.— This clause provides for the meetings of the Board.
It provides that the Board shall meet at least once in every month and four members of
the Board shall constitute a quorum for the meetings. It further provides that every meeting
of the Board shall be presided over by the President or, if for any reason he is unable to
attend, such other member as may be chosen by the members present at the meeting from
among themselves and a member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent,
without permission, and without sufficient cause in the opinion of the Board, from three
consecutive meetings of the Board and the Board may regulate its own procedure for the
transaction of business at its meeting.
Clause 30.—This clause provides for functions of the Board.
It provides that the Board shall take measures to facilitate and promote academic
studies and research in emerging areas of health education with focus on professional health
education and to ensure uniform augmentation of trained specialists and super specialists,
to achieve excellence in these and connected areas and, inter alia, includes, determination,
co-ordination and maintenance of  standards for health  education and research; design and
approve new courses of study as recommended by institutes, hospitals, colleges or
universities for imparting training and conducting courses therein; specify schedule of
admissions for admission to various courses of study; specify calendar of examinations and
scheme of examinations; conduct examinations for entry to any under graduate, post graduate,
doctoral, post doctoral, super speciality or diploma courses, fellowship examination and
screening test; take such steps as may be desirable to elevate the standards of training and
development of quality health professionals; advise the Commission regarding  establishment
of laboratories, institutes and training centres for continuous medical education; co-ordinate
between medical and other scientific academies, societies, associations, institutions and
Government medical and scientific departments and services; appoint such number of visitors
as it may consider fit to visit any university or other health educational institution imparting
a recognised course in discipline of health, or to attend any examination held by any such
university or other health educational institution for the purposes of granting recognition
thereof; to prescribe norms for compulsory disclosure by health educational institutions
engaging in discipline of health  education on all aspects related to their functioning that has
a bearing on the interests of students, faculty, parents, the community and the government;
to approve and notify norms and standards of maintenance of academic quality for
accreditation and benchmarking of education in recognised health educational institutions
imparting approved courses in the discipline of health  throughout the period of accreditation;
promote autonomy of health educational institutions for the free pursuit of knowledge and
innovation; promote development of a curricular framework with specific reference to new or
emerging or inter-disciplinary field of knowledge; develop measures to effectively connect
health education to the needs of society; encourage universities to enable colleges to evolve
into health institutions with powers to award degrees; take measures to enhance access  to,

64
and inclusion in,  health education to remove regional imbalances in the provision of health
educational institutions for such education as well as in access of students to such health
educational institutions; advice the Commission and Central Government on any matter that
may referred; and discharge such other functions as may be prescribed.
Clause 31.— This clause provides for power to conduct certain examination.
 It provides that the Board may, in consultation with the concerned State Government
and university, conduct, with effect from such date as may be notified by the Central
Government, either by itself or by an authority authorised by it, examinations for entry to any
under graduate, post graduate, doctoral, post doctoral, super speciality or diploma courses
or examination for fellowship in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the
Commission.
Clause 32.— This clause provides for power to require information as to courses of
study and examinations.
 It provides that every health educational institution which grants any recognised
qualification shall furnish such information as to courses of study and examinations as the
Board may require from time to time.
Clause 33.— This clause provides for the screening test.
It provides that no person, being a citizen of India or a registered Overseas Citizens of
India, who obtains the recognised qualification granted by medical institution in any country
outside India recognised for enrolment as medical practitioner in that country shall be entitled
for enrolment by the National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, unless he
qualifies the screening test in India to be conducted by the Board.
It further provides that no person being a citizen of India shall, after the commencement
of the proposed legislation, obtain any medical qualification from any medical institution in
a country outside India without obtaining an eligibility certificate from the Board and any
person, who obtains such qualification without obtaining the eligibility certificate, shall not
be eligible to appear in the screening test. However, any person being a citizen of India who
acquired the recognised qualification or obtained admission in the medical institution outside
India during the period between 15
th March, 2002 and the date of commencement of the
proposed legislation, after obtaining an eligibility certificate from the Medical Council of
India under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, shall, subject to other provisions of the
proposed legislation, be eligible to be enrolled in the National Register or State Register.
It also provides that any person, being a citizen of India Overseas Citizens of India,
who obtains a recognised qualification in the discipline of health other than medicine from
any health educational institution in any country outside India recognised for enrolment as
practitioner in that country shall not be entitled to be enrolled in the National Register or
State Register unless he qualifies the screening test in India and the Commission may, by
notification, exempt any person, who possesses the recognised qualification and enrolled as
health practitioner in a country outside India for a period of not less than three years, from
the requirement of the screening test under this clause.
Clause 34.— This clause provides for constitution of the National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee.
It provides that the Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Committee
to be known as the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee for evaluation and
assessment of any university or institution seeking permission under clause 17 or imparting
education in the discipline of health to assist the Commission in discharge of its powers and
functions under the proposed legislation.
Clause 35.— This clause provides for the composition of the National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee.

65
It provides that the Committee shall consist of a President, two whole-time members,
and four part-time members, to be appointed by the Central Government on the
recommendation of the selection Committee constituted under clause 25.
It further provides that the President and members shall be chosen from the persons of
eminence, integrity and outstanding calibre having post graduate degree in the discipline of
health, health policy, public health, management, technology, law or finance from a recognised
university or institution having ten years of experience in the respective field.
Clause 36.— This clause provides for terms and conditions of office of the President
and members of the Committee. It provides that a person appointed as the President or a
member of the Committee shall hold office for a term of four years from the date on which he
enters upon his office or till the date he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier
and be eligible for re-appointment for another term and the President or a member of the
Committee shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.
It further provides that the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of service of the President and other members of the Committee shall be such as
may be specified by regulation made by the Commission.
Clause 37.— This clause provides for functions of the Committee.
It provides that the Committee shall take measures to develop and regulate the process
of evaluation and assessment of institutions imparting health education and programmes
conducted therein, and monitor the functioning of agencies recommended by the Commission
and, inter alia, specify standards, norms and processes for registration of evaluation and
assessment agencies under any law for the time being in force; undertake audit and cause to
be audited the adherence to code of ethics including policies on obviating conflict of interest,
disclosure of information, evolving transparency in processes and procedures of evaluation
and assessment; specify and monitor standards on selection and training of experts for the
purposes of evaluation and assessment; scrutinise the report of the evaluation and
assessment agency on the applications for consideration of grant of permission for establishing
of college, institute or university and make its recommendations to the Commission;
recommend to the Commission for review or revoke registration granted to the evaluation
and assessment agencies and health institutions as the case may be; levy of fees or other
charges for matters relating to evaluation and assessment; advise the Central Government or
any State Government or the appropriate statutory regulatory authority on any policy matter
concerning evaluation and assessment which may be referred to it; promote research and
innovation in evaluation and assessment; monitor adherence to such norms, guidelines and
standards of academic quality, as may be specified under any law for the time being in force
by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority, in health educational institutions; and
perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Commission.
It further provides that the process of selection of evaluation and assessment agency
for evaluation and assessment shall be in a transparent manner and the information relating
to the selection of such agency shall be put in the public domain and notwithstanding
anything contained in the proposed legislation or any other law for the time being in force,
the Commission or Committee shall not engage the same evaluation and assessment agency
for successive inspections or audit inspections, to carry out audit or review inspection of
any institute at least for five years.
It also provides that the evaluation and assessment of a health educational institution
shall be done by the evaluation and assessment agencies having such qualifications and
experience and in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
Clause 38.— This clause provides for the power of audit and inspection of  evaluation
and assessment agency.
It provides that the Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government,
appoint an audit committee consisting of such number of persons having such qualifications

66
and experience as may be prescribed, for the purpose of audit, inspections or inquiry into the
affairs of any evaluation and assessment agency or any health educational institution in so
far it relates to their evaluation and assessment.
It further provides that the Commission may, on the recommendations of the National
Evaluation and Assessment Committee, at any time, by order in writing, direct the audit
committee specified in the order to audit or inspect or inquire into the affairs of any evaluation
and assessment agency or any health educational institution in so far it relates to evaluation
and assessment and to report its findings and recommendations to the National Evaluation
and Assessment Committee or the Commission, as the case may be and on receipt of the
report from the audit committee, the Commission may, after giving such opportunity to the
evaluation and assessment agency to make a representation in connection with the report, in
the opinion of the Commission seems reasonable, by order in writing, take such action in
respect of any matter arising out of the report as the Commission may think fit; or modify the
terms and conditions of certificate of registration as it thinks fit, and terms or conditions so
modified shall be binding upon and be observed by the evaluation and assessment agency
and shall be of like force and effect as if they were contained in the certificate of registration
or approval, as the case may be; or revoke the certificate of registration of the evaluation and
assessment agency or the approval granted to the health educational institution, as the case
may be.
It also provides that it shall be the duty of every evaluation and assessment agency
and every health educational institution, as the case may be, to produce before the audit
committee all such papers and other documents in its custody or power and to furnish any
statement and information relating to its affairs, as the audit committee may require of such
agency or institution, as the case may be, within such time as the audit committee may
specify and the audit committee may examine on oath, any chief executive or officer or other
employee of the evaluation and assessment agency in relation to evaluation and assessment
of any health educational institution or programme conducted therein, and may administer
oaths accordingly.
It also provides that the audit committee shall submit its report to the Committee and
the Committee shall place the report and the action taken thereon by it or the Commission, on
its website.
Clause 39.— This clause provides for the  Executive Director and other officers and
employees of the Committee.
It provides that there shall be an Executive Director to the National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee to be appointed by the Central Government for a period of four
years. It further provides that the Committee may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the
efficient discharge of its functions under the proposed legislation.
It also provides that the the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms
and conditions of service of the Executive Director and other officers and employees of the
Committee shall be such as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
Clause 40.—It provides for the meetings of the Committee.
 It provides that the Committee shall meet at least once in every three months, at such
time and place as it may appoint, the quorum of a meeting of the Committee shall be two
members and the President of the Committee shall preside over its meetings or, if for any
reason he is unable to attend, such other member as may be chosen by the members present
at the meeting from among themselves.
It further provides that a member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is
absent, without permission, and without sufficient cause in the opinion of the Committee,
from three consecutive meetings of the Committee and the Committee may regulate its own
procedure for transaction of business at its meetings.

67
Clause 41.—This clause provides for constitution of corresponding National Councils.
It provides that on the commencement of proposed legislation, there shall be
constituted, from such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint, such
corresponding new National Councils as are specified in the First Schedule annexed to the
proposed legislation.
It further provides that on the commencement of the proposed legislation, the Central
Government shall, by notification, constitute the Paramedical Council of India for the
disciplines of paramedics and National Council for any other discipline of health as may be
notified by it under sub-clause (j) of clause 2.
It also provides that each corresponding new National Council and the Paramedical
Council of India and the National Council for any other discipline of health shall be a body
corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with
power, subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation, to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or
be sued and the head office of each National Council shall be in the National Capital Region
referred to in clause (f) of section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985.
Clause 42.—This clause provides for vesting of existing councils in the Commission.
It provides that on the commencement of the proposed legislation, every existing
Council shall be transferred to, and shall vest in, the Commission.
Clause 43.—This clause provides for President, Vice- President and other members of
Council to vacate their offices.
It provides that every person holding office, immediately before the commencement of
the proposed legislation, as President or Vice-President or other members of an existing
Council shall, on such commencement, vacate their offices as such President or Vice-President
or other members, as the case may be, and no such President or Vice-President or other
member, as the case may be, shall be entitled to claim any compensation for premature
termination of the term of his office.
Clause 44.—This clause empowers the Central Government to guide the corresponding
National Councils by its directions.
It provides that every corresponding new National Council shall, in the discharge of
its functions, be guided by such directions in regard to matters of policy involving public
interest as the Central Government may, after consultation with the Chairperson of the
Commission, give.
Clause 45.— This clause provides for references to existing Councils on and from
commencement of the proposed legislation.
It provides that any reference to any existing Council in any law, other than the proposed
legislation, or in any contract or other instrument shall, in so far as it relates to the undertaking
which has been transferred by clause 42 be construed as a reference to the corresponding
new National Council.
Clause 46.—This clause provides for composition of the National Councils.
It provides that each National Council referred to  in clause 41 shall consist of, one
member from each State (other than a Union territory), to be nominated by the Central
Government in consultation with the State Government concerned; one member from each
University, to be elected from amongst the members of the faculty of the concerned discipline
of health by members of the Senate of the University or in case the University has no Senate,
by members of the Court; one member from each State in which a State Register in the
respective discipline is maintained, to be elected from amongst themselves by persons
enrolled on such Register; five members to be nominated by the Central Government from
amongst heads of medical institutions in the respective discipline owned, controlled or

68
managed by the Central Government; five members to be nominated from amongst
professionals of respective disciplines by the Central Government; and President of the
Board shall be ex officio member of the National Council for each discipline of health;
It further provides that a member of the National Council shall cease to be such
member if he ceases to be a person enrolled on the concerned State Register or to hold office
by virtue of which he was elected or nominated, as the case may be, as such member to the
Council.
Clause 47.—This clause provides for elections to National Councils and its term.
It provides that the Commission shall conduct elections for each National Council,
within a period of six months from the date of commencement of the proposed legislation for
constituting the National Councils under clause 40 in accordance with such procedure and
manner as may be prescribed and each such National Council shall continue for a period of
four years from the date on which it is constituted. However, the said period may be extended
by the Commission, with the prior approval of the Central Government, for a period not
exceeding six months in case it is not possible for any reason to reconstitute the National
Council after the expiration of the said period.
It further provides that the Commission shall commence the process of conducting the
next elections for National Council six months before the expiration of the term of the National
Council or any extended period as may be provided under sub-clause (2).
It also provides that the Commission shall conduct elections to any vacancy that may
arise in the membership of any National Council on account of death, resignation or removal,
in such manner as may be prescribed.
Clause 48.—This clause provides for the President and Vice-President of the National
Council.
 It provides that each National Council referred to in clause 41 shall have a President
and a Vice-President to be elected by the members of the National Council from among
themselves in such manner as may be prescribed and the powers to be exercised, and the
functions to be performed, by the President or the Vice-President of the National Council
shall be such as may be specified by regulations made by the National Council.
Clause 49.—This clause provides for settlement of disputes regarding election.
It provides that, in case of any dispute regarding any election under clause 47 or
clause 48, the aggrieved person may make an application within a period of thirty days from
the date of declaration of the result of election, to the Chairperson of the Commission who
shall forward the same to the Central Government.
Clause 50.—This clause provides for meetings of the National Council.
It provides that the quorum of a National Council for a meeting shall be one-third of its
total membership and the Council shall meet at least twice in each year at such time and place
as may be appointed by it.
It further provides that the meetings of the National Council shall be presided over by
the President or, if for any reason he is unable to attend, by the Vice-President, and in case he
is also unable to attend, such other member as may be chosen by the members present at the
meeting from among themselves.
It also provides that a member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent,
without permission, and without showing sufficient cause in the opinion of the National
Council, from three consecutive   meetings of the National Council and the National Council
may make regulations for the transaction of business at its meetings.
Clause 51.—This clause provides for functions of the National Council.
It provides that the National Council shall, subject to the provisions of the proposed

69
legislation, take measures to enrol persons having recognised qualifications to enable them
to practice in respective discipline of health and to regulate the profession of respective
discipline of health and such measures may, inter alia, provide matters relating to,  enrolment
of persons having recognised qualifications to enable them to practice in the respective
discipline of health and renew the enrolment from time to time; maintain and publish the
National Register; organise and conduct seminars, conferences, workshops or other
programme from time to time; grant certificate of good standing to the persons enrolled by it;
levy fees or other charges to be paid by the persons seeking enrolment or persons enrolled
by it; and perform such other functions as may be prescribed
It further provides that a person enrolled under the proposed legislation, before going
abroad for the purpose of employment, service, professional assignment or post or position
or for exploration of career opportunities or for carrying out any professional or related work,
shall obtain the certificate of good standing from the respective National Council or the State
Council.
Clause 52.—This clause provides for the Registrar and other officers and employees
of the National Council.
It provides that every National Council shall have a Registrar to be appointed by the
Central Government for a fixed term of four years who shall not be eligible for re-appointment
under the proposed legislation and the National Council may, with the prior approval of the
Central Government, appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary
for the efficient discharge of its functions under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of the other officers and employees of the National Council shall be
such as may be specified by regulations made by the National Council.
Clause 53.—This clause provides for the constitution of State Councils.
It provides that where there is no State Council in any State, the State Government
shall, by notification, constitute the State Councils for medicine, dentistry, nursing, pharmacy
and paramedics, respectively within a period of three years from the date of commencement
of the proposed legislation, in such manner and with such composition as may be prescribed
by the State Government and the State Government may, by notification, constitute State
Councils for any other discipline of health notified under sub-clause (j) of clause 2.
It further provides that until the State Council is constituted in a State, the National
Council of respective discipline of health shall enrol the persons, in respect of that State,
having recognised qualification in the manner provided under the proposed legislation and
such enrolled person shall be entitled to practice in the respective discipline of health only in
the State for which he has applied for enrolment
It also provides that each State Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of the
proposed legislation, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable,
and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued and the head office of each State
Council shall be at such place as the State Government may decide.
It also provides that each State Council shall continue for a period of four years from
the date on which it is constituted or, such period as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
Clause 54.—This clause provides for the President and the Vice-President of the State
Council.
It provides that each State Council referred to in clause 51 shall have a President and
a Vice-President to be elected by the members of the State Council from among themselves in
such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government and the powers to be exercised,
and the functions to be performed, by the President or the Vice-President of the State Council

70
shall be such as may be specified by regulations made by the State Council.
It further provides that no person shall be eligible to hold office in any capacity in the
State Council whether as a President or Vice-President or member for more than two terms.
Clause 55.—This clause provides for meetings of the State Council.
 It provides that the quorum of a State Council for a meeting shall be one-third of its
total membership and the State Council shall meet at least twice in each year at such time and
place as may be appointed by the State Council.
It further provides that the meetings of the State Council shall be presided over by the
President or, if for any reason he is unable to attend, by the Vice-President, and in case he is
also unable to attend, such other member as may be chosen by the members present at the
meeting from among themselves and a member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he
is absent, without permission, and without showing sufficient cause in the opinion of the
State Council, from three consecutive meetings of the State Council and the State Council to
make regulations for the transaction of business at its meetings.
Clause 56.—This clause provides for Registrar and other officers and employees of
the State Council.
It provides that every State Council shall have a Registrar to be appointed by the State
Government for a fixed term of four years who shall not be eligible for re-appointment under
the proposed legislation or as may be provided under regulations made by it and with the
prior approval of the State Government, appoint such other officers and employees as it
considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of the other officers and employees of the State Council shall be such
as may be specified by regulations made by the State Council.
Clause 57.—This clause provides for the enrolment of persons.
It provides that every National Council and every State Council shall enrol, the persons
having recognised qualification, in such form, manner and on payment of such fees and
fulfilment of such other criteria or conditions as may be specified by regulations by the
National Council, for a period of ten years and the person so enrolled shall be entitled to
practice in the respective discipline of health.
It further provides that before the expiry of the period of ten years, the National
Council or the State Council, as the case may be, may renew the enrolment of such persons
for a further period of ten years, on showing the proof that he has attended such seminar,
conference, workshop or any other programme as may be specified by the Commission for
the purpose of updating his professional knowledge and skill and this clause declares that
no person shall be required to appear and pass any qualifying examination for the purpose of
renewal of his enrolment.
It also provides that for the purpose of computing the period of ten years, the period
of absence of a person enrolled under this clause from India, if any, shall also be taken into
account.
It also provides that any person enrolled by the National Council shall be entitled to
practice in the respective discipline of health anywhere in India and the persons enrolled by
the State Council shall be entitled to practice in the respective discipline of health anywhere
in the State in which he is enrolled and any person enrolled with the existing Medical Council
of India or the Dental Council of India or the Nursing Council of India or the Pharmacy
Council of India or any State Council, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been
enrolled under the proposed legislation and be eligible to continue to practice for a period of
ten years and thereafter he shall be required to renew his enrolment under the proposed
legislation.

71
Clause 58.—This clause provides for the Registers for enrolment of persons.
It provides that every National Council shall enter the name of persons enrolled by it
in the National Register to be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed and every
State Council shall enter the name of persons enrolled by it in the State Register to be
maintained in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
It further provides that every National Council shall collect data of persons enrolled in
the State Register from each State Council and enter the same in separate National Register
to be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed, and the National Council and the
State Councils shall maintain the register by such data capturing method as may be prescribed
by the Central Government or State Government, as the case may be, and shall, inter alia,
contain the biometric and other details of each health professional which shall be verified at
the time of renewal of enrolment.
It also provides that the National Council and the State Council shall maintain the
Register in accordance with the provisions of the proposed legislation and update it from
time to time, and publish the same in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government or State Government, as the case may be, and the
National Register and the State Register maintained under this clause shall be deemed to be
public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
It also provides that the National Register and the State Register shall also be maintained
in electronic form and wherever admissible, be subject to disclosure in the public domain and
made amenable for electronic voting for selection of representatives of the profession or for
such other purposes as may be prescribed and no person who is not registered with the State
Council or the National Council shall falsely represent that his name is so entered in the State
Register or the National Register, or use in connection with his name or title, any words or
letters reasonably calculated to suggest that his name is so entered.
Clause 59.—This clause provides for duty to serve in India.
It provides that any person, who obtains a degree at graduate or post graduate or
doctoral or post doctoral or super speciality from a university or institution which receives
grants from the Central Government or State Government or institutions owned or controlled
by the Central or State Government; and leave India for the purposes of updating or acquiring
higher education in the discipline of health, shall endeavour to serve in India for a period of
three years after such updating or acquiring such higher education outside India, failing
which his name shall be removed from the National Register or the State Register, as the case
may be.
It further provides that any person whose name has been removed under sub-clause
(1), who opts to return to India shall be entitled to get his name re-entered subject to payment
of such fees and fulfilment of such conditions as may be specified by regulations by the
Commission.
It also provides that any person, who obtains a degree at graduate or post graduate or
doctoral or post doctoral or super speciality from a university or institution other than the
university or institution referred to in sub-clause (1); and leaves India for the purposes of
updating or acquiring higher education in the discipline of health or for employment and
does not return within the period of three years or does not inform the respective Councils of
his whereabouts during such period, then, it shall be construed as professional misconduct.
Clause 60.—This clause provides for prohibition to practice without enrolment.
It provides that no person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National Register or the
State Register, as the case may be, as a medical practitioner, hold office as physician or
surgeon or any other office as a medical professional in Government or in any health institution
maintained by a local or other authority; or practice medicine; or sign or authenticate a
medical or fitness certificate or any other certificate required by any law for the time being in
force; or give evidence in any court of law as an expert on any matter relating to medicine.

72
It further provides that no person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National Register
or the State Register, as the case may be, as a dentist, hold any appointment in the field of
dentistry or dental hygienist in any dispensary, hospital or other health institution which is
supported wholly or partially from public or local funds; or  practice dentistry; sign or
authenticate a certificate required under any law for time being in force from a dentist; or give
evidence in any court of law as an expert in any matter relating to dentistry.
It also provides that no person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National Register or
the State Register, as the case may be, as a nurse, hold any appointment in the field of
nursing as teacher in nursing, nurse, auxiliary nurse, midwife, health visitor, or public health
nurse, in any dispensary, hospital or other health institution which is supported wholly or
partially from public or local funds; and as a pharmacologist to practice pharmacy.
It also provides that no person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National Register or
the State Register, as the case may be, of Paramedics, hold any appointment as paramedic in
any dispensary, hospital or other health institution which is supported wholly or partially
from public or local funds; or practice as a paramedics.
Clause 61.—This clause provides for privileges of persons enrolled on National Register
or State Registers.
It provides that every person, whose name is for the time being borne on the National
Register or the State Register, as the case may be, shall subject to the conditions and
restrictions laid down by or under the proposed legislation, be entitled to practice in the
discipline of his enrolment and to recover in respect of such practice any expenses, charges
in respect of medicaments or other appliances, or any fees to which he may be entitled.
Clause 62.—This clause provides for persons enrolled to notify change of place of
residence or practice.
It provides that any person enrolled under clause 56 shall inform transfer of his place
of residence or practice to the Council concerned, within a period of thirty days of such
transfer and if such person fails to comply with the requirements, his right to participate in
the elections to the Council concerned shall be liable to be suspended by an order of that
Council, for such period as may be specified by regulations made by the Council.
Clause 63.—This clause provides for supply of copies of State Register.
 It provides that each State Council shall supply to the National Council printed copies
of the State Register as soon as may be after the commencement of the proposed legislation
and subsequently after the first day of April of each year and the State Council shall inform
the National Council without delay of all additions to and other amendments in the State
Register made from time to time.
Clause 64.— This clause provides for liability of persons enrolled with respective
National Councils.
It provides that a person enrolled with the respective National Council shall be liable
for all the acts of omission, commission, or professional misconduct arising in the State in
which the cause of action has arisen.
Clause 65.—This clause provides for provisional registration of persons possessing
required qualification from any institution outside India.
It provides that a citizen of India or a registered Overseas Citizens of India possessing
recognised qualification in the discipline of medicine granted by a medical institution outside
India, who is required to undergo practical training, on such terms and conditions as the
Commission may specify shall, on production of evidence that he has been selected for such
practical training in an approved institution, be entitled to enroll himself provisionally in a
State Register and shall be entitled to practice medicine in the approved institution for the
purposes of such training and for no other purpose.

73
It further provides that a person who has passed the qualifying examination of any
university or  Institution in India in the discipline of medicine for the grant of a recognised
qualification shall be entitled to enroll himself provisionally in a State Register for the purposes
of enabling him to be engaged in employment in a resident medical capacity in any approved
institution or in the Medical Service of the Armed Forces of the Union, and for no other
purpose, on production of proper evidence that he has been selected for such employment
and the names of all persons provisionally enrolled in the State Register shall be entered
therein separately from the names of other persons enrolled therein.
It also provides that a person enrolled provisionally as aforesaid who has completed
practical training or who has been engaged for the specified period in employment in a
resident medical capacity in any approved institution, or in the medical service of the Armed
Forces of the Union, as the case may be, shall be entitled to enroll himself in the State
Register.
Clause 66.—This clause provides for entry of additional qualifications in the Registers.
 It provides that if any person whose name is entered in the National Register or the
State Register, as the case may be, obtains any title, diploma or other qualification for
proficiency in sanitary science, public health or medicine which is a recognised medical
qualification, he shall, on application made in this behalf in such manner as may be prescribed,
be entitled to have any entry stating such other title, diploma or other qualification made
against his name in such Register either in substitution for or in addition to any entry
previously made.
Clause 67.—This clause provides for code of ethics.
It provides that the National Council shall specify, by regulations, the standards of
professional conduct, etiquette and code of ethics to be observed by the persons enrolled
under the proposed legislation.
Clause 68.—This clause provides for professional misconduct.
It provides that for the purposes of the proposed legislation, the expression,
“professional misconduct” shall be deemed to include any act or omission provided in the
Seventh Schedule but nothing in this clause shall be construed to limit or abridge in any way
the power conferred or duty cast on the respective Councils under proposed legislation to
inquire into the professional conduct of any person whose name is included in the National
Register or State Register, under any other circumstances.
Clause 69.—This clause provides for power of National Council and State Councils to
institute inquiry and to impose penalties.
It provides that every National Council and every State Council shall have power to
institute an inquiry into any complaint, charge or allegation of professional misconduct
against any person enrolled by it under the proposed legislation and on finding such person
guilty of such conduct, to impose any one or more of the penalties, such as,  warning or a
reprimand or a reprimand and a warning; suspension of registration for a period not exceeding
two years; or removal of his or her name from the register; impose a monetary penalty not
exceeding ten lakh rupees and a compulsory period of such professional service as may be
specified by regulations made by the Council.
It further provides that every National Council or State Council, as the case may be,
shall give an opportunity of being heard to the concerned person before imposing upon him
any of the such penalties.
Clause 70.—This clause provides for appeals against decision under clause 69.
 It provides that any person aggrieved by the decision of the National Council may,
within a period of ninety days from the date of communication of such decision, prefer an
appeal to the ethics committee to be constituted by the Commission and any person aggrieved

74
by the decision of the State Council may, within a period of ninety days from the date of
communication of such decision, prefer an appeal to the ethics committee to be constituted
by the State Council.
It further provides that any person aggrieved by an order of the ethics committee may,
within a period of sixty days from the date of receipt of the order of the said Committee, prefer
an appeal to the ethics appellate committee to be constituted by the National Council.
It also provides that the composition of, and the procedure to be followed by, the
ethics committee and the ethics appellate committee and terms and conditions of such
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
Clause 71.—This clause provides for removal of names from National Register or State
Register and restoration thereof.
It provides that the National Council, or as the case may be, the State Council may
remove the name of any person enrolled by it in such circumstances and in such manner as
may be specified by regulations made by the Commission and the Commission may, in case
of removal of name of any person from the National Register or the State Register (except in
case of professional misconduct), on an application, if it is satisfied on the grounds mentioned
therein and after making such inquiry as it deems necessary, may direct, by order, the National
Council or the State Council, as the case may be, to restore the name of such person on
payment of such fees or fulfillment of such conditions which it may impose in the order.
Clause 72.—This clause provides for   grievance redressal mechanism.
It provides that any person aggrieved from the professional services rendered by the
persons enrolled under the proposed legislation may file a complaint with the State Council,
within a period of sixty days from the date of rendering of such service, in such manner as
may be specified by regulations made by the Commission. However, the complaint may be
admitted after expiry of the said period of sixty days if the complainant satisfies the Council
that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the complaint within the said period and the
Council shall decide the complaint within a period of one hundred and twenty days from the
date of its receipt.
Clause 73.—This clause provides for power of National Council to make regulations.
It provides that the National Council may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, make regulations consistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation or
the rules or regulations made by the Commission.
It further provides that in particular, and without prejudice to the generality of  foregoing
power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the matters, namely, other ethical
principles  under sub-clause (e) of clause 2; the powers to be exercised and the functions to
be performed by the President or the Vice-President of the National Council under sub-
clause (2) of clause 48; the procedure for transaction of business at meetings of the National
Council under sub-clause (5) of clause 50; the salaries and allowances payable to and the
other terms and conditions of the service  of the other officers and employee of the National
Council under sub-clause (3) of clause 52; the form and manner of enrolment of persons and
the fees and such other criteria or conditions for such enrolment under sub-clause ( 1) of
clause  57; the standards of professional conduct, etiquette and code of ethics under clause
67; the professional service to be rendered under item (e) of sub-clause (1) of clause 69 and
any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect of
which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.
Clause 74.—This clause provides for power of State Council to make regulations.
It provides that the State Council may, with the previous approval of the State
Government, make regulations consistent with the provisions of proposed legislation or the
rules or regulations made by the Commission and the National Council and  such regulations
may provide for all or any of the matters, namely, the powers to be exercised, and the

75
functions to be performed, by the President or the Vice-President of the State Council under
sub-clause (2) of clause 54; the procedure for transaction of business at meetings of the
State Council under sub-clause (5) of clause 55; the salaries and allowances payable to and
the other terms and conditions of the service  of the other officers and employee under sub-
clause (3) of clause 56; the professional service to be rendered under item (e) of sub-clause
(1) of clause 69 and any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by
regulations or in respect of which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.
Clause 75.—This clause provides for grants by the Central Government.
It provides that the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, make to the Commission grants of such sums of money as the Central
Government may think fit, for being utilised for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
Clause 76.—This clause provides for constitution of Fund of Commission.
It provides that there shall be constituted a fund to be called “the National Commission
for Human Resource for Health Fund” and there shall be credited thereto,  all Government
grants, fees and charges received by the Commission and all sums received by the Commission
from such other source as may be decided upon by the Central Government.
 It further provides that the Fund shall be applied for meeting, the salaries, allowances
and other remuneration of the members, officers and other employees of the Commission,
Board, Committee and National Councils; the other expenses of the Commission in connection
with the discharge of its functions and for the purposes of the proposed legislation and the
expenses of the Board, Committee and National Councils in connection with the discharge of
their functions and for the purposes of this Act.
Clause 77.—This clause provides for audit of accounts.
It provides that the Commission, Board, Committee, National Council and State Council
shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement
of accounts in such form as may be prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor- General of India and such accounts of the Commission, Board, Committee, National
Council and State Council shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with
such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India.
It further provides that the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other
persons appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission,
Board, Committee, National Council and State Council shall have the same rights and privileges
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally
has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the
right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents
and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Commission, Board, Committee, National
Council and State Council.
It also provides that the accounts of the Commission, Board, Committee, National
Council, State Council as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be
forwarded annually by the Commission, Board, Committee, National Council and State Council
to the Central Government which shall cause the same to be laid as soon as may be after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 78.—This clause provides for furnishing of returns and reports to the Central
Government.
It provides that the Commission, Board, Committee, National Council, State Council,
and other committee shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such form as
may be prescribed, an annual report giving a summary of their activities during the previous

76
year and a copy of such report received by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 79.—This clause provides for punishment for establishing institution without
permission.
It provides that whoever contravenes the provision of clause 17 shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to
five lakh rupees, or with both for the first offence and in case of second or subsequent
offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may
extend to twenty-five lakh rupees, or with both.
Clause 80.—This clause provides for penalty for contravention of clause 57.
 It provides that any person who contravenes the provisions of clause 57 relating to
enrolment shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both for the first offence and in case
of second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or with fine which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees, or with both.
Clause 81.—This clause provides for penalty for contravention of section 33.
It provides that any person who contravenes the provisions of section 33 shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which
may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both for the first offence and in case of a second or
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or fine
which may extend to twenty five lakh rupees or with both.
Clause 82.—This clause provides for punishment for furnishing information contrary
to which published by institutions.
It provides that where on assessment under clause 37 it is found that the information
provided by a university or an institution imparting health education, is not in conformity
with the information displayed at its website or information given to the concerned authorities
for evaluation and assessment, then the Head of the university or institution in case of
Government university or institution and in case of non-governmental university or institution,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, trusts, societies such director,
manager, secretary or other officer shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
Clause 83.—This clause provides for offences by companies.
It provides that where an offence under the proposed legislation has been committed
by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of,
and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well
as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly and nothing shall render any such person liable to any
punishment provided in the proposed legislation, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
It further provides that notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (1), where
an offence under the proposed legislation has been committed by a company and it is proved
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to,
any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company,
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
It also provides that for the purposes of this clause, “company” means anybody
corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and “director” means a
whole-time director in the company and in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

77
Clause 84.—This clause provided for offences by societies or trusts.
It provides that where an offence under the proposed legislation has been committed
by a society or a trust, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the society or trust for the conduct of the business of the
society or trust, as well as the society or trust, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly and nothing shall render
any such person liable to any punishment provided in the proposed legislation, if he proves
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
It further provides that notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (1), where
an offence under the proposed legislation has been committed by a society or trust and it is
proved that the offence has been committed  with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary, trustee or other
officer of the society or trust, such director, manager, secretary, trustee or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
It also provides that for the purposes of this clause, “society” means anybody corporate
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and, “trust” means any body registered
under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or any other law for the time being in force; and “director”,
in relation to society or trust, means a member of its governing board other than an ex officio
member representing the interests of the Central of State Government.
Clause 85.—This clause provides for cognizance of offences.
It provides that no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under the
proposed legislation, save on a complaint made by the Commission or by an officer authorised
by it and  no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the
first class shall try any offence punishable under the proposed legislation.
Clause 86.—This clause provides for power of Central Government to supersede
Commission, Board, Committee or National Council.
The Central Government may, by notification, supersede the Commission, the Board,
the Committee or the National Council, as the case may be,  for  such period, not  exceeding
six months, if the Central Government is of the opinion that  on  account  of circumstances
beyond the control  of  the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council,  as the case
may be, it  is  unable to discharge the functions or  perform  the  duties imposed on it by or
under the provisions of the proposed legislation;  or that the Commission, Board, Committee
or National Council, as the case may be, has persistently defaulted in complying with any
direction given by the Central Government under the proposed legislation or in the discharge
of the functions or performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of the
proposed legislation and as a result of such default the financial position of the Commission,
the Board, the Committee or the National Council, or the administration of  the Commission,
the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case may be,  has suffered;  or that
circumstances exist which render it necessary in the  public interest so to do.
It further provides that the Central Government   before  issuing  any such  notification,
the  Central Government shall  give a reasonable opportunity to the  Commission, the Board,
the Committee or the National Council, as the case may be, to make representations  against
the proposed  supersession  and  shall consider the representations, if any, of the  Commission,
the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case may be.
It also provides that upon  the  publication of a notification  under  sub-clause ( 1)
superseding the Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case
may be, the  Chairperson, President, Vice-President  and other members shall, as from  the
date  of supersession, vacate their offices as such; all  the powers, functions and duties
which may, by or under  the provisions  of the proposed legislation, be exercised or discharged

78
by or on behalf of the Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the
case may be, shall,  until  the  Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National Council,
as the case may be, is reconstituted under sub-clause (3), be exercised and discharged by the
person or persons referred to in sub-clause (1);  and all properties owned or controlled by the
Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case may be, shall,
until the Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case may be,
is  reconstituted under sub-clause (3), vest in the Central Government.
It also provides that on or before the expiration of the  period  of  supersession
specified  in  the  notification  issued under  sub-clause  (1),  the Central Government  shall
reconstitute the Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case
may be, by a fresh appointment of its Chairperson, President, Vice-President and other
members and in such case any person who had vacated his office under item ( a) of sub-
clause (2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for reappointment and the Central Government
shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub-clause ( 1) and a full report of any
action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid
before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
Clause 87.—This clause provides for power of  State Government to supersede State
Council. The State Government may, by notification, supersede the State Council  for  such
period,  not  exceeding  six months,  if,  at any time the State Government is of the opinion that
on  account  of circumstances beyond the control  of  the State Council, it  is  unable to
discharge the functions or  perform  the  duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of
the proposed legislation;  or that  the State Council has persistently defaulted in complying
with any direction given by the State Government under the proposed legislation  or in the
discharge of the functions or performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of the proposed legislation and as a result of such default the financial position
of the State Council, or the administration of  the State Council,  has suffered;  or that
circumstances exist which render it necessary in the  public interest so to do. The State
Government before  issuing  any such  notification,  shall  give a reasonable opportunity to
the  State Council to make  representations  against  the proposed  supersession  and  shall
consider the representations, if any, of the  State Council.
It further provides that upon  the  publication of a notification  under  sub-clause
(1) superseding the State Council, the  President  and other members shall, as from  the  date
of supersession, vacate their offices as such; all  the powers, functions and duties which
may, by or under  the provisions  of the proposed legislation, be exercised or discharged by
or on behalf of the State Council shall, until the State Council is reconstituted under sub-
clause (3), be exercised and discharged by the person or persons referred to in sub-clause
(1);  and  all properties owned or controlled by the State Council shall,  until the  State Council
is  reconstituted under sub-clause (3), vest  in  the State Government.
It also provides that on or before the expiration of the  period  of  supersession
specified  in  the  notification  issued under sub-clause  ( 1),  the State Government  shall
reconstitute the State Council, by a fresh appointment of its President and other members
and in such case any person who had vacated his office under item (a) of sub-clause (2) shall
not be deemed to be disqualified for reappointment and the State Government shall cause a
copy of the notification issued under sub-clause ( 1) and a full report of any action taken
under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before State
Legislature at the earliest.
Clause 88.—This clause provides for declaration of interest.
It provides that the President or Vice-President and other Members of the Board,
Committee, National Council or State Council, as the case may be, shall immediately after
entering office and every year thereafter, make a declaration to the extent of their interest,
whether direct or indirect and whether financial or otherwise, in any health institution which
comes under the purview of the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council, as the
case may be, and the same shall be placed in the public domain.

79
Clause 89.—This clause provides for  restrictions on re-employment.
It provides that the President or Vice-President and other members of the Board,
Committee, National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, on ceasing to hold
office shall not for a period of two years accept any employment (including as consultant or
expert or otherwise) in any health educational institution whose matter has been dealt with
by such President, Vice-President or member, as the case may be.
It further provides that nothing in sub-clause ( 1) shall prevent the President, Vice-
President or a member, as the case may be, to accept any employment in any health educational
institution controlled or maintained by the Central Government or the State Government.
Clause 90.—This clause provides for Member to act as President, or to discharge his
functions, in certain circumstances. It provides that in the event of the occurrence of any
vacancy in the office of the President or other member of the Board, Committee, National
Council or the State Council, as the case may be, by reasons of death, removal, suspension
or resignation, the senior most whole-time member of such the Board, Committee, National
Council or the State Council, as the case may be, shall act as the President till such time the
President is appointed, to fill the vacancy and  when the President is unable to discharge his
functions owing to absence on account of leave or otherwise, the senior most whole-time
member shall discharge the functions of the President till the President is able to discharge
his functions.
Clause 91.—This clause provides for  restriction on holding office for more than two
terms.
It provides that notwithstanding anything in the proposed legislation, no person shall
be eligible to be appointed or nominated or elected in any capacity in the Commission, Board,
Committee,  National Council or State Council, whether as the Chairperson or President or
Vice-President or member for more than two terms.
Clause 92.—This clause seeks to provide for resignation of President, Vice-President
or a member of  the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council.
It provides that the President, Vice-President or a member of the Board, Committee,
National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, may, by notice given in writing
under his hand of not less than a period of  thirty days, addressed to the Central Government
or, as the case may be, the State Government, resign from his office. However, the President,
Vice-President or a member of the Board, Committee, National Council or the State Council,
as the case may be, shall, unless permitted by the Central Government or, as the case may be,
the State Government, to relinquish office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of
a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed
as his successor enters upon office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is
earliest.
Clause 93.—This clause provides for removal and suspension of President, Vice-
President or a member of  the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council.
It provides that the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government
may, by order, remove from office the President or Vice-President or any member of the Board,
Committee, National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, who, has been adjudged
an insolvent; or being whole-time member has engaged at any time, during his term of office,
in any paid employment; or has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the
Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or has become physically or mentally incapable
of acting as such Chairperson or other Member; or is of unsound mind and stands so
declared by a competent court; or has been removed or dismissed from the service or office
of the Central Government or of a State Government or from a body owned or controlled by
the Central Government or a State Government or from any Central or State statutory body;
has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functioning
as Chairperson or other Member, as the case may be; or has so abused his position as to

80
render his continuance in office prejudicial to public interest; or has been guilty of proved
misconduct; or has been guilty of proved conflict of interest in the discharge of functions.
It further provides that the President, Vice-President or member of the Board, Committee,
National Council or State Council, as the case may be, shall not be removed from his office
unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. However,
the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government may, if it considers
necessary in the public interest, suspend such President, Vice-President or other member.
Clause 94.—This clause provides for vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of
Board, Committee, National Council or State Council.
It provides that any act or proceeding of the Board, Committee, National Council or
State Council, as the case may be, shall not be invalid merely by reason of,  any vacancy in,
or any defect in the constitution of, the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council,
as the case may be; or  any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Board,
Committee, National Council or State Council, as the case may be; or any irregularity in the
procedure of the Board, Committee, new Council or State Council, as the case may be, not
affecting the merits of the case.
Clause 95.—This clause provides for power to appoint committees or experts.
 It provides that the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council shall be
competent to constitute such other committees for general or special purposes, as it may
consider necessary to carry out the functions assigned to it under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council may
engage such experts for discharging its functions under the proposed legislation for such
period, on such qualification and on payment of such fees and remuneration as may be
specified by regulations made by the Commission.
Clause 96.—This clause provides for reporting by universities and institutions.
It provides that every health educational institution under the proposed legislation
shall at all times maintain a website and display all such information as may be required by
the Commission, Board or Committee, as the case may be and the Commission, Board or
Committee, as the case may be, shall either themselves or through such other experts, at any
time during the existence of the evaluation or assessment, without any notice may assess the
performance standards and benchmarks as displayed by the University or health institution
on its website.
       It further provides that the Central Government may by notification specify such
procedure as may be necessary to prevent unfair practices by university or institutions
imparting health education.
Clause 97.—This clause provides for establishment of State or regional administrative
offices.
 It provides that the Commission, Board, Committee or the National Council, may, with
prior approval of the Central Government, establish State or regional level administrative
offices, to perform such functions relating to information management, co-ordination and
liaison in the State or region for which such office is set up.
Clause 98.— This clause provides for reference of  dispute to the Central Government.
It provides that where any dispute arises regarding any recommendation or advice of
Board or Committee or National Council made to the Commission, it shall be referred to the
Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final and binding.
Clause 99.— This clause provides for appeal against decisions of Commission.
It provides that any person aggrieved by an order made by the Commission under
clause 97 may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within such period as may be

81
prescribed and  no appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period
prescribed therefore. However,  such appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period
prescribed therefore if the appellant satisfies the Central Government that he had sufficient
cause for not preferring the appeal within the prescribed period.
It further provides that every appeal made under this clause shall be made in such form
and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order appealed against and by such fees as may
be prescribed.
It also provides that the procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be
prescribed and before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
Clause 100.—This clause provides for bar of jurisdiction of courts.
It provides that no order refusing to enrol name of any person in the National Register
or the State Register, as the case may be, or removing a name therefrom shall be called in
question in any court.
Clause 101.— This clause provides for protection of action taken in good faith.
 It provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any
person for anything which has been done or intended to be done in good faith under the
proposed legislation.
Clause 102.— This clause provides for Members, etc., to be public servants.
It provides that the Chairperson, President, Vice-President and Members and the Chief
Executive Officer, Executive Director and other officers and employees of the Commission,
Board, Committee, National Council or State Council, as the case may be, shall be deemed to
be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
Clause 103.—This clause provides for powers of the Commission, Board, Committee
or National Council to call for information or conduct investigations, etc.
It provides that where the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the
case may be, consider it expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing, call upon any health
educational institution at any time to furnish in writing, such information or explanation
relating to its affairs as the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the case
may be, may require; or appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the
affairs of any health educational institution; and direct any of its officers or employees to
inspect the books of account or other documents of any health educational institution.
It further provides that where any inquiry in relation to the affairs of an health educational
institution has been undertaken under sub-clause (1), every officer of the Government
Department, if such    health educational institution is a department of the Government;
every director, manager, secretary or other officer, if such health educational institution is a
company; or every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if such health educational
institution is a firm; or every other person or body of persons who has had dealings in the
course of business with any of the persons mentioned in sub-clause (2), shall produce
before the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be, making
the inquiry, all such books of account or other documents in his custody or power relating to,
or having a bearing on the subject-matter of such inquiry and also to furnish to the Commission,
Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be, with any such statement or
information relating thereto, as the case may be, required of him, within such time as may be
specified by the Commission.
It also provides that every health educational institution shall maintain such books of
account or other documents as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission
and the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be, shall have
the power to issue such directions to health educational institution as it may consider

82
necessary for proper functioning of such institution.
Clause 104.— This clause provides for completion of courses of studies in health
educational institutions.
It provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the proposed legislation, any
student of health educational institutions who, immediately before the commencement of the
proposed legislation was studying for a degree, diploma or certificate in any such institution
shall continue and complete his course for that degree, diploma or certificate, as the case may
be, and such institutions shall provide for the instruction and examination for such student
in accordance with the syllabus of studies as existed before the commencement of the
proposed legislation and shall be deemed to have completed his course of study and awarded
degree, diploma or certificate, as the case may be, under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the proposed legislation,
the health educational institution in case of lapse of its recognition whether by efflux of time
or by withdrawal by the Commission or by its voluntary surrender or for any other reason
whatsoever shall continue to maintain and provide the minimum standards of infrastructure
approved by the Commission till such time that all the candidates are able to complete their
study in such institutions.
Clause 105.—This clause provides for power of the Central Government to issue
directions.
It provides that without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of the proposed
legislation, the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be, shall,
in exercise of its powers and in performance of its functions under the proposed legislation,
be bound by such directions on questions of policy, as the Central Government may give in
writing to it from time to time and the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as
the case may be, shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views
before any direction is given under this sub-section. However, if any dispute arises between
the Central Government and the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the
case may be, as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the
Central Government shall be final.
Clause 106.—This clause provides for powers of  the State Government to issue
directions.
 It provides that without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of the proposed
legislation, the State Council shall, in exercise of its powers and in performance of its functions
under the proposed legislation, be bound by such directions on questions of policy, as the
State Government may give in writing to it from time to time and the State Council shall, as far
as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is given
under this sub-section.  However, if any dispute arises between the State Government and
the State Council as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the
State Government shall be final.
Clause 107.—This clause provides for furnishing of information by the commission,
Board, Committee and National Council to furnish information to the Central Government.
It provides that the Commission, Board, Committee and National Council shall furnish
to the Central Government any information with respect to their activities as the Central
Government may from time to time require.
Clause 108.—This clause provides for powers to amend Schedules.
 It provides that the Central Government may, after consultation with the Commission,
by notification, add to or otherwise amend any of the Schedules of the proposed legislation
and thereupon the said Schedules shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
Clause 109.— This clause provides for review.
It provides that the Central Government may appoint an independent committee once

83
in every five years to review the functioning of the Commission, Board, Committee or National
Council, as the case may be.
Clause 110.—This clause provides to have overriding effect by the proposed
legislation.
It provides that subject to the provisions of sub-clause ( 2), the provisions of the
proposed legislation shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by
virtue of any law other than the proposed legislation.
It further provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation or the rules made
thereunder shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Indian Medical Degrees Act,
1916.
Clause 111.—This clause provides for power of the Central Government to make rules.
It confers upon the Central Government the power to make rules to carry out the
provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the various
matters in respect of which such rules may be made.
Clause 112.—This clause provides for powers of the Commission to make regulations.
It confers powers upon the Commission to make regulations, consistent with the
proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of the proposed
legislation. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the various matters in respect of which such regulations
may be made by the Commission.
Clause 113.—This clause provides for powers of the State Government to make rules.
It confers powers upon the State Government the power to make rules to carry out the
provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates the various
matters in respect of which such rules may be made.
Clause 114.—This clause provides for laying of rules and regulations.
This clause provides that every rule and every regulation made and every notification
issued by the Central Government shall be required to be laid before each House of Parliament
and every rule and regulation made by the State Government shall be required to be laid
before the appropriate State Legislature.
Clause 115.—This clause provides for powers of the Central Government to direct
regulations to be made or to make or amend the regulations.
It provides that, if the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, it may, by
order in writing, direct the Commission or Board or Committee or National Council, as the
case may be, to make any regulations or to amend or revoke any regulations already made
within such period as it may specify in this behalf.
It further provides that, if the Commission or Board or Committee or National Council,
as the case may be, fails or neglects to comply with such order within the specified period,
the Central Government may make the regulations or amend or revoke the regulations made
by the Commission or Board or Committee or National Council, as the case may be, either in
the form specified in the order or with such modifications thereof as the Central Government
thinks fit.
Clause 116.—This clause provides for power to remove difficulties.
It provides that  the Central Government to make, by order published in the Official
Gazette, provisions for removal of difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed
legislation. Such orders could be made only within two years from the commencement of the
proposed legislation. However, every order issued under this clause is required to be laid
before each House of Parliament.

84
Clause 117.—This clause provides for repeal and saving.
It provides that with effect from such date as the Central Government may appoint in
this behalf, the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act,
1948 and the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 shall stand repealed and the Nursing Council
of India, the Pharmacy Council of India, the Dental Council of India and Medical Council of
India shall stand dissolved. However, during the period between the date of coming into
force of the proposed legislation and date of repeal of the enactments mentioned in this sub-
clause, the existing Nursing Council of India, the Pharmacy Council of India, the Dental
Council of India and the Medical Council of India, as the case may be, shall not take any
decision or action, except with the prior approval of the Commission on any matter specified
by it.
It further provides that on the commencement of the proposed legislation, every existing
Council shall be transferred to, and shall vest in, the Commission and  each existing Council
which is transferred to, and which vest in, the Commission shall be deemed to include all
assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable,
cash balances, reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising out
of, such property as were immediately before the commencement of the proposed legislation
in the ownership, possession, power or control of the existing Council, whether within or
without India, and all books of accounts, registers, records and all other documents of
whatever nature relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings, liabilities
and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting of the existing Council.
It also provides that if, according to the laws of any country outside India, the provisions
of the proposed legislation by themselves are not effective to transfer or vest any asset or
liability situated in that country which forms part of  an existing Council to, or in, the
Commission, the affairs of the existing Council in relation to such asset or liability shall, on
and from the commencement of the proposed legislation, stand entrusted to the Chief Executive
Officer for the time being of the Commission, and the Chief Executive Officer may exercise all
powers and do all such acts and things as may be exercised or done by the existing Council
for the purpose of effectively transferring such assets and discharging such liabilities. The
Chief Executive Officer of the Commission shall, in exercise of the powers conferred on him
by sub-clause (4), take all such steps as may be required by the laws of any such country
outside India for the purpose of effecting such transfer or vesting, and may either himself or
through any person authorised by him in this behalf realise any asset and discharge any
liability of the existing Council.
It also provides that unless otherwise expressly provided by the proposed legislation,
all contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal representation
and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or having effect immediately before the
commencement of the proposed legislation and to which the existing Council is a party or
which are in favour of the existing Council shall be of as full force and effect against or in
favour of the Commission, and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if in
the place of the existing Council, the Commission had been a party thereto or as if they had
been issued in favour of the Commission and if, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or
other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any existing Council which has been
transferred under sub-clause (2) is pending by or against the existing Council, the same shall
not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer
of the existing Council or of anything contained in the proposed legislation but the suit,
appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the
Commission.
It also provides that nothing in the proposed legislation shall be construed as applying
to the assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and property, movable and immovable,
cash balances and investments in any country outside India (and other rights and interests
in, or arising out of, such property) and borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever

85
kind subsisting at the commencement of the proposed legislation, of any existing Council
operating in that country if, under the laws in force in that country. However, notwithstanding
such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the aforesaid Acts
shall, insofar as such thing or action is not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed
legislation, be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of the proposed
legislation, as if the said provisions were in force when such thing was done or such action
taken, and shall continue in force.
Clause 118.—This clause provides for provisions in respect of officers and other
employees of existing Council and National Board of Examinations.
It provides that  every officer or other employee of the existing Council (except the
President, Vice-President and members of the existing Council) or  the National Board of
Examinations, as the case may be, serving in the employment immediately before the appointed
day shall become, as from the appointed day, an officer or, as the case may be, other employee
of the Commission and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same
remuneration, upon the same terms and conditions, with the same obligations and with the
same rights and privileges as to leave, leave fare concession, welfare scheme, medical benefit
scheme, insurance, provident fund, other funds retirement, voluntary retirement, gratuity
and other benefits as he would have held under the existing Council if its undertaking had
not vested in the Commission and shall continue to do so as an officer or, as the case may be,
other employee of the existing Council or until the expiry of a period of six months from the
appointed day if such officer or other employee opts not to continue to be the officer or other
employee of the existing Council within such period and the Commission may transfer any
officer or other employee or the services of such officers or other employees as it may deem
fit, to the Board, Committee or the National Council.
It further provides that where an officer or other employee of the existing Council opts
under sub-clause (1) not to be in employment or service of the Commission, such officer or
other employee shall be deemed to have resigned.
It also provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any
officer or other employee of the existing Council or the National Board of Examinations, as
the case may be, to the Commission shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any
compensation under proposed legislation or under any other law for the time being in force
and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority and the
officer and other employees who have retired before the appointed day from the service of
the existing Council or the National Board of Examinations, as the case may be, and are
entitled to any benefits, rights or privileges shall be entitled to receive the same benefits,
rights or privileges from the Commission.
It also provides that the provident fund or the gratuity fund of the existing Council or
the National Board of Examinations, as the case may be,  and any other bodies created for the
welfare of officer or other employees would continue to discharge their functions in the
Commission as was being done hitherto in the existing Council or the National Board of
Examinations, as the case may be,  and any tax exemption granted to the provident fund or
the gratuity fund would continue to be applied to the Commission.
It also provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the proposed legislation
or in the Companies Act, 1956 or in any other law for the time being in force or in the
regulations of the existing Council or the National Board of Examinations, as the case may be,
the President or Vice-President or member or the trustees, executive trustee or any other
person entitled to manage the whole or substantial part of the business and affairs of the
existing Council or the National Board of Examinations, as the case may be, shall not be
entitled to any compensation against the Commission for the loss of office or for the premature
termination of any contract of management entered into by him with the Commission.

86
Clause 119.—This clause provides for transitory provisions.
 It provides that notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947,
the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, the
educational standards, requirements and other provisions of the Indian Nursing Council
Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956 and the rules and regulations made thereunder shall continue to be in force and
operate till new standards are specified under the proposed legislation or the rules and
regulations made thereunder. However, anything done or any action taken as regards the
educational standards and requirements under the enactments under repeal and the rules
and regulations made thereunder shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of the proposed legisaltion and shall continue in force accordingly
unless and until superseded by anything done or by any action taken under the proposed
legislation and  all such courses that are being conducted by the National Board of
Examinations shall continue till the Central Government on the advice of the Commission
notifies the constitution of the Board under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that the Central Government may, if considered necessary by
notification, take such appropriate measures as may be necessary for smooth transition of
repealed Councils to the corresponding new Councils and the existing National Board of
Examination to the Board under the proposed legislation.
Clause 120.—This clause relates to resolution of difference of opinion by Joint
Mechanism. This clause provides that in case of any difference of opinion with the National
Commission for Higher Education constituted under the National Commission for Higher
Euducation and Research Act, 2011, the same may be referred to the Joint Mechanism
constituted under section 52 of the National Commission for Higher Education and Research
Act, 2011 for resolution of such difference of opinion in accordance with the provisions of
that Act.

87
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health consisting of a Chairperson; four whole-time members; and eight part-
time members to be appointed, by the Central Government. Sub-clause (3) of clause 6 of the
Bill provides that the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
2. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 15 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a Chief
Executive Officer of the Commission, not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the
Government of India, who shall be the Member-Secretary of the Commission. Sub-clause (5)
of said clause provides that salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chief Executive Officer and other officers and employees of the Commission
shall be such as may be prescribed.
3. Clause 23 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Board to be known as the ‘National
Board for Health Education’ consisting of a President; two whole-time members; and four
part-time members to be appointed by the Central Government.
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 28 of the Bill provides for appointment of an Executive
Director to be appointed by the Board. Sub-clause ( 2) thereof provides for appointment
other officers and employees by the Board with the previous approval of the Commission.
Sub-clause (4) thereof provides that the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of the other officers and employees of the Board shall be
such as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
5. Clause 34 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Committee to be known as the
National Evaluation and Assessment Committee consisting of a President; two whole-time
members; and four part-time members to be appointed by the Central Government. Sub-
clause (3) of clause 36 provides that the salary and allowances payable to and other terms
and conditions of service of the President and other members of the Committee shall be such
as may be specified by regulation made by the Commission.
6. Sub-clause (1) of clause 39 of the Bill provides for appointment of an Executive
Director to the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (2) thereof provides for appointment of other officers and employees by the
Committee with the previous approval of the Central Government. Sub-clause (3) provides
that the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of
the Executive Director and other officers and employees of the Committee shall be such as
may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
7. Sub-clause (1) of clause 41 read with the First Schedule provides for constitution of
new National Councils, namely, the Medical Council of India for medicine; the Dental Council
of India for dentistry; the Nursing Council of India for nursing; and the Pharmacy Council of
India for pharmacy. Sub-clause ( 2) thereof provides for constitution of the Paramedical
Council of India for the disciplines of paramedics. Sub-clause (1) of clause 46 provides for
composition of National Councils.
8. Sub-clause (1) of clause 52 of the Bill provides for appointment of a Registrar to
every National Council by the Central Government. Sub-clause ( 2) thereof provides
appointment of other officers and employees by the National Council with the prior approval
of the Central Government. Sub-clause (3) provides that salaries and allowances payable to,
and the other terms and conditions of service of the other officers and employees of the
National Council shall be such as may be specified by regulations made by the National
Council.

88
9. Sub-clause (1) of clause 53 of the Bill provides for constitution of State Medical
Council for medicine; the Dental Council for dentistry; the Nursing Council of the State for
nursing; the Pharmacy Council for pharmacy; and the Paramedical Council of for paramedics.
10. Clause 75 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Commission grants of
such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit, for being utilised for the
purposes of this Act. Sub-clause (1) of clause 76 provides for constitution of a fund to be
called the National Commission for Human Resource for Health Fund in which all Government
grants, fees and charges received by the Commission; and all sums received by the
Commission shall be credited.
11. It is estimated that there would be an expenditure of approximately forty crore of
rupees. Out of this, an amount of  thirty-nine crore of rupees would be towards recurring
expenditure and one crore of rupees would be towards non-recurring expenditure.
12. The Bill does not envisage any other expenditure of recurring or non-recurring
nature.

89
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 111 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  The matters with respect to which rules may be made
has been set out in sub-clause ( 2).  The matters, inter alia, relate to  ( a) the manner of
appointment  of the Selection Committee under sub-section(1) of section 5; (b) the term of
the Selection Committee under sub-section (3) of section 5; ( c) the salary and allowances
payable to and other terms and conditions of the Chairperson and other members under sub-
section (3) of section 6; ( d) the salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of
service the Chief Executive Officer  and other officers and employees of the Commission
under sub-section ( 4) of section 15; ( e) such other functions to be performed by the
Commission under clause (p) of sub-section ( 2) of section 16; ( f) any other factors to be
considered by the Committee and the Commission while passing an order for approving or
disapproving the scheme under clause (g) of sub-section (8) of section 17; (g) the manner of
appointment of the chairperson and members of the Selection Committee under sub-section
(1) and their term under sub-section (4) of section 25; (h) the salary and allowances payable
to and other terms and conditions of service of the President and other members of the Board
under sub-section (3) of section 27; (i) such other functions to be performed by the Board
under clause (ze) of sub-section (2) of section 30; (j) the number of persons to be appointed
and the qualifications and experience of the audit committee under sub-section (1) of section
38; (k) the procedure and the manner in which the National Councils are to be constituted
under sub-section ( 1) of section 47; ( l) the manner of conducting elections under sub-
section (4) of section 47; (m) the manner of elections of the President and Vice-President of
each National Council under section 48; (n) such other functions which the National Council
may perform under clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section 51; (o) the manner in which the
National  Register shall be maintained under sub-section (1) of section 58; (p) the manner in
which the State Register shall be maintained under sub-section ( 2) of section 58; ( q) the
manner in which a separate National Register shall be maintained under sub-section (3
) of
section 58; (r) the data capturing method by which the National Councils shall maintain the
register under sub-section (4) of section 57; (s) the manner in which the National Council
shall update and publish the Register under sub-section ( 5) of section 58; ( t) such other
purposes for which the National Register may be used under sub-section (7) of section 58;
(u) the manner in which an application may be   made  for entry of additional qualifications
under section 66; ( v) the composition of and the procedure to be followed by the ethics
committee and the ethics appellate committee and terms and conditions of such members
under sub-section (4) of section 70; (w) the form in which an annual statement of accounts
shall be maintained under sub-section (1) of section 76; (x) the time and the form in which an
annual report shall be furnished under sub-section ( 1) of section 78; (y) the period within
which appeal may be preferred  to the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section
99; (z) the form  of application and the fees  to be paid under sub-section ( 3), and the
procedure for disposing of an appeal under sub-section (4)  of section 99;
2. Clause 112 of the Bill confers power upon the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health to make regulations consistent with the Act and the rules made
thereunder to carry out the purposes of the Act.   The matters with respect to which regulations
may be made has been set out in sub-clause ( 2).  The matters, inter alia, relate to (a) the
conduct of business at the meetings of the Commission under sub-section (5) of section 13;
(b) the functions to be discharged by the Chief Executive officer under sub-section ( 2) of
section 15; (c) the continuous medical education and the courses workshops and training
activities under clause (l)  and such other functions under clause ( p) of sub-section (2) of
section 16; (d) the form, particulars and  manner in which the scheme shall be made and the
fees for submission of the  scheme  under sub-section (3) of section 17; (e) other  functions

90
in respect of which fees and charges may be levied under section 22; ( f) the salaries and
allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of the other officers and
employees of the Board under sub-section (4) of section 28; (g) the manner of conducting
examination for entry to graduate, post graduate, doctoral, post doctoral, super speciality or
diploma courses and fellowship examination by the Board under sub-section (1) of section
31; (h) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the
President and other members of the Committee under sub-section (3) of section 36; (i) the
qualifications and experience of, and the manner of evaluation and assessment of health
educational institutions by, the evaluation and assessment agencies under sub-section ( 5)
of section 37; (j) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Executive Director and other officers and employees  of the Committee  under
sub-section (3) of section 39; ( k) the fees and the conditions for re-entry of   name of the
person under sub-section ( 2) of section 59; ( l) the period of suspension of the right of
person  to participate in  elections to council under sub-section ( 2) of section 62; ( m) the
circumstances and manner of removal of name of any person enrolled by the National Council,
or as the case may be, the State Council under sub-section (1) of section 71; (n) the manner
of filing a complaint with the State Council under sub-section (1) of section 72; (o) the period
for which the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council may engaged committees
or experts, the qualifications of such  experts  and the fees and remunerations   to be paid
under sub-section (2) of section 95; ( p) the books of accounts and other documents to be
maintained by health educational institutions under sub-section (4) of section 103; (q)  any
other matter for which provision may be made by regulations by the Commission under this
Act.
3. Clause 113 of the Bill confers power upon the State Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  The matters with respect to which rules may be made
has been set out in sub-clause (2).  The matters, inter alia, relate to (a) the manner in which
the State Councils are to be constituted and its composition under sub-section (1) of section
53; (b) the period of State Council to continue under sub-section ( 5) of section 53; (c) the
manner of election of the President and Vice-President of the State Council to be elected by
the members under sub-section (1) of section 54;  (d) manner of enrolment of persons under
sub-section (2) of section 57; ( e) the data capturing method by which the State Councils
shall maintain the register under sub-section (4) of section 57; (f) the manner in which the
State Council shall update  and publish the Register under sub-section (5) of section 58; (h
)
any other matter for which provision may be made by rules by the State Government under
this Act.
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 114 of the Bill requires that the rules and regulations made
under the proposed legislation shall have to be laid before Parliament.  Similarly, sub-clause (2)
of the said clause requires that the rules made by the State  Government under the proposed
legislation shall have to be laid before the State legislature.
5. The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations may be made are generally
matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself.  The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to consolidate the law in certain disciplines of health sector and promote human
resources in health sector and provide for mechanism for the determination,
maintenance, coordination and regulation of standards of health education
throughout the country to ensure adequate availability of human resources in all
States and for the said purpose to  establish  the  National  Commission  for
Human  Resources for Health and to supervise and to regulate  professional
Councils in various disciplines of  health sector and  for matters connected
therewith  or  incidental  thereto.
————
(Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)
GMGIPMRND—3412RS(S3)—20-12-2011.