AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. LIX of  2025 
THE DESTITUTE SENIOR CITIZENS, WIDOWS AND ORPHANS 
(HOUSING FACILITY) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to provide for housing facilities to destitute senior citizens, widows 
and orphans and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows and
Orphans (Housing Facility) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
2. In  this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions. 
10 
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State, and in other cases, the Central Government; 
(b) “Centre” means the Residential Centre for destitute senior
citizens, widows, and orphans to be established by the appropriate 
Government under section 4; 

2 
 
(c) “destitute senior citizen” means any person , whether male or 
female, who has attained the age of si xty years and has no shelter or no 
family to provide such shelter and has no financial support; 
(d) “Fund” means the Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows and 
Orphans Welfare Fund constituted under section 8; 
(e) “National Policy” means the National Policy for the provision 
of housing facilities to destitute senior citizens,  widows and orphans 
under section 3; 
(f) “orphan” means a child below fourteen years of age who has 
no living or caring parent, legal guardian, or capable relatives; 
(g)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under th is Act; 
and 
(h)  “widow” means a woman who has not remarried after t he 
death of her husband and who has no shelter or fina ncial and familial 
support. 
5 
10 
15 
National Policy 
on housing for 
destitute senior 
citizens, 
widows and 
orphans. 
 
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, af ter commencement of 
this Act, formulate and notify, in the Official Gaz ette, a National Policy for 
the provision of housing facilities to destitute se nior citizens, widows and 
orphans. 
  
Establishment 
of Residential 
Centres. 
 
4. (1)   The appropriate Government shall establish  Residential C entres 
all over the country for destitute senior citizens,  widows, and orphans , 
free of cost, in accordance with the provisions in the National Policy. 
(2) Every Centre established under sub-section (1) shall house not fewer 
than eighty and not more than two hundred destitute persons, at a time. 
(3) Every unit within each Centre shall, as far as possible, accommodate two 
orphans, one widow, and one senior citizen, fosteri ng a familial and 
intergenerational living environment. 
20 
25 
 
Facilities at the 
Centres. 
 
5. The appropriate Government shall ensure that each Centre, — 
(a ) provides shelter, food, water, medical care, security and 
other essential amenities to the residents; 
(b) utilizes existing Government welfare schemes for 
providing education, health, and nutrition to the residents; 
(c) ensures easy accessibility for eligible individuals; 
(d) promotes interpersonal bonding and shared care giving 
among residents; and 
(e ) develops income-generating domestic production un its for 
residents' empowerment.  
30 
35 
 
Constitution of 
Managing 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute, in such manner as 
may be prescribed, a Managing Committee to monitor and coordinate 
each Centre, comprising:  — 
(i) the Chairperson of the local body, ex-officio  Chairperson; 
(ii) an officer in the appropriate Government of such rank as 
may be prescribed, ex-officio Member; 
(iii) a senior-most senior citizen of the Centre, Member; 
(iv) an oldest widow of the Centre, Member; and 
(v) an eminent social worker to be nominated by the 
appropriate Government, Member. 
40 
45 
 

3 
 
5 
10 
(2) The term of office and other service conditions of the  
Chairperson and Members of the Managing Committee , 
remuneration of the Member nominated under clause ( v) of sub-
section ( 1) and the procedure to be followed by the Managing 
Committee in the discharge of its functions shall b e such as may 
be prescribed.  
(3) The appropriate Government shall appoint such numbe r 
of 
staff to each Centre, in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions of service as well as salaries and allowances, as may be 
prescribed from time to time.  
 
15 
7. (1)  The  appropriate  Government  shall  be  responsibl e  for  the  
implementation of the National Policy. 
(2)  
The appropriate Government shall, at such periodic intervals as 
may be prescribed,  review and monitor the functioning and quality of 
services at each Centre . 
 Implementation 
and monitoring. 
 
20 
25 
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in th e Official 
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Desti tute Senior Citizens, 
Widows and Orphans Welfare Fund , for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 
(2) The Central and State Governments shall 
, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament and the State Legislature, as th e case may be, by 
law in this behalf, contribute to the Fund in such ratio, as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) The Fund shall be used for the purposes of 
maintenance, development, 
and expansion of the Centres and for such other purposes as may be 
prescribed. 
(4) The Fund shall be administered by such authority of the appropriate 
Government as may be prescribed.  
 Constitution of 
the Destitute 
Senior Citizens, 
Widows and 
Orphans Welfare  
Fund.  
 
30 
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to,  and not in derogation of, 
any other law in force relating to the welfare of senior citizens, widows,  or 
orphans. 
 Act not in 
derogation of 
other laws . 
 
35 
40 
45 
10. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2)   Every rule made by the C entral Government under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before ea ch House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirt y days, which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or mor e successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately follow ing the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in  making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that  any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validit y of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
(3)  Every rule made by the S
tate Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before the Legisla ture of that State, where it 
consists of one House, or where it consists of two Houses, before both 
Houses of the Legislature . 
 Power to make 
rules. 
 
  

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India is witnessing a growing number of destitute senior citizens, widows, 
and orphaned children who are deprived of shelter, care, and protection. While old-
age homes, widow shelters, and orphanages exist, they often operate in isolation 
and face infrastructure or care deficiencies. 
This Bill proposes an integrated solution by bringing these vulnerable groups 
under one roof, encouraging a nurturing family- like environment. Senior citizens 
can provide guidan ce, widows can offer maternal care, and orphaned children can 
benefit from their wisdom and support. 
This interdependent model not only improves emotional well-being but also 
empowers residents through shared responsibilities and domestic livelihood 
activities. 
Hence, this Bill. 
DHANANJAY BHIMRAO MAHADIK. 

5 
 
  FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment  of Residential Centres for 
destitute senior citizens, widows, and orphan child ren by the appropriate 
Government . Clause 5 relates to the provision of facilities a t such Centres, as 
enumerated therein. Clause 6 provides for the const itution of a Managing 
Committee and appointment of the Chairperson and Members thereof as well as the 
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members including 
remuneration to one Member thereof.  The Clause also provides for appointment of 
staff to the Centres and the terms and conditions o f their service as well as the 
salaries and allowances payable to them. Clause 8 p rovides for the constitution of 
the Destitute Senior Citizens, Widows and Orphans W elfare Fund and that the 
Central and State Government shall contribute to th e Fund in such ratio as may be 
prescribed. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both  non-recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of  India. However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 
 
  
 
  

6 
 
  MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Govern ment to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill.   
As the rules will relate to matters of procedural and  administrative detail only, 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.  
  
 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for housing facilities to destitute senior citizens, widows 
and orphans and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
____________ 
(Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–361–08.12.2025. 