THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (i) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(ii) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘21B. The State shall provide affordable healthcare and affordable medicine to
all citizens in such manner as the State may, by law, determine’’.
Bill No. LIX of 2016
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 2016
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Right to
health.

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution of India in article 47 has made a provision for ‘raising of the level
of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health
as among its primary duties’. But we could not achieve this goal and million of citizens are
denied access to health care and medicine due to unaffordable hospitals and medical
expenses. The public health system is not in a position to provide universal and free
health care to its citizens. The growing private sector in the health care segment has
become unaffordable even for a citizen having reasonable income. It is the duty of the
state to treat health care as occupation or profession and profiteering should not be
permitted. In the light of the above, it is a duty of the state to intervene and provide
universal affordable health care to its citizens. In order to fulfill this goal, it is felt that an
explicit provision should be made in the Part III relating to Fundamental Rights of the
Constitution.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence,  this Bill.
K.K. RAGESH

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making the right of health a fundamental right. It
provides that every citizen shall be entitled to get affordable healthcare and medicines as
may be prescribed by the appropriate Government by law. Such Bills, if enacted, by Parliament
or State Legislatures will involve expenditure recurring and non-recurring from the
Consolidated Fund of India as well as Consolidated Fund of the concerned State. However,
it is not possible to access the actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at this stage.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri K.K. Ragesh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3635RS(S3)—02-12-2016.