AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008
Bill No.  LIX  of  2008
THE  HOMELESS  ORPHAN  AND  STREET  CHILDREN
(REHABILITATION  AND  WELFARE)  BILL,  2008
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and welfare measures to be undertaken by the Central
and State Governments for the homeless orphan children who are referred to as street
children who subsist on rag picking, begging, petty crimes, shoe polishing, working
as porter or performing acrobatics at road crossings or public places by taking
their custody and providing them due care, protection, education,
vocational training and other means and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Homeless Orphan and Street Children (Rehabilitation
and Welfare) Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the Context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5

2
(b) “child” means a boy or girl who is below the age of eighteen years;
(c) “children Home” means an institution or home either established or certified
as such by the appropriate Government for the purposes of this Act;
(d) “orphan or street children” means children with unknown parentage,
abandoned, vagabond and who collect waste papers, plastic items, glass and metal
waste from garbage dumps, streets and other public places including neglected and
destitute children who subsist on working as a porter, vendor, shoe shiner, beggar or
petty criminal and who generally languish on pavements, hutments slums or railway
platforms, bus stops and such other places and remain deprived and exploited.
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate a National Policy for
the rehabilitation and welfare of homeless orphan and street children so as to secure them all
rights of childhood to enable them to enjoy their childhood and ultimately become responsible
citizens.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the National Policy
may include provisions for—
(a) taking custody of every orphan and street child who is homeless and without
guardians and his board and lodging and other facilities wherever necessary in
children home;
(b) withdrawal of orphan and street children from their profession of rag picking,
begging, petty crimes, shoe polishing, potter, performing acrobatics or any such
profession as may be prescribed;
(c) free educational facilities, vocational training and facilities for developing
character and abilities to become self dependent in life for the orphans and street
children;
(d) employment opportunities for orphan and street children after they grew up
and complete their education or vocational training;
(e) providing yearly grants-in-aid to all the orphanages and Non-Governmental
Organisations who are working for the welfare of orphans or street children, as the
case may be;
(f) such other measures as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
4. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the national policy
formulated under section 3 of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the official
Gazette, establish a welfare fund for the purposes of this Act with initial corpus of rupee two
thousand crores, and thereafter shall contribute to the Fund from time to time after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf along with the Governments of the
State in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(2) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other seems as may be received by
way of donation, contribution, assistance or otherwise from individuals, body corporate,
financial institutions, etc.
(3) The Fund shall be utilised for the welfare of the homeless orphans and street
children in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish or cause to be established such
number of children Homes as it may deem fit and necessary for the purposes of this Act.
National
Policy for
homeless
orphan and
street
children.
Appropriate
Government
to implement
the Policy.
Establishment
of Homeless
Orphan and
Street
Children
Welfare Fund.
Establishment
of children
Homes.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2) The Children Homes established under sub-section (1) shall provide free of cost
board and lodging and such other facilities to the children covered under this Act as may be
prescribed.
7. The appropriate Government shall—
(a) maintain a district wise register of all the homeless orphans and street children;
(b) open sufficient number of schools and colleges for imparting education free
of cost to the homeless orphan and Street children and provide books, writing materials,
clothes and uniforms and other relevant articles free of cost;
(c) provide healthcare facilities free of cost to every child covered under this
Act;
(d) take custody of every child who is homeless, orphan, vagabond destitute,
rag picker, beggar or petty criminal or such children identified by such Government in
such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) send every child  taken into custody under this Act to the children home or to
a NGO certified by such Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(f) provide vocational training and gainful employment wherever required;
(g) take such other measures as may be necessary for the rehabilitation and
welfare of children covered under this Act.
 8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by  Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code or any other law for
the time being in force, whoever,
(a) forces any child covered under this Act to beg, commit petty crime, ragpicking
or any act which is injurious to the health of  such child shall be punishable with
imprisonment which shall not  be less than four years but may extend to seven years
and also with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees;
(b) sexually exploits any child covered under this Act in any manner whatsoever
shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than ten years but may
extend to life imprisonment and also  with fine which shall not be less than five lakh
rupees but may extend to ten lakh rupees;
(c) having already been convicted of an offence under this Act  or of an abetment
of such offence is again convicted of any such  offence or abetment shall be punishable
with life imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
10. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being applicable for the children covered under this Act.
12.  The Central  Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Miscellaneous
Provisions.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Penalty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act supple-
ment other
laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It has rightly been said that children are the future of any country because they grow
as the citizens of that country. It is, therefore, necessary to bring up them in a good atmosphere
by providing them all the necessities of life, good education and a joyful childhood. It is
equally important to note that most of the parents try their best to upbring their children with
love and care and provide them best facilities. But in our country, unfortunately, there are
millions of orphans with known or unknown parentage, mostly homeless, abandoned, run
away vagabond and destitute who are generally known as street children and can be seen in
most of the urban areas loitering, collecting waste papers, plastic and metal scraps from the
dumping pits and public places for their subsistence. They can also be seen  begging at the
road crossings, near the religious places, markets, bus stops and railway stations. Many a
times they indulge in petty crimes like stealing, pickpocketing and snatching for their survival.
They are exploited by anti-social elements and even by Police. Such children become hardened
criminals when they grow up. The girl child in this category is generally sexually exploited
and ultimately pushed into flesh trade. It is a pity that these hapless street children work
under pathetic and unhygienic conditions and fall prey of all kinds of dreaded diseases.
Education is a dream for them and even two square meals are a luxury for them. These
children are thus most vulnerable to abuses, exploitation and depravity.
Ours is a Welfare State and thus it is the duty of the State to ensure that these hapless,
homeless orphan and street children are protected  against neglect cruelty and exploitation
and they must enjoy their  childhood by bringing them to the national mainstream by giving
every opportunity and protection they deserve to fully develop their potentials. They should
be provided with good education, nutrition, healthcare and good atmosphere which will
enable them to grow as responsible citizens. The Governments have to establish children
homes with all facilities for the street children. The NGOs too have to be encouraged for the
uplift of orphans and street children. If the orphans and street children are looked after well,
it will not only uplift the conditions of the homeless orphan and street  children but it will also
create a better society and strong nation.
Hence  this Bill.
O. T.  LEPCHA
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the establishment of children homes. Clause 4 prescribes
on appropriate Govt. the duty to implement  the National Policy for rehabilitation and welfare
of orphan and street children. Clause 8 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to
provide adequate requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is difficult to assess the exact
quantum of money likely to be involved at this stage but it is estimated that a sum of rupees
five thousand crores may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten thousand crores may also
involve.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and welfare measures to be undertaken by the Central and
State Governments for the homeless orphan children who are referred to as street
children who subsist on rag-picking, begging, petty crimes, shoe polishing,
working as potters or performing acrobatics at road crossings or public places
by taking their custody and providing them due care, protection,
education, vocational training and other means and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
(Shri O.T. Lepcha, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4769RS(S-1)—29-12-2008.