Lz HINDU SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
A
BILL
Surther to amend the Hindu Succession Act, 1956,
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —

1. (7) This Act may be called the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2004.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the

Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

3000 956. 5 2. For section 6 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the

principal Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:—

‘6. (1) On and from the commencement of the Hindu
Act, 2004, in a Joint Hindu family governed by
coparcener shal',—

Succession (Amendment)
the Mitakshara law, the daughter of a

Bill No. LV of 2004

ee INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

2 0 DEC 20m

Short title and
commencement,

Substitution
of new
section for
section 6.
Devolution of
interest in
‘coparcenary
property.


(a) also by birth become a coparcener in her own right; the.same manner as the
son here;

(b) have the same rights in the coparcenary property as she would have had if
she had been a son;

(c) be subject to the same liabilities and disabilities in respect of the said
coparcenary property as that of a son,
and any reference to a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed to include areference
to a daughter:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to a daughter
married before the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2004.

0

(2) Any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of sub-
section (/) shall be held by her with the incidents of coparcenary ownership and shall
be regarded, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the
time being in force in, as property capable of being disposed of by her by will or other
testamentary disposition. .

(3) Where a Hindu dies after the commencement of the Hindu Succession
(Amendment) Act, 2004, his interest in the property ofa Joint Hindu family governed
by the Mitakshara law, shall devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the
case may be, under this Act and not by survivorship, and the coparcenary property
shall be deemed to have been divided as if a partition had taken place and,— 20

15

(a) the daughter is allotted the same share as is allotted to a son;

(b) the share of the pre-deceased son or a pre-deceased daughter, as they
would have got had they been alive at the time of partition, shall be allotted to
the surviving child of such pre-deceased son or of such pre-deceased daughter;

and 25

(c) the share of the pre-deceased child of a pre-deceased son or ofa pre-
deceased daughter, as such child would have got had he or she been alive at the
time of the partition, shall be allotted to the child of such pre-deceased child of
the pre-deceased so or a pre-deceased daughter, as the case may be.

Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, the interest of a Hindu 30
Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed to be the share in the property that would
have been allotted to him if a partition of the property had taken place immediately
before his death, irrespective of whether he was entitled to claim partition or not.

(4) After the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2004,
no court shall ‘recognise any right to proceed against a son, grandson or great-
grandson for the recovery of any debt due from his father, grandfather or great-
grandfather on the ground of the pious obligation under the Hindu law, of such son,
grandson or great-grandson to discharge any such debt:

Provided that in the case of any debt contracted before the commencement of
the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2004, nothing contained in this sub-section 40
shall affect—

(a) the right of any creditor to proceed against the son, grandson or
great-grandson, as the case may be; or

5

(6) any alienation made in respect of or in satisfaction of, any such debt,
and any such right or alienation shall be enforceable under the rule of pious 45
obligation in the same manner and to the same extent as it would have been
enforceable as if the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2004 had not been

enacted.


Explanation.—For the purposes of clause (a), the expression "son", "grandson"
or "great-grandson" shall be deemed to refer to the son, grandson or great-grandson,
as the case may be, who was born or adopted prior to the commencement of the Hindu
Succession (Amendment) Act, 2004.

(5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a partition, which has been
effected before the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2004.'.

3. Section 23 of the principal Act shall be omitted.

4. In section 30 of the principal Act, for the words "disposed of by him", the words
“disposed of by him or by her" shall be substituted.

Omission of
section 23.

Amendment
of section 30.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Hindu Succession Act, 1956 has amended and codified the law relatiang to intestate
succession among Hindus. The Act brought about changes in the law of succession among
Hindus and gave rights which were till then unknown in relation to women’s property.
However, it does not interfere with the special rights of those who are members of Hindu
Mitakshara coparcenary except to provide rules for devolution of the interest of a deceased
smale in certain cases. The Act lays down a uniform and comprehensive system of inheritance
and applies, inter alia, to persons governed by the Mitakshara and Dayabhaga schools and
also to those governed previously by the Murumakkattayam, Aliyasantana and Nambudri
laws. The Act applies to every person who isa Hindu by religion in any of its forms or
developments including a Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the Brahmo, Pararthana or
Arya Samaj; or to any person who is Buddhist, Jain or Sikh by religion; or to any other
person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion. In the case ofa testamentary
disposition, this Act does not apply and the interest of the deceased is governed by the
Indian Succession Act, 1925.

2. Section 6 of the Act deals with devolution of interest ofa male hindu in coparcenary
Property and recognises the rule of devolution by survivorship among the members of the
coparcenary. The retention of the Mitakashara coparcenary property without including the
females in it means that the females cannot inherit in ancestral property as their male counter-
parts do. The law by excluding the daughter from participating in the coparcenary ownership
not only contributes to her discrimination on the ground of gender but also has led to
oppression and negation of her fundamental right of equality guaranteed by the Constitution.
having regard to the need to render social justice to women, the States of Andhra Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Maharashtra have made necessary changes in the law giving
equal right to daughters in Hindu Mitakshara coparcenary property. The Kerala Legislature
has enacted the Kerala Joint Hindu Family System (Abolition) Act, 1975.

3. It is proposed to remove the discrimination as contained in section 6 of the Hindu
Succession Act, 1956 by giving equal rights to daughters in the Hindu Mitakshara
coparcenary property as the sons have. Section 23 of the Act disentitles a female heir to ask
for partition in respect of a dwelling house wholly occupied by a joint family until the male
heirs choose to divide their respective shares therein. It is also Proposed to omit the said
section so as to remove the disability on female heirs contained in that section.

4. The above proposals are based on the recommendations of the Law Commission of

India as contained in its 174th Report on “Property Rights of Women: Proposed Reform
under the Hindu Law”.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Detu1;¢ H.R. BHARDWAJ.
The 16th December, 2004.



ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956
(30 oF 1956)

* * * * *

6. When a male Hindu dies after the commencement of this Act, having at the time of
his death an interest in a Mitakshara coparcenary property, his interest in the property shall
devolve by survivorship upon the surviving members of the coparcenary and not in
accordance with this Act:

Provided that, if the deceased had left him surviving a female relative specified in class
J of the Schedule or a male relative specified in that class who claims through such female
relative, the intrest of the deceased in the Mitakshara coparcenary property shall devolve by
testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be under this Act and not by
survivorship.

Explanation 1I.—For the purpose of this section, the interest of a Hindu Mitakshara
coparcener shall be deemed to be the share in the property that would have been allotted to
him ifa partition of the property had taken place immediately before his death, irrespective of
whether he was entitled to claim partition or not.

Explanation 2.—Nothing contained in the proviso to this section shall be construed
as enabling a person who has separated himself from the coparcenary before the death of
the deceased or any of his heirs to claim on intestacy a share in the interest referred to
therein.

* * * * *

23. Where a Hindu intestate has left surviving him or her both male and female heirs
specified in class I of the Schedule and his or her property includes a dwelling-house wholly
occupied by members of his or her family, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this
Act, the right of any such female heir to claim partition of the dwelling-house shall not arise
until the male heirs choose to divide their respective shares therein; but the female heir shall
be entitled to a right of residence therein:

Provided that where such female heir is a daughter, she shall be entitled to a right of
residence in the dwelling house only if she is unmarried or has been deserted by or has
separated from her husband or is a widow.

* * * * *
CHAPTER III

30. Any Hindu may dispose of by will or other testamentary disposition any property,
which is capable of being so disposed of by him, in accordance with the provisions of the
Indian Succession Act, 1925, or any other law for the time being in force and applicable to
Hindus.

Explanation.—The interest of a male Hindu in a Mitakshara coparcenary property or
the interest of a member of a tarwad, tavazhi, illom, kutumba or kavaru in the property of
the tarwad, tavazhi, illom, kutumba or kavaru shall, notwithstanding anything contained
in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, be deemed to be property capable
of being disposed of by him or by her within the meaning of this section.

* * * * *

Devolution of
interest in
coparcenary
property.

Special
provision
respecting
dwelling
houses.

Testamentary
succession.



RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

further to amend the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.”

| (Shri मं. R. Bhardwaj, Minister of Law and Justice)

MGIPMRND—3639RS—(S1)—16. 12.2004.