AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. LV of 2024 
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC 
VIOLENCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows: ⸺ 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence
(Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
43 of 2005. 2. In the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, ⸺ 
(i) for clause (q), the following shall be substituted, ⸺
Amendment of 
section 2. 

2 
 
“(q) “respondent” means any adult person who is, or has been, in a 
domestic r elationship with the aggrieved person and against whom the 
aggrieved person has sought any relief under this Act: 
Provided that an aggrieved wife or female living in a relationship in 
the nature of a marriage may also file a complaint against the relatives 
including female relatives of the husband or the male partner;”; 
(ii) after clause (t), the following shall be inserted, namely,:⸺ 
“(ta) “vocational training facility” means such bodies that are recognized 
by the National Council for Vocational Education and Training to award 
certification for a qualification or a skill”. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Insertion of new 
section 7A. 
 
Duties of 
Vocational 
Training 
Facilities. 
 
 3. In the principal Act, after section 7, the following new section shall be 
inserted, namely: ⸺ 
“7A. If an aggrieved person or, on her behalf a Protection Officer or a service 
provider, requests the person in charge of a recognized vocational training 
facility to provide any suitable skill traini ng to her, such person in charge of 
the vocational training facility shall provide such skill training to the 
aggrieved person in the vocational training facility. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Amendment of 
section 9. 
 4. In the principal Act, in section 9, in sub-section (1),: ⸺   
   (i) after clause (d), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely,:- 
        “(da) to ensure that the aggrieved person is provided information about 
and access to all such schemes of the Central Government and State 
Governments which benefit victims of domestic violence; 
(ii) for clause (e), the following shall be substituted, namely,: ⸺ 
        “(e) to maintain a list of all service providers providing legal aid or 
counselling, shelter homes, medical facilities, and vocational training 
facilities in a local area within the jurisdiction of the Magistrate;” and 
(iii) after clause (h), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely,: ⸺ 
      “(ha) to get the aggrieved person registered in a vocational training 
facility, if the aggrieved person is financially dependent and so requires and 
forward report of having registered the aggrieved person in a vocational 
training facility to the police station and the Magistrate having jurisdiction in 
the area where the vocational training facility is situated;”. 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
Amendment of 
section 10. 
 
 5. In the principal Act, in section 10, in sub -section (2), after clause (c), the 
following new clause shall be inserted namely: ⸺ 
  
          “(d) ensure that the aggrieved person is provided skill training in a 
vocational training institute if she so requires and forward a report of having 
registered the aggrieved person in a vocational training facility to the police 
station within the local limits of which domestic violence took place.”. 
35  
 
Amendment of 
section 11. 
 6. In the principal Act, in section 11: ⸺   
   (i) for clause (c), the following shall be substituted, namely: ⸺ 
      “(c) effective co -ordination between the services provided by the 
concerned Ministries and Departments dealing with law, home affairs 
including law and order, health, skill development and entrepreneurship, to 
address the issues of domestic violence and comprehensive rehabilitation of 
the victims, is esta blished and periodical review of the same is conducted;” 
and 
(ii) after clause (d), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely: ⸺ 
      “(e) all citizens are sensitized on the provisions of this Act and that age -
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 

3 
 
appropriate content on gender divers ity and equality is integrated into school 
curriculums.”. 
      
      
 
  

4 
 
 STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
  
Domestic violence transcends demographic boundaries and continues to 
violate basic human rights. Rooted in centuries of patriarchy, it reflects deep-
seated societal norms where male dominance and female subjugation are 
normalized. Women, often socialized t o accept and rationalize such violence, 
face systemic oppression reinforced by traditional beliefs and the concept of 
male ownership over women's bodies, labor, and reproductive rights further 
entrenches this dominance.  
 
In India, the interplay of patriar chy, cultural norms, and negative 
masculine constructs perpetuates domestic violence. Despite comprehensive 
legislation against this crime, it has been increasing annually. According to the 
National Commission for Women data, in 2019, there were 2,960 recorded 
complaints of domestic violence. This number alarmingly rose by 
approximately 79.2 per cent.  in 2020 during the lockdown. In 2021, the 
complaints increased by another 25.1 per cent. By 2022, the number marked a 
5.1 per cent. increase from the previous year. Although there is a decline of 
9.5 per cent. cases reported by NCW in 2023, the number is concerningly 
high.  
 
The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act was passed in 
2005 to offer effective protection of women's constitutional righ ts against 
familial violence .  However,  the legislation has often fallen short in purpose 
due to various loopholes. A significant shortcoming is its lack of emphasis on 
prevention as the Act does not sufficiently tackle its root cause  deep-seated 
patriarchy. As a corrective measure to the Act, this  Bill aims to strike at the 
root cause by prescribing the inclusion of gender sensitization in school 
curricula within the duties of the Government.  
 
Another glaring factor overlooked by the 2005 Act, which this B ill seeks 
to address, is the lack of punishment for abusive female family members. In 
many cultural contexts, mothers -in-law, sisters -in-law, and other female 
relatives may participate in or perpetrate abuse. However, the current 
domestic violence law hol ds only adult male persons responsible, designating 
them as respondents. This is a significant flaw and violates the principles of 
Article 14 of the Constitution. In consonance with the landmark judgment of 
Hiral P. Harsora vs. Kusum Narottamdas Harsora  (2016) 10 SCC 165, this 
Bill will strike down the phrase “any adult male person” to extend the purview 
of the 2005 Act to female relatives of the male partner. This will entitle 
aggrieved persons to the freedom to bring cases against female family 
members who have committed any form of violence. 
 
     Nevertheless, as important as women’s protection against domestic 
violence, their comprehensive rehabilitation is critical as well. In the absence 
of financial safety nets, women find it difficult to escape abusive relationships. 
The fear of destitution and the absence of safety cushions can lead to even 
underreporting of domestic violence cases. Although lack of financial 
independence is a factor for women from all strata to break free from the cycle 
of abuse, t hose from low -income backgrounds need special attention as they 
particularly lack social protection, educational qualifications, or access to 
decent work. Therefore, there is an urgent need for skill development to 
empower aggrieved women and break the cyc le of dependency and silence. 
While there are many schemes aimed at empowering women to be financially 
independent, such as Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY), 
Support to Training and Employment Programme for Women (STEP), and 
Sakhi - One-Stop Centre scheme, including a provision in the existing 2005 
 

5 
 
Act to connect these victims of domestic violence with such initiatives would 
strengthen the implementation of these schemes and provide a more robust 
support system for affected women. 
 
      Hence, the Bill. 
 SANDOSH KUMAR P.    
   
 
  

6 
 
 ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC 
VIOLENCE ACT, 2005 
[43 OF 2005] 
 
     *                              *                              *                              *                                  *  
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions. 
 *                              *                              *                              *                                  *  
       (q) “respondent” means any adult male person who is, or has been, in a domestic 
relationship with the aggrieved person and against whom the aggrieved person has 
sought any relief under this Act: 
 
 *                              *                              *                              *                                  *  
 9. (1) It shall be the duty of the Protection Officer— Duties and 
functions of 
Protection 
Officers. 
 *                              *                              *                              *                                  * 
       (e) to maintain a list of all service providers providing legal aid or counselling, 
shelter homes and medical facilities in a local area within the jurisdiction of the 
Magistrate; 
 *                              *                              *                              *                                  *  
 11. The Central Government and every State Government, shall take all measures to 
ensure that— 
Duties of 
Government. 
 *                              *                              *                              *                                  * 
      (c) effective co-ordination between the services provided by concerned Ministries 
and Departments dealing with law, home affairs including law and order, health and 
human resources to address issue s of domestic violence is established and periodical 
review of the same is conducted; 
 *                              *                              *                              *                                  *  
   
   
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
_______________ 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005. 
________________ 
(Shri Sandosh Kumar P., M.P.) 
RS-P&PS⸺PMB(E)─057─10.02.2025. 