AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAIYA SABHA

Bill No. LV of 2001

THE INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

A

BILL
further to amend the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Inland Waterways Authority of India (Amendment)
Act, 2001.

5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint.

82 of 1985. 2. In the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in section 3, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be sub-
stituted, namely:—

10 “(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairman;
(b) a Vice-Chairman;
(c) not more than three full-time members; and
(व) not more than three part-time members,
15 to be appointed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.

Short title and
commence-
ment.

of section 3.


2

Insertion of 3. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
new section = namely: —
4A,

Disqualifica- “ «canals . . :

Disaualiica ‘4A. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member, if he—

appointment .

aeebee * hi (@) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence

which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or

(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or

(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or

(@) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government
or a company owned or controlled by the Government; or

(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or other
interest in the Authority as is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him
of his functions as a member.”.

Insertion of 4, After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

new section SA. 7

namely:—

Meetings. “SA. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, including
the quorum thereat, as may be provided by regulations.

(2) The Chairman or in his absence, the Vice-Chairman, or in the absence of
both, such other member as is chosen by the members present at the meeting of the
Authority shall preside at the meeting.

(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be
decided by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of
an equality of votes, the Chairman or in his absence, the Vice-Chairman, or in the
absence of both, the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting
vote.”.

Amendment of 5. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after clause (j), the following

section 14. clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(k) enter into joint ventures concerning inland shipping by way of equity
participation.”.

Insertion of 6. After section 18 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

new section pamely:—

18A. namely:

Borrowing “18A. The Authority may, in such manner and subject to such terms and

powers of the conditions as may be determined by regulations, borrow money from any source by

Authority. the issue of bonds, debentures or other instruments as it may think fit for discharge of
all or any of its functions under the Act.”.

Amendment of 7. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (7), the following

section 35. clauses shall be inserted, namely:—

“(k) the terms and conditions for issue of bonds, debentures or other instruments;

(0) the time, place and the rules of procedure with regard to the transaction of
business at its meetings including the quorum under sub-section (1) of section 5A.”.

20

25

30

35

40


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Inland Water Transport as a mode of transportation is eco-friendly, economically
viable and fuel-efficient. India has over 14,500 kms. of navigable water out of which 5,700
kms. are navigable by mechanized vessels. Inspite of these advantages, Inland Water
Transport (IWT) has not developed to its full potential in comparison to the other modes of
transport. The main constraints, which affect smooth development of IWT are insufficient
water depth of major rivers due to soil erosion, non-availability of adequate navigational
aids, inadequate cargo support, inadequate terminal facilities and insufficient number of
inland vessels.

2. The problems of the Inland Water Transport were studied in the past by several
Committees. These committees considered the difficulties and problems of river transport
and made various suggestions and recommendations for the improvement of the IWT system.
As a follow up action, Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) was set up in 1986
under the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985 for the regulation and development
of inland waterways for purposes of shipping and navigation in the country. Three important
waterways, viz., the Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River System (Allahabad to Haldia, 1,620
kms.) as National Waterway No. 1, the Brahmaputra (Dhubri-Sadiya, 891 kms.) as National
Waterway No. 2 and West-Coast Canal (Kottapuram to Kollam along with Champakara
and Udyogmandal canals, 205 kms.) as National Waterway No. 3, have come into existence.
However, the desired break through in establishing the inland waterways as an effective
mode of transport could not be fully achieved due to financial constraints. Accordingly, as
a long term strategy, to ensure all-round development of IWT, the Central Government has
decided to take, inter alia, following steps, namely:—

(a) to empower IWAI to raise bonds to enable it to borrow money from the
market as in the case of other infrastructure sectors;

(0) to enlarge the role of [WAI to enter into joint ventures to encourage
investment in this sector, financial investment of the Government being limited to
equity participation. However, additional concessions in the form of grants, subsidies
and other expenditure for development of infrastructure will not be within the scope
of joint venture projects;

(c) framing of policy guidelines for private sector participation subject to actual
capital subsidy not exceeding 40 per cent. for Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT)
projects being worked out on case to case basis in consultation with the Planning
Commission. The private sector participation has been envisaged in the areas of
ownership and operations of Inland Water Transport fleet, construction and operation
of river terminals, mechanized cargo handling, fairway development including
dredging, provision and maintenance of navigational aids, pilotage services, etc.

3. With a view to facilitating the sustained development of the IWT Sector, it has
become necessary to make suitable provisions for giving effect to the above-said decisions
by, inter alia, amending the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985 as under:—

(i) giving statutory status to the |WAI so as to empower it to borrow and mobilize
funds from the market by raising bonds;

(ii) enabling IWAT to enter into joint ventures with a view to encouraging
investment in this sector;

(iii) enabling IWAI to bring in more professionalism by appointing outside
professionals as members of the Authority;

(iv) making provision for regulating the procedure as to the manner in which
decisions would be taken in the meetings of the Authority; and

(0) specifying the qualifications of members of the Authority.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DELHI; ARUN JAITLEY.
The \6th August, 2001.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to empower the Authority to make regulations with the
previous approval of the Central Government to provide for the terms and conditions for
issue of bonds, debentures or other instruments. It is also proposed to insert a new provision
for the purpose of prescribing the time, place and the rules of procedure for transacting
business at meetings of the Authority including the quorum in the said meetings under
sub-section (1) of section 5A.

2. The matters in respect of which regulations may be made under clause 7 are
essentially matters of detail or procedure. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore,
ofa normal character.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1985
(82 oF 1985)

* * * * *
CHAPTER II
INLAND WaTERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
3. ( 1) * * * * *

(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—

(a) a Chairman;

(6) a Vice-Chairman; and

(c) such number of persons, not exceeding five,

to be appointed by the Central Government.
* * * * *
CHAPTER IV
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE AUTHORITY

14. (1) The Authority may—
* * * * *
35. (1) * * * *

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

* * * * *

Constitution
and

incorporation
of Inland
Waterways
Authority of
India.

Functions of
the Authority.

Power to make
regulations.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985

(Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs and Shipping)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2174RS—21.08.2001.