1
THE SINGLE-USE PLASTIC (REGULATION) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide for a framework to enable the country to achieve its goal of elimiating
single-use plastic by the year 2022 and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Single-Use Plastic (Regulation) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise rquires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short tile,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No. LV of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019

2
(b) "higher education institution" includes institutions imparting education on
completion of senior secondary level;
(c) "plastic" means material which contains as an essential ingredient, a high
polymer such as polyethylene terephthalate, high density polyethylene, vinyl, low
density polyethylene, polypropylene, polystryrene resins or multimaterials like
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene, polyephylene oxide, polycarbonate or polybutylene
terephthalate:
(d) "plastic packaging" means all products which are—
(i) used for the containment, protection handling, delivery and presentation
of goods; and
(ii) partly or wholly composed of plastic;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "recycle" means the reprocessing in a production process of the waste materials
of a plastic product for the original purpose or for other purposes;
(g) "reuse" means any operation by which a plastic product, which has been
conceived and designed to accomplish within its life cycle a minimum number of trips
or rotations, is refilled or used for the same purpose for which it was conceived; and
(h) "single-use plastic" means any disposable plastic item which is designed to
be used only once before it is thrown out or recycled and includes plastic spoons,
forks and knives, plastic shopping bags, plastic coffee or tea cups and glasses, lids,
plastic water bottles, styroforam, plastic take out containers and plastic straws.
3. The Central Government shall, within six months from the commencement of this
Act,—
(a) prescribe a  target of complete elimination of plastic waste in accordance with
international obligations;
(b) specify the year 2022 target year to implement a complete ban on single-use
plastic and the proportion of reduction of single-use plastic during each year following
the date of fixing of target year 2022; and
(c) formulate and implement a National Plastic Control Policy for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
4. The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures to promote sustainable
alternatives to single-use plastic including,—
(a) research by higher education institutions and others into sustainable
alternatives to plastic packaging; and
(b) the use of sustainable alternatives to plastic packaging.
5. The appropriate Government shall take measures to ensure—
(a) elimination of the production and use of plastics;
(b) increase in recycling, reuse and other forms of waste recovery in relation to
plastics; and
(c) removing plastics already in the environment for the purpose of recycling,
reusing or applying another form of waste recovery to the plastics.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
person shall, after the target year 2022, use, stock, distribute, manufacture, sell or trade in any
single-use plastic item.
5
Plastic
elimination
target and
control
policy.
10
Promote
sustainable
alternatives
to plastic.
Phasing out
of existent
plastic.
Ban on single-
use plastic
items.
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. Whoever violates the provision of this Act shall be punished with a fine which shall
not be less than rupees one lakh but which may extend upto rupees five lakhs.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Power to
make rules.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India generates close to 26000 tonnes of plastic a day. A little over 10000 tonnes of
plastic waste remains uncollected and these uncollected waste eventually ends of in the
natural environment in our seas and oceans or piling up on our lands. By 2050 the amount of
plastic in seas and oceans across the world will weigh more than all the marginal creataurs. At
less than 11 kg India's per capita plastic consumption is nearly a tenth of the United States,
at 109 kg.  Nearly one sixth of the plastic waste is generated by 60 cities and half of this comes
from Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru, Chennai and Kolkata. The National Green Tribunal has also
rapped 25 cities in U.P. for not following its orders on submitting a plan on how they would
comply with the plastic waste management.
Plastic is highly non-biodegradable causing permanent damage to the environment by
disrupting ecosystems. Single use plastic can block waterways and exacerbate natural
disasters. By clogging sewers and providing breeding grounds for mosquitoes and pests,
plastic bags can increase the transmission of vector-borne diseases like Malaria. Troubles
with single-use plastic came to the fore during floods in various parts of the country this
year. The Government is also campaigning against single-use plastic that has become one of
the sources of pollution as addition to landfills is adversely impacting the already frail
ecological balance. Heaps of plastic wastes were washed ashore highlighting the lack of
awareness and infrastructure to effectively deal with the product.
Efforts to ban single-use plastic and promote sustainable alternatives to it can help in
mitigating the ill-effects on human life and environment. India's commitment towards
sustainable development can only be realised through concerted efforts to reduce pollution
caused by plastic.
Hence, this Bill.
RONALD  SAPA  TLAU
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for research by higher education institutions and others
into sustainable alternatives to plastic packaging. Clause 5 provides that the appropriate
Government shall take measures to increase recycling, reuse and other forms of waste recovery
in relation to plastics. Clause 8 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide
requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India and at this stage it is not possible
to estimate that figure. No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGRADING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a framework to enable the country to achieve its goal of elimiating
single-use plastic by the year 2022 and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4327RS(S3)—11-12-2019.