1
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF LIFESTYLE FOR
ENVIRONMENT (LiFE) IN SCHOOLS BILL, 2023
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of Lifestyle for Environment (LiFE) in all schools
throughout the country in order to enable students towards becoming Pro-Planet
People in the 21st century and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Lifestyle for Environment
(LiFE) in Schools Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that
State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "environment" includes water, air and land and the inter-relationship which exists
among and between water, air and land, and human beings, other living creatures, plants,
micro-organism and property;
(c) "lifestyle" means the particular way that a person or group lives and the values and
ideas supported by that person or group;
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LV of 2023
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2023
Definitions.
5
10

2
Compulsory
teaching of
Lifestyle for
Environment
(LiFE) in
Schools.
5
10
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "school" means any school which is recognized by appropriate Government,
imparting education up to the primary, middle, secondary and/or senior secondary level, and
includes—
(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate Government or
a local authority;
(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of its expenses
from the appropriate Government or the local authority;
(iii) a school belonging to a specified category; and
(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to meet its expenses
from the appropriate Government or the local authority;
(f) "specified category", in relation to a school, means a school such as Kendriya
Vidyalaya, Navodaya Vidyalaya, Sainik School or any other school having a distinct character
which may be specified, by notification, by the appropriate Government.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, the subject of  ‘Lifestyle for environment' shall be taught in every school as
a compulsory subject in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with the subject-matter of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
15
20
25
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Our civilisational state has espoused the adage ^^ikS/ks esa Hkh ijekRek gksrk gSA**  (God
resides even in a plant as an 'Idea of India' since centuries. At the 2021 UN Climate Change
Conference (UNFCCC COP26), Hon'ble Prime Minister of India Shri Narendra Modi announced
Mission LiFE- Lifestyle for Environment, to bring individual behaviours at the forefront of
the global climate action narrative.
2. LiFE envisions replacing the prevalent 'use-and-dispose' economy-governed by
mindless and destructive consumption-with a circular economy, which would be defind by
mindful and deliberate utilization. The Mission LiFE intends to nudge individuals to undertake
simple acts in their daily lives that can contribute significantly to climate change when
embraced across the world.
3. The youth is the future of our country. Imparting holistic education about the
various facets related to the subject of Lifestyle for Environment (LiFE) to children in schools
across the country is paramount for ensuring the formation of a 1.4 billion strong community
of  'Pro- Planet People' in the 21st century.
Hence, this Bill.
BIPLAB  KUMAR  DEB
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of Lifestyle for Environment (LiFE) in all schools
throughout the country in order to enable students towards becoming Pro-Planet
People in the 21st century and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Biplab Kumar Deb, M.P .)
RS–P&PS–PMB(E)–079–13.12.2023.