THE PREVENTION OF ADDICTION OF TECHNOLOGICAL
GADGETS BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of the rising problem of technological gadgets and
addiction among the citizens in the country
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called The Prevention of Addiction of Technological Gadgets
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. LV of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "addiction" means physical or mental dependence on a particular substance
or a service or a product or a device or a gadget;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in relation to state, Government of that
particular state and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "digital detoxication center" means any health establishment, including
Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy Establishment, by
whatever name called, either wholly or partly, meant for the care of persons with
technological gadget addiction illness, established, owned, controlled or maintained
by the appropriate Government, local authority, trust, whether private or public,
corporation, co-operative society, organisation or any other entity or person;
(d) "gadget" means a small tool or device generally mechanical or technological
in nature that does something useful;
(e) "mental illness" means a substantial disorder of thinking, mood, perception,
orientation or memory that grossly impairs judgment, behaviour, capacity to recognise
reality or ability to meet the ordinary demands of life, mental conditions associated
with the abuse of alcohol and drugs, but does not include mental retardation which is
a condition of arrested or incomplete development of mind of a person, specially
characterised by subnormality of intelligence;
(f) "Psychiatrist" means a medical practitioner possessing a post-graduate degree
or diploma in psychiatry awarded by an university recognised by the University Grants
Commission established under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, or awarded
or recognised by the National Board of Examinations and included in the First Schedule
of India Medical Council Act, 1956, or recognised by the Medical Council of Indian,
constituted under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (02 of 1956), and includes, in
relation to any State, any medical officer who having regard to his knowledge and
experience in psychiatry, has been declared by the Government of that State to be a
psychiatrist for the purposes of this Act; and
(g) "technological gadget" means any gadget or device such as mobile phone,
laptop, gaming device, personal digital assistant, tablet, music player etc.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall recognize technological gadget addiction as
a mental illness and take necessary measures in order to give effect to the same.
(2) The appropriate Government shall consider technological gadget addiction as a
form of substance abuse and take all necessary measures required in order to give effect to
the same.
4. The appropriate Government shall take all measures to ensure that,—
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through public media,
including television, radio, print and online media at regular intervals;
(b) the programs to reduce stigma associated with technological gadget addiction
are planned, designed, funded and implemented in an effective manner;
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish digital detoxication centres for patients
suffering from technological gadget addiction in every district and provide adequate medical
facilities for rehabilitation, food, adequate care, protection, lodging and boarding;
(2) The appropriate Government may, by rules, provide for the management and
supervision of the centres established under sub-section (1) of this section for providing the
best treatment and facilities to the patients.
Definitions.
Recognition
of technologi-
cal gadget
addiction as a
mental illness
and a form of
substance
abuse.
Creating
awareness
about
technological
gadget
addiction.
102 of
1956.
Creation of
digital
detoxication
centers.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
6. (1) Any person, who is not a minor and who considers himself to have a mental
illness and desires to be admitted to any digital detoxication center for treatment may
request the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the Center to be admitted as an
independent patient.
(2) On receipt of such request under sub-section (1), the medical officer or psychiatrist
in charge of the Center shall admit the person to the Center if the medical officer or
psychiatrist is satisfied that—
(a) the person has a mental illness of a severity requring admission to a digital
detoxication center;
(b) the person with mental illness is likely to benefit from admission and treatment
to the digital detoxication center;
(c) the person has understood the nature and purpose of admission to the
digital detoxication center, and has made the request for admission of his own free
will, without any duress or undue influence and has the capacity to make mental
health care and treatment decisions without support or requires minimal support from
others in making such decisions.
(3) If a person is unable to understand the purpose, nature, likely effects of proposed
treatment and of the probable result of not accepting the treatment or requires a very high
level of support approaching hundred per cent support in making decisions, he or she shall
be deemed unable to understand the purpose of the admission and therefore shall not be
admitted as indepedent patient under this section.
(4) A person admitted as an independent patient to a digital detoxication center shall
be bound to abide by order and instructions or bye laws of the Center.
(5) An indepedent patient shall not be given treatment without his informed consent.
(6) The digital detoxication center shall admit an independent patient on his own
request, and shall not require the consent or presence of a nominated representative or a
relative or care-giver for admitting the person to the digital detoxication center.
(7) Subject to the provisions contained in Section 8 an independent patient may get
himself discharged from the digital detoxication center without the consent of the medical
officer or psychiatrist in charge of such Center.
7. (1) A minor may be admitted to a digital dexotication center only after following the
procedure laid down in this section.
(2) The nominated representative of the minor shall apply to the medical officer in
charge of a digital detoxication center for admission of the minor to the Center.
(3) On receipt of such an application, the medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of
the digital detoxication center may admit such a minor to the Center, if two psychiatrist or
one psychiatrist and one mental health professional or one psychiatrist and one medical
practitioner, have independently examined the minor on the day of admission or in the
preceding seven days and both independently conclude based on the examination and, if
appropriate, on information provided by others, that,—
(a) the minor has a mental illness of a severity requiring admission to a digital
detoxication center;
(b) admission shall be in the best interests of the minor, with regard to his or her
health, well-being or safety, taking into account the wishes of the minor if ascertainable
and the reasons for reaching this decision;
(c) the mental health care needs of the minor cannot be fulfilled unless he is
admitted; and
(d) All community based alternatives to admission have been shown to have
failed or are demonstrably unsuitable for the needs of the minor.
Independent
Admission
and
Treatment in
digital
detoxication
center.
Admission of
a Minor in a
digital
detoxication
center.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(4) A minor so admitted shall be accommodated separately from adults, in an
environment that takes into account his age and developmental needs and is at least of the
same quality as is provided to other minors admitted to hospitals for other medical treatments.
(5) The nominated representative or an attendant appointed by the nominated
representative shall under all circumstances stay with the minor in the digital detoxication
center for the entire duration of the admission of the minor to the digital detoxication center.
(6) In the case of minor girls, where the nominated representative is male, a female
attendant shall be appointed by the nominated representative and under all circumstances
shall stay with the minor girl in the digital detoxication center for the entire duration of her
admission.
(7) A minor shall be given treatment with the informed consent of his nominated
representative.
(8) if the nominated representative no longer supports admission of the minor under
this section or requests discharge of the minor from the digital detoxication center, the minor
shall be discharged by the digital detoxication center.
8. (1) The medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of a digital detoxication center shall
discharge from the digital detoxication center any person admitted under Section 6 as an
independent patient when the medical officer in charge is of the view that the patient has
been cured of the illness immediately or on a request made by such a patient.
(2) Where a minor has been admitted to a digital detoxication center under Section 7
and attains the age of eighteen years during his stay in the digital detoxication center, the
medical officer in charge of the digital detoxication center shall classify him as an independent
patient under Section 6 and all provisions of this Act as applicable to independent patient
who is not minor, shall apply to such person.
(3) The medical officer or psychiatirist-in-charge of a digital detoxication center shall
discharge from the digital detoxication center any person admitted under Section 7 as a minor
patient when the medical officer in charge is of the view that the minor has been cured of the
illness or immediately on request made by the nominated representative.
9. (1) The appropriate Government shall take measures to address the human
resource requirements of mental health services in the country by planning, developing
and implementing educational and training programs in collaboration with institutions of
higher education and training, to increase the human resources available to deliver mental
health interventions and to improve the skills of the available human resources to better
address the needs of persons with technological gadget addiction.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, at the minimum, train all medical officers in
public health care establishments to provide basic and health care to patients suffering
from technological gadget addiction.
(3) The appropriate Government shall make efforts to meet internationally accepted
guidelines for number of mental health professionals on the basis of population, within ten
years from the commencement of this Act.
10. (1) The appropriate Government, as and when required, shall issue guidelines for
Prevention of technological gadget addiction.
(2) The guidelines shall be issued after due consultations with the concerned
stakeholders.
11. The Appropriate Government shall take all measures to ensure effective co-ordination
between services provided by concerned Ministries and Departments such as those dealing
with health, law, home affairs, human resources, social justice, employment, education, women
Discharge of
Patients.
Appropriate
Government
to take
measures as
regard to
human
resource
development
and training,
etc.
Guidelines for
the
prevention of
technological
gadget
addiction.
Co-ordination
within
Appropriate
Government.
10
5
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
and child development, medical education to address issues of technological gadget
addiction.
12. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, establish for the purposes of
this Act, a National Research Centre for Prevention of Technological Gadget Addiction and
the Research Center shall conduct holistic research activities in the field of prevention of
technological gadget addiction.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, specify the headquarters of the
Research Center established by it under such-section (1).
13. (1) From such date, as appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, the education of prevention of technological gadget addiction shall be
given as a compulsory subject in all educational Institutions  from such class onwards as
may be determined by the appropriate Government.
(2) Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government shall
ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be specified,
for teaching prevention of technological gadget addiction in educational Institutions.
14. (1) No photograph or any other information relating to a person with technological
gadget addiction undergoing treatment at a technology detoxication center shall be released
to the media without the consent of the person with technological gadget addiction.
(2) The Right to confidentiality of person with technological gadget addiction shall
also apply to all information stored in technological or digital format in real or virtual space.
15. The appropriate Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite  funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
16. The provisions of this Act and of any rules and orders made thereunder shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force.
17. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
National
Research
Center for
Prevention of
Technological
Gadget
Addiction.
Compulsory
teaching of
prevention of
technological
gadget
addiction in
all
educational
Institutions.
Restriction
on release of
information
in respect of
technological
gadget
addiction.
Provision of
Funds by
Central
Government.
Act to have
Overriding
Effect.
Power to
make Rules.
10
5
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India witnessed a technological revolution in the first decade of the 21st century. The
penetration of technology ensured that even the population living at the bottom of the
economic pyramid can access the fruits of development. The advent of cheap mobile telephony
along with low cost internet enabled that citizens in the country have a greater access to
information and thereby make more informed choices. However like every other modern from
of development, even technology came along with its set of externalities. Over a period of
time, the phenomenon of excessive use of mobile phones, video games and technological
gadgets such as laptops, tablets etc. is being witnessed in the Indian society. This phenomenon
is not just restricted to the urban areas but also in the rural parts of the country. According
to the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) the total number of wireless telephone
subscribers in India was 988.69 million as of August 2015.
The problem of Gadget Addiction in the country is getting serious by the day. The
most harmful effect of the same can be seen on children who are getting addicted by such
technological gadgets and are turning into couch potatoes. Excessive usage of television,
mobile phones, video games and computing devices is not only hampering their physical,
mental and psychological growth in the most productive years of their life but is also making
them totally isolated from the society.
Due to this disorder, people stay glued into their technological gadgets at all times of
the day. May it be while driving or crossing the road or even while performing daily life tasks
such as eating or using the washroom, people just cannot move away from their technological
gadgets. This problem is slowly but steadily penetrating into Indian households and has the
capability of destroying the ethos of cultural traditions of the country. The excessive use of
technological gadgets affects the premise or the foundation of a cohesive and collaborative
society. In a series of surveys conducted by global IT security solutions firm Kaspersky Lab
in the year 2015, 73 percent of the respondents in India were found to be 'digital addicts'. In
the year 2014, a study from 10 countries done by A.T. Kearney Global Research revealed that
53 per cent of Indian respondents surveyed connected to the internet every waking hour
which was higher than the global average of 51 per cent. V ery little surveys has been done on
this front at a national level and hence, there is also a pertinent need to conduct such
independent surveys in the country to estimate the magnitude of the problem of technological
gadgets disorder.
Moreover, the excessive use of technological gadgets is extremely detrimental to the
health of population especially young and growing children. Medical research has found
that the children who spend more time on the internet have high chances of elevated blood
pressure. There is a tendency to use technological gadgets late in the night after switching
off the light and hence, it severely affects the eye sight of human beings. More so, it also
induces sleeplessness among the addict users.
This phenomenon is termed as technological gadget addiction and is being slowly
recognized as a serious problem in various countries. In 2008, China became the first country
in the world to declare Internet addiction a clinical disorder. In the year 2013, South Korean
Government stated that one in every five students is addicted to smartphone usage. In
Japan, a Study published by the Government stated that in the year 2013, 8.1% of approximately
100,000 junior-high and high-school students polled were likely to be "pathologically"
addicted to the Internet. The Government of South Korea has passed a Shutdown Law also
known as Cinderella Law whereby children under the age of 16 are not allowed to access
gaming websites from midnight 12 am till 6 am. In Sanskrit, it is rightly said—
vfrifjp;kr~
voKk which means too much of acquaintance causes disrespect. This very well hols true for
technology and technological gadgets as well.
6

7
Having a mental disorder or an illness is considered as a taboo in Indian society. It is
necessary that the taboo around such problems is removed and a more conducive environment
is created so that the patients suffering from such problems can be treated in a more humane
manner. It is an imperative that technological gadget addiction is considered as a mental
problem in the first place so that required awareness can be created about this problem
persisting in the society. Digital detoxication centers will ensure that the patients suffering
from gadgets or internet overdose are treated in an effective manner so that they can live a
more peaceful and happy life. Moreover, this Bill also mandates the creation of National
Research Centre for prevention of technological gadget addiction in the country. Minimal
research has been done on this front across the globe and hence, through this Research
Center and its robust working, India can make significant contribution in solving the problem
of technological gadget addiction in the world. Compulsory education of prevention of
technological gadget addition will ensure that the most susceptible section of the society to
such disorder-young children will become more aware about this problem and can be better
placed to face the same.
With efforts being made to promote the digital technologies in the country at every
stage by the government, it is also necessary that appropriate laws are created in order to
prevent the ill effects of the over usage of the same. The need of the hour is to follow the age
old time tested Sanskrit adage—
vfr loZ= otZ;sr~—Let excess be avoided everywhere.
Hence this Bill.
VIVEK GUPTA

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for publicity through public media. Clause 5 provides for
the creation of digital detoxication centers. Clause 9 provides for addressing the human
resource requirtment of Mental Health Services and the training needs.
Clause 12 provides for the establishment of National Research Center for Prevention
of Technology Gadget Addiction. A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand and
five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
Clause 15 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. At this stage, it is not possible to estimate the amount
to be incurred. However, the Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees one thousand crore would be involved.
8

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
9

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
Provide for the Prevention of the rising problem of technological gadgets and addiction
among the citizens in the country
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3382RS(S3)—07-12-2015.