THE NATIONAL FINANCIAL SERVICES AUTHORITY
BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Financial  Services Authority and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  National Financial Services Authority Act, 2008.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of October, 2008.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “National Authority” means the National Financial Services Authority
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3.
(b)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification, constitute a National Authority
to be known as the National Financial Services Authority to exercise the powers conferred
on, and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Definitions.
Bill  No.  LV of  2008
5
Constitution
of National
Financial
Service
Authority.
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(2) The National Authority shall consist of the following persons, namely,—
(a)  an economist of eminence and international repute—as Chairperson, who
shall be of the rank of Cabinet Secretary;
(b) not more than three members of the rank of Secretary to the Government of
India to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons having experience
in the fields of finance and business management, banking, monetary, economic and
judiciary:
Provided  if  the powers of the National Authority are vested in an individual, such
individual shall be entitled to the same powers and functions and shall be assisted or
provided with the same  secretarial support and technical expertise as are  available to
National  Authority consisting of more than one person under this Act.
(3) The head office of the National Authority shall be in Delhi.
(4) The National Authority may appoint such number of officers and employees as
it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(5) The qualifications and experience, terms of office and allowances of the
members, officers and employees of the National Authority shall be such, as may be
prescribed.
4.  The powers and functions of the National Authority, shall, inter alia include,—
(i) to advise the Reserve Bank of India on regulating the long term structural features
such as capital inflows including external commercial borrowings, participatory notes,
etc.;
(ii) to consider steps on bringing about financial liberalisation and easing capital
control;
(iii) to consider the advisability of the level of liquidity required to be maintained
by the banks and the cash reserve ratio;
(iv) to advise the Reserve Bank of India on reforms for the financial sector including
banks under its control and private financial institutions and related aspects;
(v) to study and make recommendations on all aspects related to the capital account
liberalisation.
5. The National Authority shall prepare in such manner and form and at such time
in each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report giving a full account  of its
activities and recommendations on the functions assigned to it during the previous
financial year and submit it  to the Central Government.
6. The Central Government shall cause the annual report of the National Authority
to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received before each House of Parliament.
7.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters namely:—
(a) the method of the appointment of the National Authority;
(b) the composition of the National Authority;
(c) the reports of the National Authority to be submitted to the Government;
(d) any matter or matters not expressly provided for in the Act,  but considered
necessary for the appointment and functioning of the National Authority.
Powers and
functions of
National
Authority.
Annual
report.
Annual report
to be laid
before the
Parliament.
Power to
make rules.

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
With the globalisation of the international trade and commerce, large scale inflows
of the capital from the developed to developing countries and also the outsourcing of
business, many disturbing financial trends have become visible. It is necessary to diagnose
them before they damage the economy of the country. At the same time, it is necessary to
control the monetary supply to curb inflation and  other related financial impacts on trade
and commerce.
Hence this Bill.
N. K. SINGH
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute the National Financial Services Authority
and makes provisions for salary and allowances of the Members, officers and employees
of the Authority.
The Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a sum of rupees two hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure
from the Consolidated  Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be incurred.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. As such the
delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Financial Services Authority  and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri N. K. Singh, M.P . )
GMGIPMRND—4761RS(S-5)—29-12-2008.