1
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment in
Act No. 2 of
2007.
THE SCHEDULED TRIBES AND OTHER TRADITIONAL FOREST
DWELLERS (RECOGNITION OF FOREST RIGHTS) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to amend the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of
Forest Rights) Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest
Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights)  Amendment Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Bill, 2006 for clause (o), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(o) “other traditional forest dweller” means any member or community who
has primarily resided in, not later than March 25, 1971, and who depend on the forest
or forests land for bona fide livelihood needs.”
Bill No. LV of 2009
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 18TH DECEMBER, 2009
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is a historical fact that due to partition of the undivided India a number of people
from the then Pakistan had to enter into some states of the country, particularly into West
Bengal, Tripura and Assam, as refugees. As regards the State of Tripura, the area in the plane
terrain is very limited. That is why, quite a good number of these people had to find shelter in
the hilly terrains in the forest area also and got settled there in as the traditional forest
dwellers under compulsion of a historical phenomenon. Later on, there was another historical
event. That was the creation of Bangladesh.  After that, the Indira-Mujib Pact was signed
between India and Bangladesh. According to that Pact, anyone coming from the erstwhile
East Pakistan before 25th March, 1971 is entitled to reside anywhere in India as its citizen.
The very incidence of partition does not satisfy the condition of three generations, because
the period of 75 years has not elapsed after partition of undivided India has taken place. The
People having been forced to leave Pakistan under compelling situation after partition and to
leave East Pakistan any time before March 25, 1971 have had the occasion to live in the forest
land also. So the criteria like ‘at least three generations (75 years)’ do not hold good here in
the broad perspective of the Act.
Secondly, the state of Tripura during kings' period had witnessed many rebellions
against the kings at several periods of time. That is why, the section of tribal people also had
to shift their habitations from here to there on many occasions. The fixity of residence for
more than 75 years in their cases is a difficult task, though their right to forest is an inborn
right. To show a valid document of residence during kings' period or the British period is
practically hard task. It is not operational also. Factually, it is not at all wise to depend on the
information having origins to the kings' period or the British period, this being the periods of
turmoil and uncertainty in most of the times.
These reasons do not refer to Tripura only. The issue of 75 or more years will create
problems in some other states also. The application of this condition will keep a big number
of deserving families out of the benefit of this historic legislation. That is why the amendment
is moved.
Hence this Bill.
MATILAL SARKAR
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE SCHEDULED TRIBES AND OTHER TRADITIONAL FOREST
DWELLERS (RECOGNITION OF FOREST RIGHTS) ACT, 2006.
*** *** *** *** *** ***
(o) “other traditional forest dweller” means any member or community who has for at
least three generations prior to the 13th day of December, 2005 primarily resided in and who
depend on the forest or forests land for bona fide livelihood needs.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause, “generation” means a period comprising
of twenty-five years.
*** *** *** *** *** ***
3

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006
—————
(Shri Matilal Sarkar, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5619RS(S5)—18-12-2009.