Bill No. LV of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE COMPULSORY FOOD WASTE REDUCTION
BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to constitute a Committee for Food Waste Reduction which shall publish a Food Waste
Reduction Strategy for the purposes of reducing food wastage and making it
mandatory for supermarkets and food manufacturers to donate food
and beverage products and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
WHEREAS under article 47 of the Constitution of India it is the duty of the State to raise
the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Food Waste Reduction Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Committee" means the Committee for Food Waste Reduction constituted under
section 3;
Definitions.
5
10

2
(b) "food manufacturer" means a person engaged in the business of manufacturing
any article of food for sale and includes any person who obtains such article from another
person and  packs and labels it for sale or only labels it for such purposes;
(c) "food redistribution organization" means a company registered under Section 8 of
the Companies Act, 2013 and whose primary function is the redistribution of food and
beverage products to vulnerable people;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(e) "supermarkets" means any premises where goods are sold, either by retail or
wholesale, and includes an office, a store room, godown, warehouse or workhouse or work
place for distribution or packaging or repackaging of finished goods is carried out, and
where at least thirty per cent. of the products sold are food and beverage products, and
which has an annual revenue of at least one hundred crore rupees.
(f) "unsold in-date food" means food and beverage products, which have a shelf life
of at least one month, and which are seven days away from their date of expiration.
CHAPTER II
C
OMMITTEE FOR FOOD WASTE REDUCTION
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a "Committee for Food Waste Reduction", within six months of this Act coming into force.
4. (1) The Committee shall consist of:—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst
persons who shall:—
(i) have a thorough understanding and expertise of food waste
management policies in India; and
(ii) be a scholar of repute with advanced publications in the field of food
waste management and such related fields;
(b) six, who shall be appointed by the central government, out of whom:—
(i) two members shall have prior experience of working closely with food
manufacturers and a thorough understanding of their functioning in relation to
food waste management;
(ii) two members who shall have prior experience of working closely with
supermarkets and a thorough understanding of their functioning in relation to
food waste management; and
(iii) two members, who shall have a prior experience of working closely
with food redistribution organizations and thorough understanding of their
functioning in relation to food waste management.
5. (1) The Chairperson and every member of the Committee shall hold office for a term
of two years from the date on which they assume office and shall be eligible for re-
appointment:
Provided that the Chairperson or any member shall not be allowed to hold office after
two terms.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 1, the Chairperson or a member
may give up their position, by giving in writing to the Central Government, a notice of not
less than six months.
5
10
15
25
20
30
35
40
Constitution
of a
Committee
for Food
waste
Reduction.
Composition
of the
Committee.
Terms of
office and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and Members.

3
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other members shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
CHAPTER III
F
UNCTIONS OF THE COMMITTEE FOR FOOD WASTE REDUCTION
6. (1) The Committee for Food Waste Reduction shall publish a "Food Waste Reduction
Strategy", within six months of its establishment.
(2) The Committee shall, in the Food Waste Reduction Strategy under section 3, after
appropriate consultation:—
(a) set a target to halve food wastage in India by 2025;
(b) require supermarkets and food manufacturers to:—
(i) reduce their food waste across their supply chains by thirty per cent
by 2025, from a 2016 baseline;
(ii) make proposals for achieving a reduction of food waste by fifty percent
by 2030, from a 2016 baseline; and
(iii) enter into formal agreements with one or more food redistribution
organizations within three months for the purpose of donating unsold in-date
food to such organizations;
(c) make a list of key indicators by which the objectives under clauses (a) and
(b) will be measured; and
(d) include incentive for individuals, public sector bodies and private sector
corporations to encourage the observance of food waste reduction.
7. The Committee shall, in discharging their duties under section 6, consult relevant
bodies and organizations, including, but not limited to:—
(a) supermarkets;
(b) food manufacturers;
(c) food redistribution organizations.
8. (1) The Committee shall also conduct periodic inspections, within such times as
may be prescribed by the Central Government, of food manufacturers, supermarkets and
food redistribution organizations to ensure their compliance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) If, during the course of the inspection, the Committee finds that the food
manufacturer, supermarket or a food redistribution organization has not complied with any
of the provisions of this Act, it shall take such action as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
CHAPTER IV
D
ISCLOSURE OF LEVELS OF FOOD WASTE
9. The supermarkets and food manufacturers shall be required to —
(a) New liver submit a report to the Committee, within such times as prescribed
by the Central Government, containing details of the level of food waste across their
supply chains and the progress they have made in achieving the targets set under
section 6; and
(b) disclose details of their formal agreements with food redistribution
organizations in the reports, including, but not limited to:—
(i) the number of food redistribution organizations they have entered
into formal agreements with;
Function of
the
Committee.
5
10
15
25
20
30
35
40
45
Consultation
by the
Committee.
Inspections
by the
Committee.
Disclosure of
levels of food
waste.

4
(ii) the amount of food that has been donated to food redistribution
organizations;
(iii) the frequency with which the donations are made; and
(iv) the number of perople that have benefitted from the aforementioned
donations.
(2) The Committee shall submit the reports received under sub-section ( 1) to the
Central Government, who shall cause all such reports to be laid befoe both House of
Parliament.
CHAPTER  V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
10. (1) The Central Government shall during every financial year, prepare, in such form
and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report titled "Food Waste Reduction
Strategy Report; and the annual report shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
(2) The report shall include, among other things:—
(a) the steps that have been taken by the Committee to achieve the targets set
under section 6;
(b) an assessment of whether the Committee shall achieve the targets set under
section 6, and, if not, the steps the Central Government has taken, or plans to take, in
this regard.
11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Committee from time to time, for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
12. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
13. (1) If any difficulty arises in  giving effect to the provisions of this act the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
14. The provisions of this Act or the rules made there under shall be in addition and
not in derogation of any other legislation, rules, order or instructions which provides for
reduction of food waste, donation to food redistribution organisations or any act which
gives effect to Article 47 of the Constitution of India and all connected matters.
Annual
Report.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds
to the
Committee.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make Rule.
5
10
15
25
20
30
35

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Under article 47 of the Constitution of India, it is the duty of the State to raise the
level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health. The article says
that the State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its'
people and the improvement of public health as among its primary duties.
Despite this provision, it is extremely disturbing to note that India is ranked 103 out
of 119 countries in the recently released Global Hunger Index 2018, with hunger levels in the
country being characterized as serious. The report further states that at least one in five
children in India are wasted, which means they have extremely low weight for their height,
reflecting acute under-nutrition. According to the World Economic Forum, India is one of the
most undernourished countries in the world, with around one-third of the world's children
who are undernourished children live in India. Overall, around 190.7 million people are
undernourished in India, which represents 14.5% of the Indian population.
Even after such a dire and serious situation,. the United Nations estimated that
nearly 40% of the food produced in India is either wasted or lost. Food wastage is happening
at every level, from harvesting to consumption. The aim of this bill is to reduce wastage after
food and beverage items have been processed and packaged. By committing the Government
to reduce food wastage by 30 per cent by 2025 and enlisting the support of food manufacturers.
supermarkets and food redistribution organizations for achieving this objective, it is expected
that the levels of malnourishment and food wastage in India will reduce drastically.
Hence, this Bill.
DR. VIKAS MAHATME

6
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Committee for Food Waste
Reduction. Clause 5 provides for composition of the Committee.  Clause 6 provides for the
payment of salary and allowances to the Chairperson and six other members of the Committee.
Clause 8 provides for the Committee to conduct periodic inspections of food manufacturers,
supermarkets and food redistribution organizations. Clause 11 provides that the Central
Government shall grant Funds to the Committee.  The Bill, therefore, if enacted is likely to
involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of rupees fifty crore would be involved per annum.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Clause 5 empowers the Central Government to make regulations for
salary and allowances payable and other terms and conditions of the Chairperson and other
members of the Committee. Clause 8 empowers the Central Government to make appropriate
penalties to be  imposed on food manufacturers, supermarkets or food redistribution
organizations. As the rules and regulations will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to constitute a Committee for Food Waste Reduction which shall publish a Food Waste
Reduction Strategy for the purposes of reducing food wastage and making it
mandatory for supermarkets and food manufacturers to donate food
and beverage products and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
.
————
(Dr. Vikas Mahatme, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—859RS(S3)—24-06-2019.