AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON THE 28TH JUL Y, 2006
THE COMPULSORY EDUCATION BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory education system in the country.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Education  Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may by notifica-
tion in the official Gazette appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "Compulsory Education System" means an educational system, through
which education will be made available to all, whether poor or rich, throughout India,
from primary to senior secondary level.
Short title,
extent  and
commence-
ment .
Definitions.
Bill No.  LV  of  2006
5
10

2
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall implement the Compulsory Educa-
tion system throughout the country in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the aforesaid provisions the appro-
priate Government shall provide to each and every student in country the follow-
ing facilities from primary to senior secondary level in schools:
(a) Total expenditure to be incurred on admission and tuition fee;
(b) Free books, note books and items of stationery;
(c) Free hostel facility, wherever necessary; and
(d) Scholarships in such cases, as may be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Government shall establish and maintain or shall cause to
be established or maintained such number of primary, middle or senior secondary
schools under its jurisdiction, as may be necessary for implementation of the pro-
visions of this Act:
"Provided that the appropriate Government shall establish at least one se-
nior secon-dary school  in each area within its jurisdiction having a population of
one thousand."
5. It shall be the duty of every parent to enroll their children in the school for obtain-
ing education and they shall not prevent them in any way from attending school until the
completion of their education under compulsory education system.
6. No person shall engage any child in a job, which causes hindrance in his or her
attending school to obtain education.
7. If any person including parents of children prevents any boy or girl child from going
to school or causes hindrance or obstruction in any way, he shall be punishable with impri-
sonment, which may extend to six months.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the subject matter dealt with in this Act.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Appropriate
Government
to implement
compulsory
education
system.
Appropriate
Government
to establish
schools.
Duty of the
parents to
enroll their
children in
school.
Children not
to be
engaged in
jobs.
Penalty for
obstruction.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 21A of the Constitution provides that it is the responsibility of  State government
to provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years.
Though the government have taken a number of steps in his direction, yet these are not
sufficient. We have not been able to provide education to all children even after 58 years of
independence.
Competence in reading and writing is a significant factor of  human prospective
capability. Literacy is the first step in getting access to the means of education and having
knowledge and information. Hence, compulsory education should be provided upto senior
secondary level and scholarships may be provided to the children who are good at studies.
It is also necessary to provide free food, dress, books and scholarships to the poor
students so that the parents are inspired to send their wards to school. It is proposed in the
Bill that the parents must send their  children to school otherwise they shall be punished.
This measure will achieve the desired results and the illiteracy will be eradicated from the
country soon.
Hence, this Bill.
JAI  PARKASH  AGGARWAL
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill has the provision of compulsory education from primary level to
higher secondary level. Clause 4 provides that appropriate Govt. shall establish and maintain
schools for providing free education. It is not confirmed at this stage that how many schools
will be required to implement the provisions of the Bill. Some expenditure will be incurred on
establishment of schools, free food and uniform, etc. apart from giving scholarships to the
poor students. The expenditure to be incurred in respect of the schools in Union Territories
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The expenditure to be incurred
in respect of the schools in the States will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Funds
of concerned states. However, some aid will be provided by the Central Government in this
regard.
It is estimated that a sum of rupees fifteen crore may involve as recurring expenditure.
A sum of rupees twenty five crore is also likely to be involved as non-recurring expenditure.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
5

RAJYA   SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory education system in the country.
————
(Shri  Jai Parkash Aggarwal, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1786RS(S-1)—28.07.2006.