THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.
2. In article 103 of the Constitution in clause (2) for the words "Election Commission",
the words "Electoral Council" shall be substituted.
3.  After article 324 of the Constitution the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"324A. (1) There shall be an Electoral Council consisting of the Chairman of the
Council of States, the Speaker of the House of the People, the Chief Election
Commissioner, the Chairman, Law Commission and one eminent jurist to be
appointed by the President.
(2) The Chairman of the Council of States shall be the Chairman of the Electoral
Council.
(3) The Electoral Council shall formulate the electoral policy and shall have the power
to review decisions taken by the Election Commission in the discharge of its functions."
Short title.
SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \ RS \ 3602RS
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 24TH NOVEMBER, 2006
Bill NO. LVI of 2006
Amendment of
article 103.
Insertion of
new article
324A.
Electoral
Council.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The role of  Election Commission as seen during earlier elections has become the
subject matter of intense debate. The decisions of the Election Commission have been both
criticised or acclaimed by the political parties, groups depending upon their political
ideologies.
Article 324 of the Constitution vests in the Election Commission the power of
superintendence, direction and control of elections which is inherently an administrative
power. The Election Commission cannot encompass policy decisions which impinge on the
functions of the executive and legislature. Even the judicial intervention had to be sought to
resolve certain controversial decisions of the Commission. This has created an unsavoury
and anomalous situation.
The time has come to review the provisions of the Part XV of the Constitution. An
"Electoral Council" consisting of the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, Speaker, Lok Sabha,
Chief Election Commissioner, the Chairman, Law Commission and one eminent jurist should
be constituted to review the decisions of the Election Commission. It will enhance transparency
and credibility of the role of the Election Commission.
The Bill seeks to  achieve the above objectives.
MANOHAR  JOSHI
2

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of Electoral Council consisting of
the Chairman of the Council of States, the Speaker of the House of the People, the
Chief Election Commissioner, the Chairman, Law Commission and one eminent jurist to be
appointed by the President. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees
ten lakh per annum.
It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five lakh.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
103. ( 1) * * * * * * * *
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall obtain the
opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.
* * * * * * * * * *
Decision on
questions as to
disqualifications
of members.

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Manohar Joshi, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3602RS(S-5)—24.11.2006.