1
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
THE FREE AND COMPULSORY PRIMARY , SECONDARY , HIGHER
AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory primary, secondary, higher and technical education
to every child in order to eradicate their illiteracy and overall development and for
deterrent punishment for those who prevent the children from going to school and
pursuing their studies in any manner and for  matters connected therewith  and
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Free and Compulsory Primary, Secondary, Higher and
Technical Education Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012
Bill No. LVI of 2012
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "child" means any human being who is between the age group of four to
twenty-five years;
(c) "higher and technical education" means education beyond senior secondary
level and include colleges, universities, academies, seminaries and professional schools
in the field of law, theology, medicine, technology, business, music and art;
(d) "parent"  in relation to a child include his father and mother, guardian and
every person who has the actual custody of the child for the time being;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) "primary and secondary education" means education in a school from primary
to senior secondary level or class.
3.  (1) Notwithstanding any custom, usage or belief of any section of the society, every
parent shall compulsorily admit his children in a school, on completion of four years of age
in order to enable him to get primary education and shall not restrain him in any manner from
attending the school.
(2) For the purposes of section 3, no parent or person shall engage a child in any
household job or employ a child in a manner which may prevent the children from attending
his school and deprive him from primary, secondary, higher and technical education.
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 3, shall
be guilty of an offence under this Act.
4.  (1) The appropriate Government shall provide free and compulsory primary,
secondary, higher and technical education to every child who is ordinarily residing within
its territorial jurisdiction.
(2) For the purposes of sub-secion (1) of section 5, the appropriate Government shall
establish such number of schools within its territorial jurisdiction as it may deem necessary
and for the physically challenged child, special schools at such place or places as may deem
necessary with such facilities, as may be prescribed.
(3) If any child intends to pursue higher studies beyond the primary and secondary
education levels, the appropriate Government shall provide free higher and technical
education to such child with such facilities, as may be prescribed.
(4) The appropriate Government shall also provide the following facilities from primary
to higher and technical education in schools:—
(i) free books, note books and stationery items;
(ii) free school uniforms;
(iii) free hostel facility and meals;
(iv) free vocational training wherever necessary; and
(v) scholarships in such cases, as may be prescribed.
Compulsorily
admission of
children in
school and
prohibition
on their
employment.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
free and
compulsory
primary,
secondary,
higher and
technical
education to
every child.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
Central
Government
to provide
necessary
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
Offences to
be cognizable.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by Parliament
in this behalf, provide necessary funds, from time to time, for the purposes of this Act.
6. (1) If any parent of a child, for any reason whatsoever, does not admit, prevents,
restrains or in any manner obstructs the child from receiving primary, secondary, higher and
technical education, the parent shall be liable to simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months and also with a fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever employs a child resulting in obstructing him from attending the school
for primary, secondary, higher and technical education shall be liable to imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than two years but may extend to five years and also with fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the
offences under this Act shall be cognizable.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law applicable to children.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Penalty.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 21A of the Constitution provides that it is the responsibility of the State to
provide free and compulsory education to all children of age of six to fourteen years. Although,
Government has taken many steps in this regard but they are inadequate. We have not been
able to provide education to all children even after sixty-five years of independence.
The ability to read and write is an essential element of human capability. Literacy is the
first step towards acquiring tools of learning and opening the doors for knowledge and
information. Education expands opportunity for human beings, empowers them to resist
oppression and to claim their rights.
Our education system is very expensive and all citizens cannot afford it. Poor parents
with meagre incomes are unable to send their children to school for primary, secondary,
higher and technical education. Therefore, it is necessary to provide textbooks, scholarships,
hostel facilities, etc. to the poor students so that their parents are encouraged to send them
to school and to pursue higher studies thereafter. Therefore, it is necessary to provide for
free and compulsory education at all levels including primary, secondary, higher and technical
education with scholarships to meritorious students.
Hence this Bill.
A VINASH  RAI  KHANNA

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for free and compulsory education to child by opening
schools, special schools, etc. Clause 5 provides that Central Government shall provide
necessary funds for the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees twenty thousand
crore may involve as recurring expenditure per year. A sum of rupees ten thousand crore may
also involve as non-recurring expenditure.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation
of legislative power is of normal character.

GMGIPMRND—3969RS (S3)—07.12.2012.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory primary, secondary, higher and technical education to
every child in order to eradicate their illiteracy and overall development and for deterrent
punishment for those who prevent the children from going to school and pursuing
their studies in any manner and for  matters connected therewith  and incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri Avinash Rai Khanna, M.P .)