AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. LVI of 2024 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act,2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
2. In article 124 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following
proviso and Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
Amendment of 
article 124. 
“Provided that such number of Judges, as nearly as may be,
equal to the proportion of the population of the Scheduled Castes, the

2 
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes to the total 
population of the country, shall be appointed from amongst the 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and 
the Other Backward Classes.  
          Explanation.—In this article, the expression “population” 
means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of 
which the relevant figures have been published.” 
 
5 
Amendment of 
article 216. 
3. In article 216 of the Constitution, the following proviso and
Explanations shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that such number of Judges, as nearly as may be,
equal to the proportion of the population of the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes to the total
population of the State, shall be appointed from amongst the persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
Other Backward Classes.
Explanation I..—In this article, “State” includes all States and
Union Territories that share a common High Court.
Explanation II.—In this article, the expression “population”
means the population as ascertained at the last preceding Census of
which the relevant figures have been published.”
10 
\15 
2
0 

3 
STATEMENT OF O BJECTS AND REASONS 
          Even after 75 years of affirmative action, the disadvantaged and 
marginalised communities in the country are not adequately represented in the 
higher judiciary. As the guardian of the Constitution and the last resort to the 
millions of citizens, the Supreme Court of India influences the lives of each and 
everyone in the country. Therefore, it is imperative that judges represent the 
broadest spectrum of society. 
          Since independence, a very small number of judges belonging to 
marginalised communities  were able to serve as judges of the Supreme Court 
and High Courts. Caste -based reservation has been an integral part of the Indian 
principle of equality, therefore, its absence in the superior judiciary is 
unconvincing and needs to be rectified. Without a  constitutional provision for 
reservation, it is highly improbable for persons from these communities to reach 
such eminent positions through natural means. Further, the existence of 
reservation in subordinate courts is reason enough for its introduction in higher 
courts as well. 
          India is a highly diverse country and its diversity should also be reflected 
in the higher judiciary. A more inclusive judiciary is also more likely to foster 
balanced and comprehensive discussions on matters related to c aste, gender, 
access, and equality. The first -hand knowledge of the issues pertaining to 
backward classes would also help in developing a more advanced understanding 
of the caste-based problems in the country. 
          In the absence of a formal and written framework, representation in the 
higher judiciary could not be expanded on its own. A constitutional mandate in 
this regard would ensure that the superior courts are never underrepresented. 
Previously, Parliamentary Committe es and the National Commission for 
Scheduled Castes have also recommended similar provisions for the appointment 
of judges in the Supreme Court and High Courts. It is of utmost importance that 
equitable representation and fair play in the higher judiciary is secured through 
the channels of the Constitution. 
Hence, this Bill. 
MANOJ KUMAR JHA 

4 
 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
                                 *                          *                           *                             *                     *                     
Establishment and 
constitution of 
Supreme Court. 
 
 
 
Constitution of 
High Courts. 
 
 
  
 
 124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice 
of India and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more 
than seven other Judges. 
*                          *                           *                             *                     * 
216. Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such other Judges 
as the President may from time to time deem it necessary to appoint. 
*                          *                           *                             *                     * 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

RAJ
YA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
_______ 
(Shri Manoj Kumar Jha, M.P.)
RS-P&PS—PMB(E)─067─10.02.2025 