Bill No. LVI  of  2013
THE NALANDA UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to amend the Nalanda University Act, 2010.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Nalanda University (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the Nalanda University Act, 2010 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
the preamble,—
(a)  in paragraph 3, after the words, "State of Bihar", the words "as a
contemporary University inspired by the academic excellence and global vision of the
historic Nalanda" shall be inserted;
(b) after paragraph 3, the following paragraph shall be inserted, namely:—
“A
ND WHEREAS, as the University progresses, it is intended to conclude
an inter-governmental agreement, and encourage Member States of the East
Asia Summit to become parties to the said agreement.”.
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of preamble.
39 of 2010.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA  SABHA
5
10

2
3.  In section 7 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1)—
(i) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(c) five members, one each to be nominated by five Member States
of the East Asia Summit, invited by the Government of India with the
concurrence of the Visitor;";
(ii) in clause (d), for the words "rank of Secretary", the words "rank of
Secretary dealing with East Asia Summit Member States" shall be substituted;
(iii) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(g) five persons of eminence to be recommended by the Governing
Board and nominated  with the approval of the Visitor;";
(iv) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(h) two members of the academic faculty of the University
nominated by the Vice-Chancellor.";
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the words, brackets and letters "clauses ( c) to (g)",
the words, brackets and letters "clauses ( c), (e), (g) and (h)" shall substituted;
(c) in sub-section (3), for the words "The Chancellor", the words "The Chancellor
or in his absence, any member nominated by him from the Governing Board" shall be
substituted;
(d) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(4) The Registrar of the University shall be the Secretary of the
Governing Board.".
4. In section 8 of the principal Act, in the proviso to sub-section ( 2), for the words,
brackets and letters "clauses (c) to (g)", the words, brackets and letters "clauses (c) to (h)"
shall be substituted.
5. In section 9 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1),—
(a) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(
a) to meet and set global standards of academic excellence and
research and enable capacity building in the domain of philosophy,
language, history and other areas of higher learning;";
(b) in clause (b), for the words "promotion of", the words "promotion of
global inclusiveness" shall be substituted;
(c) clause (c) shall be omitted;
(d) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(j) to encourage other interested countries, who are not members
of the East Asia Summit, to collaborate in developing the Nalanda
University as an international centre of excellence.";
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "from each of the Member States", the
words "from the Member States, Institutions and Organisations" shall be substituted;
(iii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), the
Government of India may meet both capital and recurring expenditure of the
University to the extent required.".
Amendment
of section 7.
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment
of section 9.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. In section 10 of the principal Act,—
(a) for clause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(ii) to set up a consortium of international partners in furtherance of the
objectives of the University;”;
(b) in clause ( ix), for the words “Readerships and Lecturerships”, at both the
places where they occur, the words “Associate Professorships and Assistant
Professorships” shall be substituted;
(c) in clause ( xxiii), for the word “Ordinances”, the word “Statutes” shall be
substituted;
(d) in clause ( xxiv), for the words “to borrow”, the words “to borrow funds”
shall be substituted;
(e) after clause (xxviii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(xxix) to appoint persons working in any other University or academic
institution, including those located outside the country, as faculty of the
university for a specified period.".
7. In section 11 of the principal Act, for the words “irrespective of gender”, the words
"irrespective of nationality, gender" shall be substituted.
8. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the proviso shall be omitted.
9. In section 13 of the principal Act, after clause ( 2), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(2A) the Deans;
(2B) the Provosts;”.
10. After section 15 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“15A. The Deans shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and
conditions of service and exercise such powers and perform such functions as may
be prescribed by the Statutes.
15B. The Provosts shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and
conditions of service and exercise such powers and perform such functions as may
be prescribed by the Statutes.”.
11. For section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted and
shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 25th November, 2010, namely:—
“21. The University, members of the academic staff and, where applicable, their
dependents or members of the family shall enjoy such privileges and immunities as
the Central Government may, after entering into an agreement with the University
from a date not earlier than the date of the commencement of this Act, notify under
section 3 of the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947.”.
12. In section 22 of the principal Act, for clause ( 3), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(3) the Councils of Schools of Studies;”.
13. In section 24 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (2)—
Amendment
of
section 10.
Amendment
of
section 11.
Amendment
of
section 12.
Amendment
of
section 13.
Insertion of
new sections
15A and 15B.
Deans.
Provosts.
46 of 1947.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 21.
Privileges
and
immunities
of
University,
academic
staff, etc.
Amendment
of
section 22.
Amendment
of
section 24.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(i) for clause (iv), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(iv) Economics and Management;”;
(ii) in clause (v), for the word "Langauges", the word “Linguistics” shall
be substituted;
(iii) after clause (vi), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(via) Information Sciences and Technology;”;
(b) in sub-section ( 3), for the word “Board”, the word “Council” shall be
substituted;
(c) in sub-section (4), for the words “Boards of School”, the words “Councils of
Schools” shall be substituted.
14. In section 27 of the principal Act, for clause ( k), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(k) Schools of Studies, members of their Councils and the powers and functions
of such Councils;”.
15. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “shall also be
submitted”, the words “shall be sent” shall be substituted.
16. In section 32 of the principal Act, sub-section (6) shall be omitted.
17.  In section 42 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 25th
November, 2010, namely:—
“(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations shall include the
power to give retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement
of this Act, to the Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations or any of them but no such
retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, Ordinance or Regulation so as to
prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, Ordinance or
Regulations may be applicable.”.
18. In section 43 of the principal Act,—
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(a) the first Registrar, the first Finance Officer, the first Deans and the
first Provosts shall be appointed by the Governing Board, as it may deem fit,
and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;”;
(ii) clause (b) shall be omitted.
Amendment
of
section 27.
Amendment
of
section 31.
Amendment
of
section 32.
Amendment
of
section 42.
Amendment
of
section 43.
5
10
15
20
25
30

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Nalanda University Act, 2010 (the Act) was enacted to implement the decisions
arrived at the Second East Asia Summit held on the 15th January, 2007, in the Philippines
and subsequently at the Fourth East Asia Summit held on the 25th October, 2009 in Thailand
for the establishment of the Nalanda University in the State of Bihar as an international
institution for the pursuit of intellectual, philosophical, historical and spiritual studies and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
2.  The Act came into force on the 25th November, 2010.  The President of India is the
Visitor of the University and Professor Amartya Sen is the Chancellor and Chairman of the
Governing Board.  The University has commenced its operations from its office in
New Delhi. The construction of the buildings that will come up in Phase I is expected to
begin in the last quarter of 2013-14.  Teaching in the Schools of Ecology and Environment
Studies and Historical Studies is expected to begin from leased premises in September, 2014.
Teaching in all the seven schools will commence in the academic year 2017-18.
3. It has become necessary to amend certain provisions of the Act in order to create
an even better governance structure for the University than exists presently, and help
speed up the project.  At present, there is no provision in the Act to extend privileges and
immunities provided under the Act to the University, in addition to its academic staff so as
to enable from the date of the commencement of the Act.  A provision is required the
Government of India to meet not only the University’s capital expenditure but  its recurring
expenditure as well.  The Act does not  provide for retrospective operation of the Statutes,
Ordinances and Regulations from the date of commencement of the Act, which will provide
the University a legal basis for appointments, and for financial decisions made before the
Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations came into force.
4. In view of the above, it becomes necessary to amend the Nalanda University Act,
2010 by  the Nalanda University (Amendment) Bill, 2013, which, inter alia, provides for the
following, namely:—
(a) to encourage Member States of the East Asia Summit to conclude an inter-
governmental agreement with a view to providing further substantive basis for the
University to be treated as an international organisation;
(b) to amend section 7 of the Act relating to the “Governing Board” so as to
increase the number of persons of eminence and to include two members from the
academic faculty of the University on the Governing Board;
(c) to insert a new sub-section ( 3) to section 9 of the Act so as to enable the
Government of India to meet the University’s capital and recurring expenditure to the
extent required;
(d) to insert new sections 15A and 15B so as to make a provision for the
appointment of Deans and Provosts;
(e) to substitute section 21 of the Act relating to “privileges and immunities” so
as to extend the said privileges and immunities to the University, in addition to the
members of the academic staff, under the Headquarters Agreement, applicable from
the date of commencement of the Act; and
(f) to insert a new sub-section (3) to section 42 so as to empower the University
to bring its Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations  in to force with retrospective effect
from the date of commencement of the Act.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; SALMAN KHURSHID
The 13th August, 2013.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section ( 2) of section 9 to provide that the
Nalanda University shall be a non-profit public-private partnership, which shall seek support
from each of the member States and from other sources but shall be autonomous and
accountable to the Governing Board.  Accordingly, the University’s funding is based on the
contributions from the Government of India, and from amongst the Member States of the
East Asia Summit, in addition to benefactions, donations and gifts received in accordance
with the regulations made by the Governing Board.  Private donations, international
contributions from other foreign governments and member countries of the East Asia Summit
are expected on a voluntary basis.
2. Clause 5 of the Bill further seeks to insert new sub-section (3) to said section so as
to provide that the Government of India may meet both capital and recurring expenditure of
the University to the extent required.  To minimise the burden of recurring expenditure on
the Government, the University will take steps to reduce recurring expenditure, and create
a revenue model whereby it is able to meet recurring expenditure to the maximum extent
possible.
3. Educational Consultants India Ltd. had prepared a detailed Project Report, under
which the capital expenditure projected between 2010-2011 and 2021-2022 is Rs. 2154.35
crores, and the recurring expenditure which begins from 2014-2015 is Rs. 1,378.27 crores.
On the basis of the said Report, the Ministry of External Affairs had submitted the Expenditure
Finance Committee Memorandum for the consideration of the Expenditure Finance Committee
(EFC).  Based on the observations of the EFC, efforts are being made to significantly reduce
both capital and recurring expenditure.  Taking into account the inputs, the University is
working on a revenue model to deal with recurring expenditure.  In parallel, it has constituted
an External Endowment Committee to raise funds through Public-Private Partnership, and is
also preparing estimates of capital and recurring expenditure beyond 2021-2022.  Taking
into account the inputs due to be received from the University, the EFC proposal will be
further refined and a revised proposal for continuous budgetary support until 2021-2022
will be sent to the EFC.  Thereafter, the proposal will be brought before the Cabinet separately.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 15A which provides that the Deans
shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and conditions of service and exercise
such powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed by the statutes. The said
clause  of the Bill further seeks to insert a new section 15B which provides that the Provosts
shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and conditions of service and exercise
such powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
2. The matters in respect of which the Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations may be
made are matters of procedure and administrative detail.  The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE NALANDA UNIVERSITY ACT, 2010
(39 OF 2010)
*****
A
ND WHEREAS, it is considered expedient to make provision for implementing the
decisions arrived at in the aforesaid East Asia Summits for establishment of the Nalanda
University in the State of Bihar and declare it to be an institution of national importance.
*****
7.  (1) There shall be a Governing Board of the University consisting of the following
persons as its members, namely:—
*****
(c) five members from amongst the Member States which provide maximum
financial assistance during a period of three years to be nominated by the Member
States;
(d) one member, not below the rank of Secretary in the Ministry of External
Affairs, to be nominated by the Central Government;
*****
(g) three members from amongst the persons being renowned academician or
educationist, to be nominated by the Central Government.
(2) Each member of the Governing Board referred to in clauses ( c) to ( g) of
sub-section (1), shall hold office for a fixed term of three years.
(3) The Chancellor shall be the Chairperson of the Governing Board.
(4) The member, being the Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs, nominated
under clause (d) of sub-section (1), shall be the Member-Secretary of the Governing Board.
*****
8.  (1) **** *
(2) The Governing Board shall exercise such powers as may be prescribed by the
Statutes:
Provided that the Nalanda Mentor Group shall exercise the powers and discharge the
functions of the Governing Board for a period of one year or till such time the members
referred to in clauses (c) to (g) of sub-section (1) of section 7 are nominated, whichever is
earlier.
9. (1) The objectives of the University shall be—
(a) to impart education and to enable research towards capacity building of the
Member States in the domain of ancient science (in particular, practised in the Nalanda
several centuries ago), philosophy, language, history and other areas of higher learning
vital for improving the quality of life;
(b) to contribute to the promotion of regional peace and vision by bringing
together the future leaders of the East Asia, who by relating to their past history can
enhance their understanding of each others’ perspectives and to share that
understanding globally;
(c) to harmonise the academic standards and accreditation norms in teaching,
research and curriculum that are acceptable to all Member States;
*****
Governing
Board.
Powers and
functions of
Governing
Board.
Objectives of
University.
8

9
Powers of
University.
University
open to all
persons.
(2) The University shall be non-profit public-private partnership, which shall seek
support from each of the Member States and from other sources but shall be autonomous
and accountable to the Governing Board.
10. The University shall have the following powers, namely:—
*****
(ii) to set up a consortium of international partners and friendly countries in
furtherance of the objects of the University;
*****
(ix) to institute Professorships, Readerships and Lecturerships and other
teaching and academic positions, required by the University and to appoint persons
to such Chairs, Professorships, Readerships and Lecturerships and other teaching
and academic positions;
*****
(xxiii) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts in accordance with the
Ordinances and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any property, movable or
immovable, including trust and endowment properties, for the purposes or objects of
the University and to invest funds in such manner as it deems fit;
(xxiv) to borrow, with the approval of the Governing Board.
*****
11. The University shall be open to all persons irrespective of gender, caste, creed,
disability, ethnicity or socio-economic background.
12.  (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University:
Provided that the President may, by order, nominate any person to be the Visitor and
such person so nominated shall hold office for such term, not exceeding five years as may
be specified in the order and the person so nominated shall exercise the powers and
discharge duties of the Visitor.
*****
13. The following shall be the officers of the University:—
*****
21. The members of the academic staff and, where applicable, their dependents or
members of the family, shall enjoy such privileges and immunities as the Central Government
may, after entering into an agreement with the University, notify under section 3 of the
United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947.
22. The following shall be the authorities of the University:—
* * * * *
(3) the Boards of Schools of Studies;
24. (1) * *  *  *   *
* * * * *
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision contained in
sub-section (1), the University shall have the following Schools, namely:—
* * * * *
(iv) Business Management in relation to Public Policy and Development Studies;
(v) Language and Literature;
Visitor.
Officers of
University.
Privileges
and
immunities
of academic
staff, etc.
Authorities
of the
University.
The School
of Studies.
46 of 1947.

10
Statutes.
* * * * *
(3) Every School of Studies shall have a Board comprising of such members as may be
prescribed by the Statutes.
(4) The powers and functions of the Boards of School of Studies shall be prescribed
by the Statutes.
* * * * *
27.  Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(k) Schools of Studies, members of its Board and the power and functions of
such Board;
* * * * *
31. (1)*  *  *  *  *
(3) A copy of the annual report so prepared shall also be submitted to the Member
States and exhibited on the website of the University.
32. (1)* * * * *
(6) A copy of the audited annual accounts shall also be submitted to the Member
States.
* * * * *
43. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes,—
(a) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the
Governing Board and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three
years;
(b) the first Board of School of Studies shall consist of not more than eleven
members, who shall be nominated by the Governing Board and they shall hold office
for a term of three years;
* * * * *
Annual
report.
Transitional
provisions.
Annual
accounts,
etc.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Nalanda University Act, 2010.
————
(Shri Salman Khurshid, Minister of External Affairs)
GMGIPMRND—2143RS(S4)—20.08.2013.