THE PREVENTION OF FEMALE INFANTICIDE BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for measures to stop female infanticide and make it punishable with stringent
penalty and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Female Infanticide  Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) ''girl child" means a girl upto the age of ten years; and
(ii) ''prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Whoever causes, or does any act with the intention of causing death of a girl child
or allows a sick girl  child to die by deliberately not giving timely and proper medical assistance
or does any act  or  neglects the care of the girl child which may result in her death, commits
the offence of female infanticide.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. LVI of 2010
Definitions.
Female
infanticide.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH AUGUST, 2010

2
4. (1) Whenever a girl child is born or a girl child below ten years of age dies, it shall be
the duty of the parents or the guardian of the child to inform the nearest health centre, run by
the Government or such authority as may be prescribed for this purpose, about the birth or
death of the girl child.
(2) In case of death of a girl child, the child shall not be cremated or buried unless the
health centre or such other authority as may be prescribed for this purpose, has caused an
investigation into the cause of the death of the child.
(3) The investigation under sub-section ( 2) shall be completed within twenty-four
hours from the time information about death is received.
5. If after a preliminary investigation into the cause of the death of a girl child, any
person is found to have committed the offence of infanticide, he shall be taken into custody
at once.
6. Any person who commits or abets the commission of the offence of female infanticide
or withholds information about the death of the girl child, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to ten years and also with fine of rupees one lakh:
Provided that any person who withholds information about the birth of a girl child
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months.
7.  Any inquiry or investigation into female infanticide and filing of reports or a suit in
a court of law shall be completed within a period of three months from the date of the death
of the girl child.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, the
offence committed under this Act shall be non-bailable.
9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Indian Penal Code 1860 or
any other law for the time being in force.
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Information
about birth or
death of a girl
child to be
given to
authorities.
Investigation
and filing of
report.
Arrest of
person
committing
female
infanticide.
Punishment.
Offence to be
non-bailable.
2 of 1974.
Act to have
over-riding
effect. 45 of 1860.
Power to
make rules.

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
With the menace of dowry system continuing in the country, birth of a girl child in an
ordinary family is considered to be very inauspicious and a curse. A girl child is considered
a burden by poor families. As a result, female infanticide is widely prevalent in the country.
Thousands of innocent girls are dying prematurely as a result of inadequate health care and
indifferent attitude on the part of their families. It is high time that this dastardly act is
brought to an end. However, in the absence of a stringent legislation, it is quite difficult to
put an end to this evil practice.
It is, therefore, proposed to bring forward a legislation providing for severe punishment
to those who commit female infanticide in order to eradicate this malady from the country.
Hence this Bill.
MOHAN SINGH

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers  the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—4363RS(S3)—27-08-2010.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for measures to stop female infanticide and make it punishable with stringent
penalty and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P .)