AS INTRODUCED IN THE Rasya SABHA

Bill No. LVI of 2000

THE UNIVERSALISATION OF GIRLS
EDUCATION BILL, 2000

A
BILL

‘to provide for free and compulsory primary education for all the girls of school going age

throughout the country and for their welfare in order to eradicate illiteracy among
them and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1, (7) This Act may be called the Universalisation of Girls Education Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by

5 notification in the official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—

(७) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the State Government
and in all other cases the Central Government;

(b) “girl” means any female human being who is below the age of sixteen
years;

(c) “parent” in relation to a girl includes a guardian and every person who has
the actual custody of the girl;

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Comuptsory
primary
education
to gitls.

Appropriate
Govern-
ment tb:
establis|
requisite
number of
Primary
schools.

Establish-
ment of
special
schools by
appropriate
Govern-
ment.

Free and
compulosry
education
for girls.

Parents of
girls to
admit her
for primary
education
in a school.

Girls not to
be engaged
in house-
hold chores
so as to
prevent
them from
getting
primary
education.
Vocational
training to
girls.

2
(४) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(९) “primary education” means education upto eighth class in a school;

(0 “school” includes every educational institution imparting primary education
or higher education to the children.

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
it shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide every girl residing in its
territorial jurisdiction —

(a) free and compulsory primary education:

Provided that if the girl intends to pursue higher studies beyond the
primary stage the appropriate Government shall provide free higher education
to such girl.

(6) Stationery helpful to her studies such as books, note-books, writing materials
etc. free of cost;

(c) school uniform, free of cost;
(d) free hostel facilities and scholarships in deserving cases.

~

4, It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to establish and maintain
or cause to be established or maintained such primary schools within its territorial
jurisdiction as the appropriate Government may deem necessary so as to provide
compulsory primary education to every girl residing in such jurisdiction.

5. The appropriate Government shall establish and maintain or cause to be
established or maintained such number of special schools for physically handicapped
or mentally retarded girls at such place or places within its territorial jurisdiction as
the appropriate Government may deem necessary.

6. The appropriate Government shall provide free and compulsory education to
every girl who is ordinarily residing within its jurisdiction.

7. (1) Notwithstanding any custom, usage or belief every parent shall admit his girl
child on completion of five years of age to a primary school and shall not restrain the girl
from attending the school. ‘

(2) If the girl is physically handicapped or mentally retarded it shall be the duty of the
parent to admit her, on completion of five years of age to a special school established under
section 5.

8. No parent or person shall engage a girl child in household chores or employ a girl
child in a manner which shall prevent her from attending a primary school.

9. The appropriate Government shall, in addition to the compulsory and free primary
education, also provide training to the girls in vocations like home science, tailoring,
painting, doll making, knitting and weaving, food preservation, interior decoration, nursing,
ete.

20

25

30

35


1 of 1974.

3

10. (7) If any parent of a girl, for any reasons, prevents, restrains or otherwise obstructs
his girl child from receiving primary education in school, such a parent shall be liable to
simple imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to
ten thousand rupees or with both.

(2) If any parent of a girl or any person contravenes the provisions of section 8, he
shall be liable to imprisonment which may extend to six years or with fine which may
extend to twenty thousand rupees or with both.

11. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973,
the offences under this Act shall be cognizable.

12. The Central Government may, by notification in the, Official gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Penalty.

Offences to
be cogniza-
ble.

Power to
make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It is an irony that on the one hand our country rather the whole world is heading
towards 21st century achieving many scientific advancements but on the other hand the
girls are the most neglected and unwanted lot throughout the world in general and in our
country in particular. This is evident from the fact that most of the families do not want that
a daughter be born in the family. Due to scientific development the femate foetus is
detected at the early pregnancy stages and aborted. However, despite every effort if the girl
is born she is always neglected. The living conditions of girls in orthodox families
particularly in rural areas are worst. While the male children get best attention the girls are
treated shabbily. The boys are sent to best of the schools for education but the girls are not
sent to schools at all. In the cities and metropolices the situation has improved a lot but in
the rural areas the situation is very grim. The girls are denied even primary education. They
are supposed to do the household chores and married of tenderage to contribute in the
population explosion. As such most of the girls remain illiterate throughout their lives and
remain dependent on others. Due to their illiteracy they are generally cheated and denied
the property rights fraudulently by getting their thumb impression. Even a letter is required
to be read by someone, to her. This results in illiteracy to her children also. It is a hard fact
that if a girl is literate, she will certainly teach to her children and will not allow them to
remain illiterate.

Hence it is necessary that girls should be given compulsory primary education to
eradicate illiteracy from the country. Being a welfare State it is the holy duty of the State to
come forward in this field and educate the girls through compulsory and free education.
The State should provide adequate number of schools for this purpose. The parents of the
girls should be forced to send them to schools or they should be punished to have a
deterrent effect on others. Then oily the girls can be educated and illiteracy among the
girls can be removed from our country.

Hence this Bill.
SURESH PACHOURI


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that appropriate Government shall establish requisite
number of primary schools within its jurisdiction. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the
establishment of special schools by the appropriate Government. The Bill if enacted and
brought into operation will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a sum of rupees one thousand crores from the Consolidated Fund of India
per annum as recurring expenditure.

It is also likely to involve a sum of rupees five hundred crores from the Consolidated
Fund of India as non-recurring expenditure.

Hence this Bill.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for free and compulsory primary education for all the girls of school going age
throughout the country and for their welfare in order to eradicate illiteracy among them
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4513RS—9-11-2000