AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. LVI of 2025 
THE STRAY AND WILD ANIMAL ATTACKS (PREVENTION 
A
ND WELFARE) BILL, 2025 
A
 
BILL 
t
o provide for the prevention of harm to human beings and loss of lives and 
property from stray and wild animal attacks, establish mechanisms 
 for rapid emergency response and victim compensation, and 
to regulate the welfare, population control, vaccination, 
sheltering, and rehabilitation of such animals 
through humane and scientific practices, 
 and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of  
India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Stray and Wild Animal Attacks (Prevention
and Welfare) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
n
otification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. (a) “appropriate Government” means, in the case of a State, the Government
of that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “designated officer” means an officer appointed by the Central
Government or the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette,
for such local area or for such functions as may be specified in the
notification;
(c) “domestic or pet animal” means any animal that is tamed or bred in
captivity and is ordinarily kept or intended to be kept in a household, farm,
or other human environment for companionship, work, utility, or livelihood;
(d)
“Fund” means the Stray and Wild Animal Victim Compensation Fund
established under section 14 of this Act;
(e) “incident” means any reported case of injury, fatality, or medically
verified threat to a human being caused by an attack or aggression by a stra y
or wild animal;
(f) “local authority” means,—
(i) a Municipality or a Panchayat, as defined in clauses (e) and (f)
of article 243P of the Constitution, which is respon sible for sanitation 
in its area of jurisdiction; 
(ii) a Cantonment Board constituted under section 10 of the
Cantonments Act, 2006; and 
(iii) a railway authority of that sub- division, district, or any such
part of India; 
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed under the rules made under this Act;
(h) “Scheme” means the Scheme for payment of compensation to persons
affected by incidents under this Act framed under section 10;
(i) “shelter home” means a facility established, maintained, or recognised by
the State Animal Welfare Board, or in the case of a Union Territory, by the
Union Territory Administration or the Animal Welfare Board of India, for
the temporary or long-term housing, medical treatment, post-operative care,
quarantine, and rehabilitation of stray animals, in accordance with the
standards and guidelines prescribed under this Act or the rules made
thereunder;
(j) “stray animal” means a dog, or any other animal species as may be
notified by the Central Government from time to time, found in a public
place without supervision, care, or identifiable ownership;
(k) “Unit” means the Stra y and Wild Animal Response Unit established by
the appropriate Government in every distr ict of the country under section 3;
and
(l)
“wild animal” means any animal as defined under the Wildlife
(Protection) Act, 1972, which is found in human-inhabited or developed
areas outside its notified or natural habitat.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
41 of  2006. 
53 of 1972. 
C HAPTER II  
STRAY AND WILD ANIMAL RESPONSE UNIT 
E
stablishment of 
Stray and Wild 
Animal 
Response Unit. 
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the official
Gazette, establish, in every district, a Stray and Wild Animal Response
Unit within six months from the date of commencement of this Act, to
carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Unit shall function as a nodal body for coordination between the
Department of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services, the Forest
Department, the Health Department, local authorities, and such other
authorities and stakeholders, as may be required from time to time for the
effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
45 
50 

3 
5
 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
(3) The composition of each Unit shall be as follows—
(a) a veterinary practitioner registered under the relevant law
for the time being in force, to be nominated by the District 
Administration in such manner as may be prescribed, who shall serve 
as the Chairperson;  
(b) one officer not below such rank as may be prescribed, from
the Forest or Wildlife Department to be nominated by the 
appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(c) one representative from the Health Department in the
appropriate Government not below the rank of Block Medical 
Officer or equivalent, to be nominated by the appropriate 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(d) one representative from the Police Department or Civil
Defence, not below such rank as may be prescribed, 
to be nominated 
by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed; and 
(e) one representative of a Animal Welfare Organisation
registered under any law for the time being in force and having 
such experience in stray or wild animal management, to be appointed 
by the appropriate Government, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) The Unit shall work in coordination with the Animal Welfare Board of the
State, in the case of a State, or the Animal Welfare Board of India, in the case
of a Union Territory, and any other relevant local body, as may be prescribed.
(5) The term of office of, the salary and allowances payable to, and other
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the
Unit shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Unit shall function in such manner and the procedure with regard to
transaction of its business shall be regulated in such manner as may be
prescribed by the appropriate Government.
3
5 
4. (1)  The appropriate Government may appoint such number of officers
and staff to the Unit, as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of
its functions under this Act.
(2) The method of recruitment, the salaries and allowances payable to,
and other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and staff, so
appointed for the purpose of the Unit shall be such as may be
prescribed.
Officers and 
staff of the 
Unit. 
C HAPTER III  
 PREVENTION AND SAFETY MEASURES 
4
0 
45 
50 
5. (1) No person who owns or is in charge of a domestic or pet animal shall
abandon such animal in any public place, private property, or any other
location, whether temporarily or permanently, in a m anner that renders the
animal stray or without care.
(
2) Every person who owns or has acquired any domestic or pet animal
shall, within a period of one month from the date of such acquisition or
ownership, make an application for its registration to the respective local
authority having jurisdiction:
 Provided that every person who, before the commencement of this Act, 
owns or is in charge of a domestic or pet animal shall, within such period 
from the date of commencement of this Act, as may be prescribed, apply for 
registration as provided under this Act. 
(3) The procedure for registration, including application forms, required
documents, fees, and maintenance of a digital or physical register of such
registration under sub-section ( 2), shall be such as may be prescribed.
Prohibition of 
abandonment 
and  mandatory 
registration of 
owned animals. 

4 
(4) The local authority shall maintain a register of all animals registered
under sub-section (2), including the name and contact details of the owner,
species and breed of the animal, and such other part iculars as specified in
such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(
5) Any person who, in contravention of this section —
(a) fails to register their domestic or pet animal within the
stipulated time; or 
(b) abandons an animal;
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both. 
5 
10 
Risk zoning and 
surveillance. 
6. (1) Local authorities shall, in consultation with the concerned Unit, identify
and notify high-risk zones based on the frequency, s everity, recurrence of
incidents and such other factors in such form and ma nner as may be
prescribed.
(2) In such notified zones, the local authority shall implement appropriate
surveillance and deterrent measures, which may include CCTV installation,
animal tagging, and installation of physical barrier s, subject to technical
feasibility and ecological compliance.
(
3) The Central Government may issue model guidelines for standardising
the risk assessment criteria and minimum safety infr astructure required in
high-risk zones.
15 
20 
Prevention 
p
rotocols. 
7. (1) The local authority shall implement mandatory sterilization and anti-
rabies vaccination drives in areas notified as high-risk zones under section
6, at such regular intervals as may be prescribed.
(
2) The local authority and the Forest Department shall install physical
barriers and warning signage in identified human-ani mal conflict zones in
such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(
3) Public advisories and safety protocols shall be disseminated through
signage, community channels, digital platforms and s uch other forms of
communication as may be prescribed.
25 
30 
C HAPTER IV 
INCIDENT MANAGEMENT AND HUMAN SAFETY 
E
mergency 
reporting and 
response. 
8. (1) The Central Government shall establish and maintain a 24x7
national toll-free helpline for reporting incidents.
(2) Each local authority shall maintain at least one operational animal
ambulance and a designated first-response team to re spond to stray and wild
animal attacks as expeditiously as possible.
(3) All emergency calls involving a threat to human life shall be responded
to within two hours in urban areas and six hours in rural areas, to the extent
administratively possible.
(4) The national helpline and district response data shall be centrally
recorded and reported quarterly to the State Governm ent and the Central
Government, in such form and manner as may be prescr ibed.
35 
40 
Handling of 
aggressive or 
dangerous 
animals. 
9. (1) Where any stray or wild animal is reported to pose an imminent danger
to human life, the Unit shall ensure the capture of such animal and conduct
a medical and behavioural evaluation of such animal within twenty-four
hours of such capture by a registered veterinary practitioner in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(2) No animal shall be euthanised unless—
(a) in the case of a stray animal, a certification by a registered
veterinary practitioner is obtained that the animal is terminally ill or 
45 
50 

5 
5
3 of 1972. 
59 of 1960. 
53 of 1972. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
suffering from an incurable condition causing prolonged suffering or 
where a designated officer, after risk assessment in accordance with the 
rules made under this Act, certifies that the such animal constitutes a  
continuing and imminent threat to public safety; and 
(b) in the case of wild animals, the Chief Wildlife Warden or
such other officer authorised under the Wildlife (Pr otection) Act,  
1972, permits such action in accordance with the section 11 of that  
Act: 
Provided that if euthanasia is being resorted to, then it shall be 
done in as humane a manner as possible. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), every effort shall be made,
wherever feasible to relocate, rehabilitate, or quarantine such animal, as an
alternative to euthanasia.
(
4) All actions under this section shall comply with the provisions of the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, the Wild life Protection Act,
1972, and the Animal Birth Control Rules, 2023 and a ny other law in this
regard for the time being in force.
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “euthanasia” means the humane termination of life of an
animal by or under the supervision of a registered veterinary 
practitioner, by such method as may be prescribed. 
(b) “imminent threat” means a situation where an animal is likely
to cause immediate and serious harm to human life or health, as may be 
assessed in such manner based on such parameters, as may be 
prescribed. 
C HAPTER V  
 COMPENSATION AND DATA MANAGEMENT 
4
5 of 2023. 
30 
35 
40 
45 
10. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official
Gazette, frame a Scheme for payment of compensation to persons
affected by incidents under this Act.
(
2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), the Scheme
shall provide for—
(
i) payment of compensation of not less than rupees four lakh
to the next of kin in the event of death of an indiv idual; 
(ii) payment of compensation ranging from rupees one lakh to
rupees two lakh in cases of grievous hurt as defined under section 
116 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or any other serious  
injury resulting in permanent disability, disfigurement, or 
prolonged hospitalization as may be certified by a registered 
medical practitioner;  
(iii) an insurance scheme for individuals residing in high-risk
zones; and 
(
iv) compensation for damage or loss to property or livestock.
(3) T he Scheme referred to in sub-section (1) shall be administered by such
authority, not lower in rank than the District Collector, as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
(4) The Central Government shall   make rules for the implementation of the
Scheme and the determination, procedure, and manner of disbursement of
compensation.
Compensation 
Scheme. 

6 
 
Central 
database and 
reporting. 
 
 
11. (1)  The  Central  Government  shall  establish  and  maintain  a dedicated  
digital portal for the collection and tracking of incidents, nationwide.  
(2) Every local authority, Unit, shelter home, and vete rinary institution or 
any other entity as may be notified, shall mandator ily record and upload 
data relating to such incidents to the portal, in s uch form, manner, and at 
such intervals as may be prescribed. 
(3)  The Central Government shall publish an annual rep ort based on such 
data referred to in sub-section (2) and upload the same on the dedicated 
digital portal for public access. 
5 
 
   CHAPTER VI 
COMMUNITY AWARENESS AND CAPACITY BUILDING  
10  
Public 
awareness and 
education 
programmes. 
 
12. (1) The appropriate Governments shall organise regular public  
awareness campaigns on safe coexistence and human-a nimal conflict  
prevention .  
(2)  The National Council of Educational Research and T raining (NCERT) 
and other relevant institutions shall develop age-a ppropriate modules on  
human-animal conflict prevention for inclusion in t he curricula and training  
programmes of all educational institutions. 
15 
 
Capacity 
building 
programmes. 
 
13. (1) The appropriate Government shall organise and condu ct regular 
training programmes for officers and organisations engaged in the  
implementation of this Act.  
(2) The Central Government shall prescribe model guidel ines and training 
modules for such programmes. 
20 
 
   CHAPTER VII  
 FUNDING  AND PENALTIES  25 
 
Establishment 
of the Stray and 
Wild Animal 
Victim 
Compensation 
Fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification i n the official 
Gazette, establish a fund to be called the "Stray a nd Wild Animal 
Victim Compensation Fund" for the purpose of provid ing 
compensation to victims of attacks by stray and wil d animals, including 
in cases of injury, disability, or death, as provided under section 10. 
(2)  The Fund shall be financed through equal contribut ions made by the 
following, namely— 
(a)  grants or allocations by the Central Government, from 
time to time, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf; 
(b)  grants or allocations by the State Government, fro m time to 
time, after due appropriation made by the State Leg islature by law in 
this behalf; and 
(c)  the local authority having jurisdiction over the a rea where the 
incident occurred. 
(3)  There shall also be credited to the Fund the following, namely: — 
(a)  the amount of fines collected by way of imposition of 
penalties under sections 15 and 16; and 
(b)  moneys received by way of voluntary donations from 
persons or companies or corporate entities as part of their Corporate 
Social Responsibility obligations under section 35 of the Companies 
Act, 2013. 
(4)  The Fund shall be utilized for providing financial  assistance or 
compensation in the event of— 
30 
35 
40 
45 
18 of 2013. 

7 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
(a)   physical injury resulting from an attack by a str ay or wild 
animal; 
(b)  permanent disability or disfigurement caused by su ch an 
attack; 
(c)  death caused due to such an attack, in which case 
compensation shall be payable to the legal heirs or  dependents of the 
deceased; and 
(d)  such other losses as may be notified by the approp riate 
Government through rules. 
(5)  The Fund shall be administered and managed by the appropriate 
Government and disbursed through such authority as referred to in sub-
section (3)  of section 10, in coordination with the concerned l ocal 
authorities. 
(6) The appropriate 
Government shall frame detailed guidelines, includi ng 
eligibility conditions, assessment procedures, time lines for disbursal, 
grievance redressal mechanisms, and auditing provis ions, for the effective 
and transparent administration of the Fund.  
(7)   The local authority shall be responsible for—  
(a)  
initial verification and documentation of claims wi thin its 
jurisdiction; 
(b)  submission of verified claims and reports to the a ppropriate 
Government for final sanction; and 
(c)  maintaining local records of all such incidents an d 
compensations disbursed. 
(8) The appropriate Government shall maintain proper ac counts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of  accounts of the Fund in 
such form and manner and at such time of each finan cial year as may be 
prescribed. 
(9)  The accounts of the Fund shall be audited and certi fied by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India or by any other person appointed 
by him in this behalf at such intervals and shall be laid annually, as the case 
may be, before each House of Parliament or before the State  Legislature, 
where it consists of one House and before each Hous e of the State 
Legislature, where it consists of two Houses. 
(10)  
The Central Government may issue model guidelines f or the uniform 
implementation of this provision across States and Union territories, without 
prejudice to the autonomy of appropriate Government  in the administration 
of the Fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
45 
15. (1)   Where any local authority or any official authorise d by it fails to take 
reasonable preventive measures to regulate, control , or manage stray or wild  
animals within its jurisdiction, resulting in an increase in anima l attacks 
causing injury, harm, or threat to public safety, s uch local authority or the 
authorised official, as the case may be, shall be l iable to penalty in 
accordance with sub-section (2).  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1) , t he designated 
officer or person-in-charge of animal control in the local authority shall, 
upon the first offence, be liable to: 
(a) a fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but 
may extend to two lakh rupees; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Penalty   and 
liability   for 
negligence   in 
prevention   of 
animal   attacks. 

8 
(b) m andatory suspension from duty for a minimum period of
thirty days or until completion of the inquiry, whichever is longer. 
(3) In the case of a second or subsequent offence, such officer shall be liable
to,—
(a) imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months; or
(b) fine not less than two lakh rupees; and
(c) disqualification from  holding  any  public  office  or
administrative post related to urban governance or animal control for a 
period of five years. 
(4) The liability under this section shall be without prejudice to any civil or
criminal liability under any other law for the time being in force.
(5) The Central Government may prescribe, by rules, the manner of
determination of responsibility, inquiry procedures, and additional
safeguards for enforcement under this section.
5 
10 
Penalties and 
enforcement. 
16. (1) Any person who obstructs any officer or person authorised under this
Act in the lawful discharge of their duties shall be punishable with,—
(a) fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees; or
(b) imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month; or
(c) both.
(2) In the event of a subsequent conviction, the offender shall be punishable
with fine of not less than fifteen thousand rupees or with imprisonment
which may extend to three months, or with both.
15 
20 
Application of 
other laws. 
17. (1)  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation
of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in the event of
any conflict or inconsistency between t he provisions of this Act and any
other law, including the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, the provisions of this Act related to the
establishment of Units emergency reporting and response mechanisms,
victim compensation, and data management shall prevail.
25 
30 
53 of 1972. 
59 of 1960. 
Power to make 
rules. 
18. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before eac h House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree th at the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(
3) Every rule made by the State Government or the Union territory
Government with Legislature, as the case may be, under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State
Legislature or the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two
Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House.
35 
40 
45 

9 
 
 
5 
19. (1)  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the pr ovisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the O fficial Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisio ns of this Act, as appear 
to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such orders shall be made after th e expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2)  Every order under this section shall be laid, as so on as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 
 Power   to 
remove  
difficulties.  
 
  

10 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
I
ndia faces a growing challenge at the intersection of public safety and animal 
welfare. Official data highlights the scale of this issue, with over 3.04 million dog 
bite cases reported in 2023 leading to at least 286 deaths. In 2024, approximately 
2.2 million dog bite cases and 48 rabies fatalities were recorded, alongside over 
500,000 incidents involving other animals. These attacks are frequent in populated 
areas, leading to avoidable injuries, deaths, and public fear. Independent surveys 
suggest that the true burden is much higher, with estimates of 9.1 million animal 
bite incidents annually. India accounts for nearly 36 per cent. of the world's rabies 
fatalities. 
Currently, India lacks a dedicated legal framework to holistically manage 
animal attacks on humans. Existing laws like the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
Act, 1960, and the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, are vital for animal rights but do 
not provide for coordinated emergency response, victim compensation, or scientific 
population management, leading to administrative confusion. 
This Bill seeks to address this critical gap by balancing the constitutional right 
to life guaranteed to the citizens of the country under Article 21 of the Constitution 
with compassion for living beings. It proposes a humane and evidence-based 
framework by: 
● Establishing district-
level Stray and Wild Animal Response Units for
coordinated action.
● Mandating a 24x7 national emergency helpline, time- bound response
protocols, and a victim compensation scheme.
● Strengthening preventive measures through systematic animal birth
control, vaccination, and a central digital database.
● Introducing structured public awareness campaigns, educational
modules, and capacity-building programmes.
● Creating a dedicated Stray and Wild Animal Victim Compensation Fund
supported by governmental allocations, contributions by local authorities,
amount of fines imposed by way of penalties provided under the Bill,
CSR, and public donations.
This legislation offers a forward-
looking solution, recognising that protecting 
human lives and ensuring animal welfare are shared societal obligations. It also 
aligns with global public health goals, such as the WHO's target to eliminate dog-
mediated rabies by 2030. 
Hence, the Bill. 
ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL.
 

11 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Stray and Wild Animal 
Response Units  in every district of the country, which shall function as nodal 
bodies for the prevention and coordinated response to animal attack incidents, and 
shall consist of veterinary professionals, officials from Forest, Health, Police 
Departments, and representatives from Animal Welfare Organisations, the 
composition of the Units and the salaries and allowances and other service 
conditions of  the Chairperson and Members thereof. Clause 4 provides for the 
appointment of the officers and staff of the Unit and their salaries and allowances 
and other service conditions. Clause 8 mandates the establishment of a 24x7 
national toll-free emergency helpline for reporting incidents of stray and wild 
animal attacks.  Clause 10 provides that the Central Government shall frame a 
Scheme for payment of compensation to persons affected by stray and wild animal 
attacks, including provisions for compensation in cases of death, permanent 
disability, serious injury, or property loss. Clause 11 empowers the Central 
Government to establish a dedicated digital portal for real-time r eporting and 
national-level data aggregation of incidents. Clause 12 provides that the 
appropriate Government shall organise regular public awareness campaigns on safe 
coexistence and conflict prevention, whereas, sub-clause (1) of Clause 13 provides 
for the organization and conduct of regular training programmes for officers and 
organisations engaged in the implementation of this Act. Clause 14 provides for the 
establishment of a “Stray and Wild Animal Victim Compensation Fund” with 
contributions from the 
Central Government, State Governments, local authorities, 
CSR and public donations etc. to be used exclusively for compensation and welfare 
measures under this Act. 
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure, both of recurring and non-
recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated 
that a 
recurring expenditure of approximately one hundred crore rupees per annum will 
be involved. A non-recurring expenditure of approximately fifty crore rupees is 
also likely to be involved.  

12 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION 
C
lause 18 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules to 
carry out the provisions of the Act. Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central 
Government to make such provisions through an order for r emoving any difficulty 
that might arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. 
As the rules or orders will relate to matters of administrative and procedural 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
to provide for the prevention of harm to human beings and loss of lives and 
 property from stray and wild animal attacks, establish mechanisms 
 for rapid emergency response and victim compensation, and 
to regulate the welfare, population control, vaccination, 
sheltering, and rehabilitation of such animals 
through humane and scientific practices 
 and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
____________ 
(Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–287–08.12.2025 
A
BILL