THE VICTIMS OF TERRORISM (COMPENSATION AND
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL, 2008
A
 BILL
to provide for the financial compensation, relief and rehabilitation to the victims and their
dependents affected by terrorist violence of naxalites, maoists and other terrorist outfits
operating in various parts of the country including those supported, sponsored and
financed from across the borders through employment and other means and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Terrorism (Compensation and Miscella-
neous Provisions) Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008
Bill No. LVI of 2008
Definitions.
5

2
(b) “dependent” include spouse, children and aged parents who are, dependent
on the deceased victim of terrorism violence;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention Act, 1967) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those
Acts.
3.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
the appropriate Government shall give relief to the dependents of a citizen who is killed in
terrorist violence of naxalite or maoist or by any terrorist outfit, whatever name called
by,—
(a) paying an ex-gratia grant of compensation of an amount which shall not be
less than five lakh rupees in such manner, as may be prescribed; and
(b) giving financial assistance at the rate of two thousand rupees per mensem
to the old and minor dependents of the victim for such period and in such manner as
may be prescribed.
4.  Any citizen who survives the attack of terrorists but receives severe injuries
thereby permanently incapacitating him or otherwise shall be given compensation by the
appropriate Government by,—
(a) bearing the entire costs of his medical treatment; and
(b) paying ex-gratia grant of compensation of not less than two lakh rupees, in
such manner as may be prescribed.
5.  It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to formulate rehabilitation
package for the victims of terrorism violence by way of providing employment, vocational
training, self employment and such other measures as that Government may deem fit and
necessary for the purposes of this Act.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, where a dwelling house of any citizen is destroyed or damaged due to torching,
bombing or any other acts of terrorists, the appropriate Government shall,—
(a) provide a dwelling house or bear the entire cost of construction, or repair or
construct the house at the same place or elsewhere, as the case may be, as per the
choice or preference of the victim in such manner as my be prescribed;
(b) allot a plot of appropriate size to the victim near the city free of cost and bear
the cost of construction of a dwelling house thereon in such a manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) Where the livestock of a citizen is killed or the standing crop or orchard is
destroyed by the terrorists violence, the appropriate Government shall pay adequate and
appropriate financial compensation to the owner of the livestock, crop or orchard, as the
case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Where the business establishment or shop or kiosk or hawking apparatus or any
such thing being used for carrying business of a citizen is destroyed or damaged in terror-
ist violence, the appropriate Government shall pay appropriate compensation to the owner
in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall in order to protect the life and property of the
citizens of the terrorism affected areas within its territorial jurisdiction compulsorily
insure the life, property, livestock, crop, orchard, business establishment against terrorist
violence, in such manner as may be prescribed.
Relief to
dependent of a
citizen.
45 of 1860
37 of 1967
2 of 1974
Rehabilitation
package to the
victims of
terrorism.
Compensation
to Survivors
of terrorist
attack.
Compensation
for other losses.
Insurance of
life and
property in
terrorism
affected areas.
5
10
15
20
30
35
40
45
25

3
(2) The appropriate Government may, if it deems fit, expedient and necessary to do so,
promote village level security system in the villages affected by terrorism, through teams
of volunteers for the protection of their village from terrorist violence and provide the
volunteers with necessary weapons and ammunition from time to time in such manner as
may be prescribed.
8.  The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, in consultation with the Govern-
ments of the States affected by violence by terrorists, formulate a national policy for those
terrorists who wish to shun violence and return to the mainstream of nation for their rehabili-
tation through general amnesty, and by providing them with employment, financial assis-
tance for self employment and other means as that Government may deem necessary to do
so in the nation interest.
9.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the States and Union Territories affected by
terrorist violence for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10.  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by notification, make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal
of difficulty and any such order or direction, as the case may be, shall be final:
Provided that no such order or direction shall be made after the expiry of a period
of four years from the commencement of this Act.
11.  The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect not-
withstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being
in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
12.  The Central Government may, by  notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purpose of this Act.
Central
Government
to formulate
national
policy.
Central
Government
to Provide
Funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Terrorism is one of the very serious problems of our nation. V arious parts of the
country are in the grip of terrorism let loose by Naxalites, Maoists, Leninist-Maoist, People
War Group (PWG) and other militant outfits either infiltrated from across the borders or
remotely controlled from abroad. Be it north-eastern States, Jammu and Kashmir, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand parts of Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, West Bengal, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, etc. have been affected by terrorism. The
terrorists are ruthlessly killing hundreds of innocent people, policemen, personnel of para-
military and armed forces, every year just to create panic and spread terror amongst the
masses. Bomb blasts occur every now and then. Peaceful cities like Delhi - Hyderabad -
Jaipur - Mumbai, etc. are targeted through planting bombs at busy places and in the blasts
many people are killed, injured and permanently crippled without any fault. The naxalites and
other terrorists do not even spare houses, shops which are torched or blown up. Even the
thatched huts of the poor villagers are not spared. They attack Police Station to loot weap-
ons and kill the police personnel or ambush the police and para-military forces and plant
blast mines on the roads used by Police and para-military forces which blow up the vehicles
carrying them. The terrorist outfits are blackmailing the rich people, industrialists and busi-
nessmen and getting ransom from them. In the terrorist affected areas people do not venture
out of their houses in the evening and night. In many areas, the terrorists are illegally
collecting taxes from the people and running parallel Government and giving instant justice.
Though lot of innocent citizens are killed and wounded seriously in the terrorist vio-
lence, they are not given any compensation. Sometimes, a meagre sum is announced as ex-
gratia payment. Similar is the case of those who lose their houses, business establishment
livestock, crops, etc. who have to fend for themselves. State does not come forward for their
rehabilitation. The Banks, financial institutions too do not provide credit to the affected
people.
Since, it is the duty of the State to protect the life and property of every citizen and in
failing to do so it is the sacred duty of the State to duly compensate the affected citizens and
their dependents. At the same time, if the misguided youth who have joined hands with the
terrorist outfits due to frustration and variety of other reasons they need to be brought back
to the mainstream of the nation by providing employment opportunities and other incen-
tives apart from granting amnesty to them. For this a national policy is required.
Hence this Bill.
GIREESH KUMAR SANGHI
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for compensation to the dependents of citizens killed in
terrorism violence. Clause 4 provides for compensation to citizens wounded in terrorism
violence. Clause 5 provides for rehabilitation package to the victims of terrorism. Clause 6
provides for compensation for other losses. Clause 7 provides for Insurances of life and
property in terrorism affected areas. Clause 9 makes it obligatory for the Central Government
to provide requisite funds for the purposes of the Bill.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per
annum.
A sum of rupees one hundred crores may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the financial compensation, relief and rehabilitation to the victims
and their dependents affected by terrorist violence of  naxalites,
maoists and other terrorist outfits operating in various parts
of  the country including those supported, sponsored
and financed from across the borders through
employment and other means and for
matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4758RS(S-5)—29.12.2008.