1
Bill No. LVI of  2018
 THE FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN FINANCIAL SERVICES,
CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND TECHNOLOGY
AFFECTING NATIONAL SECURITY
(REGULATION) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
 to provide for measures to ensure national security while promoting foreign investment, to
reform the process of examination of such investment, vis-a-vis their effect, if any, on
national security and to establish a Committee on Foreign Investment to effectively
guard against the risk to national security posed by certain types of foreign investment
in financial services, critical infrastructure and technology sector, and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Foreign Investment in Financial Services, Critical
Infrastructure and Technology Affecting National Security (Regulation) Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019
1
5
10

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'access' means the ability and opportunity to obtain information, subject to
regulations prescribed by the Committee under section 9;
(b) 'Committee' and 'Chairperson' means the Committee on Foreign Investment
and the Chairperson thereof, respectively;
(c) 'control' includes the power to determine, direct, or decide important matters
including but not limited to the sale, lease, pledge or other transfer of the company's
assets; the dissolution of the company; the closing or relocating of research and
development facilities; board decisions; capital allocation or budget plans affecting an
entity, and its right to information in relation to an entity subject to regulations prescribed
by the Committee under section 9;
(d) 'country of special concern' includes a country that poses a significant threat
to the national security of India;
(e) 'covered transaction' includes any of the following form of transaction or
investment including any merger, acquisition, investment or takeover either proposed
or pending after the coming into operation of this Act, by or with any foreign person,—
(i) resulting in increase in foreign holding of an Indian business engaged
in financial services, critical infrastructure and technology sector by five percent
or more, in such Indian business that already has at least fifteen percent combined
foreign ownership;
(ii) entering into business in financial services, critical infrastructure and
technology sector by an existing Indian Business that has foreign ownership of
at least fifteen percent;
(iii) investmenting (other than passive investment) in any Indian critical
technology company or Indian critical infrastructure company subject to
regulation prescribed by the Committee under section 9;
(iv) resulting in change in the rights that a foreign person has with respect
to an Indian business in which the foreign person has an investment, if that
change may result in foreign control of Indian business; or
(v) leading to any transaction, transfer, agreement, or arrangement, the
structure of which is designed or intended to evade or circumvent the application
of this Act, subject to regulations prescribed by the Committee under section 9
or which impairs the national security.
(f) 'critical infrastructure' means, systems and assets, whether physical or virtual,
as may be prescribed, the incapacity or destruction of which may have a debilitating
impact on national security;
(g) 'critical infrastructure company' means an Indian business that owns, operates,
or primarily provides services to, an entity or entities that operate within a critical
infrastructure sector or subsector, as defined by regulations prescribed by the
Committee under section 9;
(h) 'critical technology company' means an Indian business that produces, trades
in, designs, tests, manufacturers, services, or develops one or more critical technologies,
or a subset of such technologies, as defined by regulations prescribed by the Committee
under section 9;
(i) 'critical materials' means physical materials essential to national security, subject
to regulations prescribed by the Committee under section 9;
(j) 'financial services' means and includes services supplied by companies that
are in the business of lending, payments, wallets, wealth management, asset
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
management, peer-to-peer lending, peer-to-peer payments, foreign exchange, money
transfer, financial service platforms such as aggregators and comparison platforms,
and any other area related to financial transactions as may be prescribed;
(k) 'foreign Government-controlled transaction' includes any covered transaction
that could result in the control of any person engaged in Indian financial or critical
infrastructure or technological services by a foreign Government or an entity controlled
by or acting on behalf of a foreign Government; foreign State-owned enterprises, and
also foreign Government influenced transactions including but not restricted to such
foreign companies that have Government official(s) on their board, or where Government
officials of a foreign country are able to exert influence on business decisions or a
transaction when the entity investing is under a legal obligation of a foreign Government
or foreign authority to disclose the critical technology or critical infrastructure or any
other fact thereof which is likely to impair the national security;
(l) 'fund" means the Committee on Foreign Investment in India Fund established
under section 15;
(m) 'foreign person' means a person who is not a resident in India and includes
any entity or a person which or who is in any manner associated with a firm, company,
partnership, limited liability partnership or any other entity in any form not registered
in India and is under the control of a foreign Government or a foreign authority;
(n) 'Indian business' means any entity or a person engaged in financial services
in critical infrastructure or technology sector in India;
(o) 'intellectual property' has the meaning given to that term in regulations as
may be prescribed by the Committee under section 9;
(p) 'investment' means investments through the ownership of a majority or minority
of the total outstanding voting securities, proxy voting or contractual arrangements or
the acquisition of equity interest, including contingent equity interest, or grant of form
in whatever form as further defined in regulations prescribed by the Committee under
section 9;
(q) 'lead agency' means an agency, or agencies, designated as the lead agency or
agencies pursuant to sub-section(4) of section 3 for compliance with the provisions of
this Act;
(r) 'national security' shall be construed so as to include those issue relating to
Indian national security, including its application to financial services and critical
infrastructure and technology sector in India;
(s) 'non public technical information' means any  information (either by itself or in
conjunction with other information) to which a foreign person may have access without
which critical technologies cannot be designed, developed, tested, produced, or
manufactured; and in a quantity sufficient to permit the design, development, testing,
production, or manufacturing of such technologies;
(t) 'passive investment' means an investment by a foreign person in an Indian
business,—
(i) that is not described in clause (e) of section 2;
(ii) that does not afford the foreign person—
(a) access to any non-public technical information in the possession of
Indian business;
(b) access to any non-technical information in the possession of Indian
business that is not available to all investors;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(c) membership or observer rights on the board of directors or equivalent
governing body of Indian business or the right to nominate an individual to
such a position; or
(d) any involvement, other than through voting of shares, in substantive
decision making pertaining to any matter involving Indian business;
(e) any involvement, other than through non-voting shares, in substantive
decision making pertaining to any matter involving Indian business;
(iii) under which the foreign person and Indian business to not have a parallel
strategic partnership or other material financial relationship, as described in regulations
prescribed by the Committee under section 9; and
(iv) that meets such other criteria as the Committee may  prescribe by regulation
under section 9.
CHAPTER II
C
OMMITTEE ON FOREIGN INVESTMENT
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
Committee on Foreign Investment to operate as a national agency of the Government of
India, with the objective to effectively guard against the risk to the national security posed
by certain types of foreign investment in financial services and technology sector, and for
other purposes assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Committee shall consist of the following namely:—
(i) Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance;
(ii) Secretary Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Ministry of
Commerce and Industry;
(iii) Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs;
(iv) Secretary, Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce and Industry;
(v) Secretary, Ministry of Defence;
(vi) Secretary (Economic Relations), Ministry of External Affairs;
(vii) Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs;
(viii) Secretary, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance;
(ix) Secretary, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.
(3) The Secretary of the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance shall
serve as the Chairperson of the Committee.
(4) The Committee may constitute a lead agency or lead agencies for the exercise of
any power or discharge of any function which the Committee may by resolution delegate to
them or for inquiring into, reporting or advising upon any matter which the Committee may
refer to them.
(a) Provided that the lead agency constituted under this section shall be presided
by the Chairperson of the Committee only; and
(b) The lead agency shall consist of members of the Committee only and may,
with the sanction of the Committee co-opt not more than two persons who are not
members of the Committee, but who in the opinion of  that Committee possesses
special qualifications for serving on such Committee.
4. (1) The Committee, acting through the Chairperson, may suspend a proposed or
pending covered transaction that appears to it to pose a risk to the national security of the
Constitution
of Committee
on Foreign
Investment,
Powers and
functions of the
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
country, for such time as the covered transaction is under review or investigation under
section 5 or section 6 respectively;
(2) The Committee or a lead agency may, on behalf of the Committee, negotiate, enter
into or impose, and enforce any agreement or condition with any party to the covered
transaction in order to mitigate any threat to the national security likely to arise as a result of
the covered transaction.
(3) If a party to a covered transaction has voluntarily chosen to abandon the transaction,
the Committee or lead agency, as the case may be, may negotiate, enter into or impose, and
enforce any agreement or condition with any party to the covered transaction for purposes
of effectuating such abandonment and mitigating any risk to the national security likely to
arise as a result of the covered transaction.
(4) The Committee or lead agency, as the case may be, may negotiate, enter into or
impose, and enforce any agreement or condition with any party to a completed covered
transaction in order to mitigate any interim risk that may arise as a result of the covered
transaction until such time that the Committee has completed action pursuant to section 5 or
section 6 as the case may be;
(5) the Chairperson and the head of the lead agency shall periodically review the
appropriateness of an agreement or condition imposed under sub-sections (2), (3) or (4) and
shall terminate, phase out, or otherwise amend the agreement or condition if a threat no
longer requires mitigation through the agreement or condition.
(6) No agreement shall be entered into or any condition imposed under sub-sections
(2), (3) or (4) with respect to a covered transaction unless the Committee determines that the
agreement or condition resolves the national security concerns posed by the transaction,
taking into consideration whether the agreement or condition is reasonably calculated to —
(i) be effective;
(ii) allow for the terms of the agreement or condition in an appropriately verifiable
way; and
(iii) enable effective monitoring of compliance with and enforcement of the
terms of the agreement or condition.
(7) No agreement shall be entered into or any condition imposed under sub-sections
(2), (3) or ( 4) unless the Committee has conducted a risk-based analysis of the threat to
national security of the covered transaction after taking into consideration the factors specified
in section 12.
(8) Any member of the Committee who concludes that a covered transaction poses an
unresolved national security concern shall recommend to the Committee that the Committee
suspend the transaction under sub-section (1), or negotiate enter into or impose, or enforce
any agreement or condition under sub-sections (2), (3) or (4) with respect to the transaction
and in making that recommendation, the member shall propose or contribute to the risk-
based analysis required by sub-section ( 7) of this sub-section.
(9) If  Committee fails to reach consensus with respect to recommendation under sub-
section (8) regarding a covered transaction, the members of the Committee who support an
alternative recommendation shall produce —
(i) a written statement justifying the alternative recommendation; and
(ii) as appropriate, a risk-based analysis that supports the alternative
recommendation.
(10) If any written notice of a covered transaction that was submitted to the Committee
under this Act is withdrawn before the completion of any review or investigation by the
Committee under section 5 or section 6 respectively, the Committee shall establish, as deemed
appropriate —
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
40

6
(a) interim protections to address specific concerns with such transaction that
have been raised in connection with any such review or investigation pending any
resubmission of any written notice under this Act with respect to such transaction and
further action by the Chairman under this section;
(b) specific time frames for resubmitting any such written notice; and
(c) a process for tracking any action that may be taken by any party to the
transaction, in connection with the transaction, before the notice referred to in
clause (b) is resubmitted.
(11) The lead agency shall negotiate, modify, monitor, and enforce, on behalf of the
Committee, any agreement entered into or condition imposed under sub-section ( 2) with
respect to a covered transaction, based on the expertise and knowledge of the issues related
to such transaction:
Provided that the lead agency may for the purposes of sub-section (ii) obtain assistance
of other departments or agencies:
Provided further that the lead agency shall provide periodic reports to the Committee
on any material modification to any such agreement or condition imposed with respect to the
transaction.
(12) In the case of a covered transaction with respect to which an agreement is entered
into under sub-sections (2), (3) or (4) the Committee or lead agency, as the case may be, shall
formulate, adhere to, and keep updated a plan for monitoring compliance with the agreement.
(13) Each plan required under sub-section (12) with respect to an agreement entered
into under sub-sections (2), (3) or (4) shall indicate—
(i) the member of the Committee who shall have primary responsibility for
monitoring compliance with the agreement;
(ii) the manner in which the compliance with the agreement shall be monitored;
(iii) the frequency of conducting compliance reviews;
(iv) whether an independent entity shall be utilized under sub-section ( 15) to
conduct compliance reviews; and
(v) the proposed action if the parties fail to co-operate regarding monitoring
compliance with the agreement.
(14) If, at any time after a mitigation agreement or condition is entered into or imposed
under sub-sections (2), (3) or (4) the Committee or lead agency, as the case may be, determines
that a party or parties to the agreement or condition are not in compliance with the terms of
the agreement or condition, the Committee or lead agency may—
(a) negotiate a plan of action for the party or parties to remediate the lack of
compliance, with failure, to abide by the plan or otherwise remediate the lack of
compliance serving as the basis for the Committee to find a material breach of the
agreement or condition; or
(b) require that the party or parties submit a written notice under sub-section (1)
of section 5 or a declaration under sub-section ( 4) of section 5 with respect to a
covered transaction initiated after the date of the determination of non-compliance but
not later than five years after the date of such determination, to the Committee to
initiate a review of the transaction under section 5; or
(c) seek injunctive relief.
(15) If the parties to an agreement under sub-sections ( 2
), ( 3) or ( 4) enter into a
contract with an independent entity from outside the Indian Government for the purpose of
monitoring compliance with the agreement, the Committee shall take such action as is necessary
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
40

7
to prevent a conflict of interest from arising by ensuring that the independent entity owes no
fiduciary duty to the parties.
(16) Any agreement or condition entered into or imposed under sub-sections (2), (3)
or (4) shall be considered binding on all successors and assignees unless and until the
agreement or condition terminates on its own terms or is otherwise terminated by the Committee
in its sole discretion.
(17) Subject to the other provisions of this section, the Committee shall develop and
agree upon methods for evaluating compliance with any agreement entered into or condition
imposed with respect to a covered transaction that may allow the Committee to adequately
ensure compliance without unnecessarily diverting the resources of the Committee from
assessing any new covered transaction for which a written notice under sub-section ( 1) of
section 5 of or declaration under sub-section (4) of section 5 has been filed, and if necessary,
reaching a mitigation agreement with or imposing a condition under sub-section (2), (3) or
(4) on a party to such covered transaction or any covered transaction for which a review has
been reopened for any reason.
CHAPTER III
R
EVIEW AND INVESTIGATION OF COVERED TRANSACTIONS
5. (1) (a) The party or parties to any covered transaction shall initiate a review of the
transaction by submitting draft or a formal written notice of the transaction to the
Chairperson of the Committee.
(b) Subject to clause (d), the Committee shall provide comments on a draft or
formal written notice or accept a formal written notice submitted under clause (a) with
respect to a covered transaction not later than the date that is ten business days after
the date of submission of the draft or formal written notice.
(c) If the Committee determines that a draft or formal written notice described
under clause (a) of this sub-section is not complete, the Committee shall notify the
party or parties to the transaction in writing that the notice is not complete and shall
provide an explanation of all material respects in which the notice is incomplete.
(d) No covered transaction for which a notice was submitted under clause ( a)
may be withdrawn from review, unless a written request for such withdrawal is submitted
to the Committee by any party to the transaction and approved by the Committee.
(e) A request for withdrawal under clause (d) shall not be construed to preclude
any party to the covered transaction from continuing informal discussions with the
Committee or any member thereof regarding possible resubmission for review  pursuant
to this sub-section.
(f) A written notice submitted under clause (a) by a party shall include a copy of
any partnership agreements, integration agreements, or other agreements relating to
the transaction, including any such agreements relating to the transfer of intellectual
property, as may be specified in regulations prescribed by the Committee under
section 9.
(2) Upon receiving written notice  of any covered transaction, or pursuant to a unilateral
review initiated with respect to any covered transaction, the Chairperson, acting through the
Committee:
(a) shall review the covered transaction to determine the effects of the transaction
on the national security in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) shall consider the factors specified in section12 for such purpose, as
appropriate.
Review of
covered
transactions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
45
35

8
(3) If the Committee has any information or reason  to believe that the covered
transaction may be a national security risk the Committee shall within thirty days of the
review, conduct an investigation of the transaction under section 6.
(4)  (a) A party to any covered transaction shall submit, not later than forty five days
of its completion, to the Committee, a declaration with basic information regarding  the
transaction instead of a written notice under sub-section (1), if the covered transaction;
(i) involves the acquisition of a total voting interest of the foreign person, which
would directly or indirectly result in holding at least fifteen percent in the Indian
business post the acquisition, or any such subsequent direct or indirect investment of
at least five percent by the same foreign person or any other foreign person, in an
Indian business by, that has existing foreign ownership of at least fifteen percent; and
(ii) involves a  foreign person in which a foreign government owns, directly or
indirectly, foreign stated-owned enterprises holds at least five percent of voting or
passive interest.
(b) The Committee shall require the submission of a declaration specified in clause (a)
with respect to any covered transaction identified under regulations prescribed by the
Committee under section 9 for purposes for this sub-section, at the discretion of the Committee
and based on  appropriate factors, such as—
(i) the technology, industry, economic sector, or economic subsector in which
Indian business that is a party to the transaction trades or of which it is a part;
(ii) the difficulty of remedying the harm to the national security that may result
from completion of the transaction; and
(iii) the difficulty of obtaining information on the type of covered transaction
through other means.
(5) Any review under this section shall be completed before the end of thirty days
period beginning on the date of the acceptance of written notice under sub-section ( 1) by
the Chairperson, or beginning on the date of the initiation of the unilateral review in accordance
with sub-section(4), as applicable and if the parties to the covered transaction are not able to
satisfy the Committee that such a transaction does not pose a threat to the national security
of India, the Committee shall initiate an investigation into such a transaction as per the
provisions of section 6.
Provided that the authority of the Committee to initiate a review under sub-section (4)
may not be delegated to any person, other than the Deputy Secretary or an appropriate
Under Secretary of the department or agency represented on the Committee.
(6) The Committee shall establish a mechanism to identify covered transactions for
which—
(a) a notice under sub-section (1) or a declaration under sub-section (4) is not
submitted to the Committee; and
(b) information is reasonably available.
6. (1) The Committee shall immediately conduct an investigation of the effects of a
covered transaction on the national security after considering the factors specified in section
12, and shall take all necessary action in connection with the transaction to protect the
national security.
(2) Sub-section (1) shall apply in each case in which—
(a) a review of covered transaction under section 5 results in a determination
that—
Investigation
of covered
transactions.
5
10
15
20
25
35
40
45
30

9
(i) the transaction threatens to impair the national security and that threat
has not been mitigated during or prior to the review of a covered transaction
under section 5; or
(ii) the transaction is a foreign Government-controlled transaction; or
(iii) the transaction may result in control of any critical infrastructure of or
within India by or on behalf of any foreign person, if the Committee determines
that the transaction could impair national security, and that such impairment to
national security of India has not been mitigated by assurances provided or
renewed with the approval of the Committee, as described in sub-clause ( i),
during the review period under section 5; or
(iv) parties of the covered transaction fail to satisfy the Committee within
thirty days of the review.
(b) the lead agency recommends, and the Committee concurs, that an investigation
be undertaken.
(3) Any investigation under sub-section (1) shall be completed before the end of the
forty five day period beginning on the date on which the investigation commenced; and
(i) if on such completion the Committee concludes that concerned covered
transaction poses a threat to the national security of India, it shall take appropriate
measures as per section 13; or
(ii) in case the investigation is not completed in forty five days, the transaction
shall be rejected and the parties shall be debarred from re-applying for the transaction.
Exceptions.—
(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of sub-section (2), an
investigation of a foreign Government-controlled transaction described in sub clause
(ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (2) or a transaction involving critical infrastructure
described in sub clause (iii) of clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall not be required, if
the Committee determines, on the basis of the review of the transaction under section 5,
that the transaction will not impair the national security of India.
(b) The authority of the Committee referred to in clause (a) above shall not be
delegated to any person.
7. (1) The Committee shall, upon completion of a review under section 5 or completion
of an investigation under section 6 as the case may be, cause to forward to the Central
Government a report duly signed by the Chairperson with a declaration, that in the determination
of the Committee, there are no unresolved risks to the national security of India which
concern with the transaction that is the subject of the report.
(2) Each certified report required under sub-section (1) shall include—
(a) a description of the actions taken by the Committee with respect to the
transaction; and
(b
) identification of the determinative factors considered under section 12.
8. (1) No provision of this Act shall be construed as prohibiting any party to a covered
transaction from submitting additional information concerning the transaction, including
any proposed restructuring of the transaction or any modifications to any agreements in
connection with the transaction under section 4 while any review or investigation of the
transaction is ongoing.
(2)  the lead agency shall upon request from any member of the Committee, promptly
provide briefings on a covered transaction for which all action has concluded under section 6
or in compliance with a mitigation agreement or condition imposed with respect to such
transaction, on a classified basis, if deemed necessary by the sensitivity of the information:
Maintenance
of records of
review and
investigation
of covered
transactions.
Submission of
additional
information
to the
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
35
40
45
30

10
Provided that the disclosure of information under this section shall be consistent
with the regulations as may be prescribed under Section 9 and the members of  the
Committee shall be subject to the same limitations on disclosure of information as may
be prescribed under Section 9:
Provided further that the proprietary information associated with a particular
party to a covered transaction shall be furnished to the members of the Committee only
when the Committee provides assurance of confidentiality, unless such party otherwise
consents in writing to such disclosure.
9. (1) The Committee shall have the power to prescribe regulations for the purposes of
this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) specify the voting rights, profit or equity share or such other characteristics
that shall amount to control by a foreign person,
(b) define the covered transactions by reference to the technology, sector,
subsector, transaction type, or other characteristics of such transactions,
(c) Standard procedures for—
(i) submitting any notice of a covered transaction to the Committee;
(ii) submitting a request to withdraw a covered transaction from review;
(iii) resubmitting a notice of a covered transaction that was previously
withdrawn from review; and
(iv) providing notice of the results of a review or investigation to the
parties to the covered transaction, upon completion of all action under this Act,
(d) imposition of civil penalties for any violation of this Act,
(e) minimizing paperwork burdens,
(f) coordinating reporting requirements under this Act, with reporting requirements
under any other provision of the laws in force in India.
10. (1) Except as provided in this section the Committee shall expeditiously carry out
a thorough analysis, in such manner as may be prescribed by regulations, of any threat to the
national security posed by any covered transaction, which shall include the identification of
any recognized gaps in the collection of intelligence relevant to the analysis:
Provided that the Committee shall seek and imcorporate into the analysis required by
sub-section (1), the views of all affected agencies with respect to the transaction.
(2) The lead agency may provided the Committee with basic information regarding any
threat to the national security of India posed by a covered transaction.
(3) The Chairman shall ensure that the lead agency remains engaged in the collection,
analysis and dissemination to the Committee of any additional relevant information that may
become available during the course of the investigation under section 6 with respect to a
transaction.
(4) The Committee shall ensure that its processes under this section preserve the
ability of the Committee to conduct analysis under sub-section ( 1) that is independent,
objective, and consistent with all applicable directives, policies, and analytic tradecraft
standards of the intelligence community.
Regulations.
Analysis of
covered
transactions
by the
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

11
11. (1) Subject to sub-section ( 3), the Chairperson shall, with respect to a covered
transaction that threatens to impair the national security take such action for such time as the
Chairperson considers appropriate to suspend or prohibit the transaction or to require
divestment.
(2) The Chairperson shall announce the decision on whether or not to take action
pursuant to sub-section (1) with respect to a covered transaction not later than fifteen days
after—
(a) the date on which the investigation of the transaction under section 6 is
completed; or
(b) the date on which the Committee otherwise refers the transaction to the
Chairperson under section 4,
Whichever is earlier.
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise the authority conferred by sub-section (1), if
the—
(a) entity fails to provide credible evidence within seven days from the date that
the Committee refers the transaction to the Chairperson, proving that the foreign
interest does not impair the national security; and
(b) entity fails to prove that the transaction does not fall in determinative factors
as under section 12.
12. For purposes of this Act, the Committee or the Chairperson as the case may be,
with reference to an Indian business or Indian critical technology company or Indian critical
infrastructure company, taking into account the requirements of maintainig the national
security, or risks of spreading terrorism or risk of interference in Government's ability to
monitor terror threats due to influence of foreign person, shall consider—
(a) that there is a minimum local ownership of at least twenty six per cent and not
more than seventy four per cent foreign ownership wherein no single foreign investor
controls more than ten per cent of such entity subject to such other regulations made
by the Committee under section 9;
(b) the potential national security-related effects of the cumulative market share
of any one type of infrastruture, energy asset, critical material, or critical technology
by foreign persons;
(c) whether any foreign person that would acquire an interest in an Indian
business or its assets as a result of the covered transaction has a history of—
(i) complying with Indian laws and regulations, including laws and
regulations pertaining to exports, the protection of intellectual property, and
immigration; and
(ii) adhering to contracts or other agreements with entities of Indian
Government;
(d) the extent to which the covered transaction is likely to expose, either directly
or indirectly, personally identifiable information, genetic information, or other sensitive
data of Indian citizens to access by a foreign Government or foreign person that may
exploit that information in a manner that threatens national security;
(e)  whether the covered transaction is likely to have the effect of creating any
new cyber security vulnerabilities in India or exacerbating existing cyber security
vulnerabilities;
(f) whether the covered transaction is likely to result in a foreign Government
gaining a significant new capability to engage in malicious activities against India,
including such activities designed to affect the outcome of any elections in India;
Suspension of
covered
transactions.
Factors for
consideration
of the
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(g) whether the covered transaction involves a country of special concern that
has a demonstrated or declared strategic goal of acquiring a type of critical technology
that an Indian business that is a party to the transaction possesses;
(h) whether the covered transaction is likely to facilitate criminal or fraudulent
activity affecting the national security of India by taking control over the financial
services or technical sector of India;
(i) whether the covered transaction is likely to expose any information regarding
sensitive national security matters or sensitive procedures or operations of any law
enforcement agency with national security responsibilities to a foreign person not
authorized to receive that information; and
(j)  such other factors as the Committee may determine to be appropriate, generally
or in connection with a specific review or investigation.
13. The Committee shall notify the parties to a covered transaction of the results of a
review or investigation under this Act, immediately upon completion of all action under this
Act.
14. (1) The Committee shall transmit a report to the Chairperson before July 31 of each
year on all of the reviews and investigations of covered transactions completed under
sections 5 and 6 during the twelve months period covered by the report.
(2) The annual report under sub-section (1) shall contain the following information,
with respect to each covered transaction, for the reporting period:—
(a)  a list of all notices filed and all reviews or investigations of covered
transactions completed during the period, with—
(i) a description of the outcome of each review or investigation, including
whether an agreement was entered into or condition was imposed under section 4
with respect to the transaction being reviewed or investigated, and whether the
President of India took any action under this section with respect to that
transaction;
(ii)  basic information on each party to each such transaction;
(iii) the nature of the business activities or products of the Indian business
with which the transaction was entered into or intended to be entered into; and
(iv) information about any withdrawal from the process.
(b) specific, cumulative, and, as appropriate, trend information on the numbers
of filings, investigations, withdrawals, and decisions or actions by the Chairperson
under section 11.
(c) cumulative and, as appropriate, trend information on the business sectors
involved in the filings which have been made, and the countries from which the
investments have originated.
(d) information on whether companies that withdrew notices to the Committee in
accordance with section 5 have later refiled such notices, or, alternatively, abandoned
the transaction.
(e) the types of security arrangements and conditions, the Committee has used
to mitigate national security concerns about a transaction, including a discussion on
the methods that the Committee and any lead agency are using to determine compliance
with such arrangements or conditions.
(f) a detailed discussion on all perceived adverse effects of covered transaction
on the national security or critical infrastructure of India that the Committee propose to
take into account in its deliberations during the period before delivery of the next
report, to the extent possible.
Notice of
results to
parties.
Annual report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(g) statistics on compliance plans conducted and actions taken by the Committee
during that period, a general assessment of the compliance of parties with agreements
entered into and conditions imposed under sections 4 that are in effect during that
period, including a description of any actions taken by the Committee to impose
penalties or initiate a unilateral review and any recommendations for improving the
enforcement of such agreements and conditions.
(h) cumulative and, as appropriate, trend information on the number of
declarations filed under section 5, the actions taken by the Committee in response to
those declarations, the business sectors involved in those declarations, and the
countries involved in those declarations.
(i) a description of—
(i) potential methods to improve such identification and the resources
required to do so; and
(ii) the number of transactions identified during the reporting period and
the number of such transactions identified for further review.
(3) The report shall be created and maintained in such manner, as may be prescribed by
the regulations framed under section 9.
15. (1) There shall be established a fund, to be known as the 'Committee on Foreign
Investment in India Fund' to be administered by the Chairperson.
(2) The Central Government shall provide, after the appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, necessary amounts each year to the Fund, as may be required, for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Committee may assess and collect a fee as may be determined by the Committee
by regulations with respect to each covered transaction for which a written notice is submitted
to the Committee under sub-section (1) of section 5 or a declaration under sub-section (4) of
section 5
(4) The amount of the fee to be assessed under sub-section ( 3) with respect to a
covered transaction—
(i) may not exceed an amount equal to one percent of the value of the transaction
or an amount decided by the Committee, whichever is less.
(ii) shall be based on the value of the transaction, taking into account the effect
of the fee on small business concerns; the expenses of the Committee associated with
conducting activities under this Act, the effect of the fee on foreign investment; and
such other matters as the Committee considers appropriate.
(5) The Committee shall periodically reconsider and adjust the amount of the fee to be
assessed under sub-section ( 4) with respect to a covered transaction to ensure that the
amount of the fee does not exceed the costs of administering this Act and otherwise remains
appropriate.
(6) Any fees collected under this Section shall—
(a) be deposited into the Fund solely for use in carrying out activities under this
Act;
(b) to the extent and in the amounts provided in advance in Appropriations Acts,
be available to the Chairperson;
(c) remain available until expended; and
(d) be in addition to any appropriations made available to the Committee.
Funding and
Fees.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5

14
CHAPTER IV
MISCELLANEOUS
16. The burden of proof for establishing that a covered transaction does not pose a
threat to the national security of India shall be the party to a covered transaction.
17. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Committee under section 5 or section 6 as
the case may be; may file an appeal to the High Court within thirty days from the date receipt
of the order.
18. No provision of this Act shall be construed as altering or affecting any other
authority, process, regulation, investigation, enforcement measure, or review provided by or
established under any other provision of the laws in force in India and shall be in addition to
and not in derogation thereof.
19. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
20. Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of this Act, shall be punishable with
a fine which shall not be less than rupees one crore, subject to a maximum of rupees twenty
five crore.
21. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Committee or
the person, officer or authority in respect of anything done by it or him in good faith in
pursuance of carrying out the bonafide purposes of this Act or of any rule or order made, or
direction issued, there under.
22. If any provision of this Act, or the application of such a provision to any person or
circumstance, is held to be invalid, the application of that provision or amendment to other
persons or circumstances and the remainder of the provisions of this Act shall not be
affected thereby.
23. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this  Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section and every regulation made by the Committee
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
Rules of
evidence.
Appeal.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Penalty.
Protection for
action taken in
good faith
Severability.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There is an imminent threat to India's national security on account of the influx of
Multi-National Corporations—large internet firms from certain leading economies into India's
financial technology space either directly or through a proxy. Such instances include the
buying of a large stake and taking de-facto control of the existing Indian companies. As far
as foreign investment is concerned, at present, there is no level playing field in India between
private sector banks and non-bank finance companies (NBFCs).
Since it is  extremely hard to get a fresh banking license, the favourite route for foreign
Multi-National Corporations to enter the Indian financial services space is through the non-
bank finance companies which are now becoming systemically important. Current foreign
direct investment regulations in India allow one-hundred per cent foreign investment in non-
bank finance companies under the automatic route. This unfettered foreign ownership and
control of our non-bank finance companies can potentially destroy the strong fabric of
India's financial services sector.
Foreign financial giants could capture a large chunk of our domestic lending market by
resorting to predatory pricing and capital dumping. This is nothing but a surreptitious
aggression, which, if unchecked, could give the foreign government access to sensitive data
on millions of individuals including armed forces personnel and corporates. These data
could be weaponized posing a serious national security threat. India must balance its national
interest with imperative of foreign investment against the potential damages.
In the light of this growing unacknowledged threat to national security, it is imperative
to redouble the ongoing efforts to ensure data privacy. The Reserve Bank of India presently
has an ownership cap of ten per cent on a single foreign investor in respect of private sector
banks. Further, the Reserve Bank of India currently has an overall ownership  cap of seventy-
four per cent on all foreign investors combined, in respect of private sector banks. These
ownership limits should be urgently extended to non-bank finance companies and payments
firms.
There is a need for a legislation which aims at balancing the possible gains from
foreign investment against potential national security harms.
Hence this Bill.
DR.  NARENDRA  JADHA V
15

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 15 of the Bill envisages the establishment of the Committee on Foreign
Investment in India Fund, out of the Consolidated Fund of India. Besides this, a non-
recurring expenditure is also likely to be involved. At this stage, it is not possible to quantify
the exact amount.
16

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
17

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
  to provide for measures to ensure national security while promoting foreign investment, to
reform the process of examination of such investment, vis-a-vis their effect, if any, on
national security and to establish a Committee on Foreign Investment to effectively
guard against the risk to national security posed by certain types of foreign investment
in financial services, critical infrastructure and technology sector, and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
.
————
(Dr. Narendra Jadhav, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—847RS(S3)—25-06-2019.