Asp
INTRODUCED jy THE Rasya §,
ON THE 25754 , 2008

Avousr, 2005

Bill No. LVI of 2005
PROHIBITION OF BEGGING AND REHABILITATION OF
BEGGARS BILL, 2005
A
BILL
to provide for the prohibition of begging and for the rehabilitation and welfare of
beggars by the State and for matters conneeted therewith and incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Patliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of india
& follows:— 2

1.00 This Act may be called the Prohibition of Begging and Rehabilitation of Beggars Short | extent
Act, 2005, and

commencement.
§ — (2)Itextends to the whole of India.
__ (3)Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
ithe Official Gazette, appoint.
2.Inthis Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— ५.2 कट पाक

44 (0) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of

that tate and in other cases the Central Government;
(+) "beggar" means any person who indulges in begging;
(©) "begging" includes, — .
rai tee Soliciting, asking for or receiving alms in cash or kind ins —
Sop, हे, place, market, place of tourism, steet, वा any place
Visited le or public transport, educational institution, aah
or frequented by general public;

Ig



Istablishment
of the National

‘Beggars
Welfare Fund.

_ 2

private premises for soliciting, asking fo, OF roma
ivi

exhibiting any wound, deformity ar disease of
soliciting, asking for or receiving alms;
other perso” fi a boy or girl who is below the age of eighteen ae
echild" means
ae J chil
(e) "children home" means 8

Act, 2000; हु
(0 “prescribed
) "Rehabilitation C

. ie
all be kept; the National Beggars Welfare Fund established under

Selfor any

idren home established under the Juvenile Juste s

means pr 4
entre” means 8 centre established under this Act, where ६

beggar shi
(h) "Welfare Fund” means
section 4.

ing by any beggar in an
3. (7) Begging by athe provistons ofsub-section (/) shall be guilty ofan offence

y form or manner is hereby prohibited.

(2) Whoever contravene:

t this Act. ; at ois
ee 4, (0) The Central Government shall, by notification im the Official Gazette,

establish the National Beggars Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act.

(2) The initial corpus fund of the Welfare Fund shall be five hundred crore rupees
which shall be provided by the Central Government after due appropriation madé by

1४7

‘ Sty,
escribed by rules made under this Act;

Parliament by law in this behalf. do

(3) After the establishment of the Welfare Fund, moneys therein shall be provided
by the Central and State Governments in such proportions as may be agreed to from

year to year on the basis of proportion to their beggars population relevant for the
purposes of this Act.

(4) the Welfare Fund may also receive money by way of donations from persons 2४

or associations or body corporate which shall also form the corpus of the Welfare Fund.

(5) The Central 6 ic
Fe = om ste = SEE shall administer the Welfare Fund in such manner

5. The Welfare Fund shall be utilized for—
() providing Vocational trainin,
है Fe ;
( ) Providing educational facilities to the child beggars and other illiterate
(c) free medica} Care to the beggars:

al assistance to
the beggars for Starting their venture or for their

Priate Gove
infra including Tament shall
. Pans for provision of en Such Schemes or workout ५९
Velihood. Nable the 'ए and create such suitable
(2) : DeBRars to take up suitable jobs for

tshan set “
1०) do not turn 8 to the olg. Pe stitute homes

beggars, } infirm, helpless in every district for

and destitute persons “4

8 to the beggars covered under this Act; 38

7


a aren

4, (0) whoever pnp or encourages any

qustody OF क्श्ाण्णि 2०88 8. Person, includin
cates “spall be punished with imprisonment whieh ie ON aS an exhibit
5 and also with fine which shall sates pe be less tha
less than one

ing SHO
ed (0 ten yeu
ver collects alms by forcing two
Or More persons j
SONS |

ex
2) Wher ent which shall
- pris ment which sha not be less than
iw inset and also W' seven yea

ims or deforms the parts of the body of a child
or any other
Person so

+ bye Child in his
fi le pu
॥ five ye Mg of
lakh rupees
in bees

begging shall be Santee’

ith fine which rf
shall not be less than fin bir be extend to fife
pees,

3) whoever mai

to ae him into be
aims himself for the

(0 ever m i mc 2 |
iso fora term which shall not be less Han eto beeing abe pis
ars but may rated

yeas

gging shall be punished with death

ithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
In force

8. (1) No
shall be arrested by the Police and before making
every such

any person found begging

the officer in charge of the concerned Police Stati 22700

हर soma ofthe arrested beggar ion shall satisfy himself as to the
(2) The Police shall keep 8 special watch at the places of tourism which are freq

uented

d foreign tourists to keep them free from beggars.
other than a child, arrested under the provisi :
thc ig provisions of th

Rehabilitation Centre, to be established in every district by poy fea

Government, wherein such beggar shall be provided with facilities for his rehabilitation in

such manner aS may be prescribed.

(4)Any child arrested on the ground of begging shall be

9. Notwithstanding anything

49° offence under this Act shall be cogni:

by domestic an
~ (3) Any beggats

sent 10 4

sent to a children Home.

contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 an

[28016 and non-bailable.

made there under shall have effect
law for the time
addition to-and not

1

10. The provisions of this Act and of any rules
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act

for the time being applicable to beggars.

in derogation of any other law
jo ‘1, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make roles
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Penalty

Arrest of

beggars and <
be seat to

Overriding
effect.


rEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONg
STA veguars ०१४४ in public places like markets, =
are miions oF roadside, in the streets ver residential coon, “०, ५
की ral 0 ०«] मं mosques, churches, gurudwaras, ete, Schools ! 0७७५५
and with ces like tem ad mmore so in the urban areas. The beggars ary Seen |, in
religious P trains, etc: a give alms. Such unwarranted acts of be T lurks the

» tn
ists to ‘al ‘ A 8 no g
moving forei tourists foreign visitors but also bring dishonour re "only ang

inds of : s
forcing or on in the minds nace of begging continues unabate throughous of व

bad i nately, the 116 laces of tourist importance, Not ont 04
ott in the urban आल) persons resort to begging for आदर ce icy,
ae apped, deprived a begging 888 regular occupation. There are Organized but a,
handicaps too take 10 deform some parts of their bodies and force the १500,
ts, Lactating infants are often used for begging siden

kidnap children, maim them,
by their own parents.

amoun'
‘ag and collect huge
the eee are forced to beg even poner ms :
menace of begging, a ० ive 2S 1० ७७ ८,
Inorder to tte to tackle begging not only through legislative mesg, watt
developing an infras environment, of accommodation and acceptance of पहल व sy
socially creating an them a life with dignity. So an atmosphere has to be creat ॥ the

society and to Mol ith sufficient means of livelihood by the Government, Prohibit, be
a ty es along with programmes for education, training and गा
begging |

children, women-and men engaged in begging.
Hence this Bill.

Meta”

PREMA CARIAPp 4

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117(3) Of THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Copy of 0.0. No. 11-1/2005-CW dated the 9th

August, 20
Shrimati Meira Kumar, Minister of Social Justice and Empower: दे 05 from

ment to the Secretary.

iT oe ation of Beggars Bill 2005” by
Shrimati Prema Cariappa, Member of Parliament (Ra, icle 1
creat had ent (Rajya Sabha) under Article 117(3) of the