As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD FEBRUARY, 2017
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Constitution, for article 109, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"109  (1). A Money Bill may be introduced in either House of Parliament.
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People, it shall be
transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations and the Council of States
shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the
Bill to the House of the People with its recommendations,and the House of the People
may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Council
of States.
(3) If the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the Council
of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with
the amendments recommended by the Council of States and accepted by the House of
the People.
(4) If the House of the People does not accept any of the recommendations of
the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both
Houses in the form in which it was passed by the House of the People without any of
the amendments recommended by the Council of States.
Bill  No. LVI of  2016
Amendment
of article 109.
Short title and
commencement.
5
10
15
20
Special
procedure in
respect of
Money Bills.

2
(5) If a Money Bill passed by the House of the People and transmitted to the
Council of States for its recommendations is not returned to the House of the People
within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to have been passed by
both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by
the House of the People.
(6) After a Money Bill has been passed by the Council of States, it shall be
transmitted to the House of the People for its consideration.
(7) The House of the People shall follow the same procedure laid down for
considering the Bill referred to in clause (6) like any other Bill passed by the Council of
States and transmitted to it.
(8) The procedure laid down under the clauses (2), (3), (4) and (5) shall be
followed in respect of Money Bills introduced in the House of People; and
(9) The procedure laid down under clauses (6) and (7) shall be followed in
respect of the Money Bills introduced in the Council of States.
3. In article 117 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the words "and a Bill
making such provision shall not be introduced in the Council of States" shall be
omitted
4. In the Constitution, for article 198, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"198 (1). A Money Bill may be introduced in either House of  Legislature of a
State which has a Legislative Council.
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by Legislative Assembly of a State
having a Legislative Council it shall be transmitted to the Legislative Council for its
recommendations and the Legislative Council shal within a period of fourteen days
from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly with
its recommendations and the Legislative Assembly may thereupon either accept or
reject all or any, of the recommendations of the Legislative Council.
(3) If the Legislative Assembly accepts any of the recommendations of the
Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both
Houses with the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council and accepted
by the Legislative Assembly.
(4) If the Legislative Assembly does not accept any of the recommendations of
the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both
Houses in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly without any of
the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council.
(5) If a Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the
Legislative Council for its recommendations is not returned to the Legislative Assembly
within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to have been passed by
both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by
the Legislative Assembly.
(6) After a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Council, it shall be
transmitted to the Legislative Assembly for its consideration.
(7) The  Legislative Assembly shall follow the same procedure laid down for
considering the Bill referred to in clause (6) like any other Bill passed by the Legislative
Council and transmitted to it.
(8) The procedure laid down under the clauses ( 2), ( 3), (4) and ( 5) shall be
followed in respect of Money Bills introduced in the Legislative Assembly; and
(9) The procedure laid down under clauses ( 6) and ( 7) shall be followed in
respect of the Money Bills introduced in the Legislative Council.
5. In article 207 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the words "and a Bill making such
provision shall not be introduced in  Legislative Council shall be omitted.
Amendment
of article 117.
Amendment
of article 198.
Special
procedure in
respect of
Money Bills.
Amendment
of article 207.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The founders of our Indian Constitution have thought that only the federal form of
Government with bicameral legislature is suitable for a vast country like India to sustain its
unique feature of  "Unity in Diversity". The Constitution has mandated to form a "Council of
States" i.e., a House elected by the elected members of Assemblies of the States and union
territories, along with a directly elected House of People to represent the parliamentary
democracy. Though the Union Council of Ministers are collectively responsible only to the
House of the People and the House of the People solely enjoys the matters relating to certain
financial matters, the Council of States had also played a constructive and effective role in
our federal set up. The performance of Council of States in the legislative field and in
influencing the policies of the government has been quite significant. The Rajya Sabha, the
Upper House of Parliament, has efficiently served its Constitutional mandate and preserved
its dignity and prestige.
However, Article 109 and Article 117 of the Constitution prohibit the introduction of
Money Bills and certain Financial Bills in the Council of States. The decision on these
Bills is totally vested with the House of People and Council of States cannot make
amendments to the above Bills but only it can recommend amendments and finally accepting
or rejecting the recommendations of Council of States rests with House of People only.
Introduction and final decision on the Money Bill are two different things and mere allowing
introduction of Bills will not have any effect either on the responsibility or on the authority
of the House. But denying even introduction of Money Bills in the Upper House is not
understandable and it is prohibiting the Members of the Council of States to put forth his/
her ideas in the matters of Money Bills, thus infringing their rights guaranteed under
articles 14 and 19(1) of the Constitution. Even permitting the introduction of Money Bills
in the Upper House will not hamper the basic principles of Constitution as the House of the
People is the ultimate authority to take a decision on the Money Bills as mandated by the
Constitution. Sometimes, a situation may arise that a party in power in a certain State, may
not have representation in House of People, and in such situation its representative in the
Council of States may want to bring to the notice of the government about some issues
involving financial liability on the Union Government, through a Private Member Bill. But
not allowing him/her to introduce such Bills by terming them as Money Bills/ Financial
Bills hampers the interest of the State.
Similarly Article 198 and Article 207 of the Constitution prohibit the introduction of
Money Bills and certain Financial Bills in the Legislative Council of the States, wherever they
exist. This is infringing the rights of Members of Legislative Councils.
Allowing the introduction of Money Bills/ Financial Bills in the Council of States/
Legislative Councils does not alter the basic features of the Constitution. Therefore, with
due respects to constitutional mandate of specific responsibility given to House of People
and Legislative Assemblies, this Bill proposes to sustain the dignity of the Upper House of
Parliament as well as Legislative Councils of the States by permitting the Money Bills/
Financial Bills to be introduced in them.
Hence, the Bill.
DR. K. V. P. RAMACHANDRA  RAO
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
109. Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.—(1) A Money Bill shall not be
introduced in the Council of States.
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People it shall be transmitted
to the Council of States for its recommendations and the Council of States shall within a
period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of
the People with its recommendations and the House of the People may thereupon either
accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Council of States.
(3) If the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the Council of
States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the
amendments  recommended by the Council of States and accepted by the House of the
People.
(4) If the House of the People does not accept any of the recommendations of the
Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in
the form in which it was passed by the House of the People without any of the amendments
recommended by the Council of States.
(5) If a Money Bill passed by the House of the People and transmitted to the Council
of States for its recommendations is not returned to the House of the People within the said
period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the
expiration of the said period in the form in which it was passed by the House of the people.
* * * * *
117. Special provisions as to financial Bills.—(1) A Bill or amendment making provision
for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be
introduced or moved except on the recommendation of the President and a Bill making such
provision shall not be introduced in the Council of States:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for the moving of
an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters
aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary
penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or
by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alternation or regulation of
any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India shall not be passed by either House of Parliament unless the
President has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.
* * * * *
198. Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.—(1) A Money Bill shall not be
introduced in a Legislative Council.
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a State having
a Legislative Council, it shall be transmitted to the Legislative Council for its recommendations,
and the Legislative Council shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt
of the Bill return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly with its recommendations, and the
Legislative Assembly may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations
of the Legislative Council.
4

5
(3) If the Legislative Assembly accepts any of the recommendations of the Legislative
Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the
amendments recommended by the Legislative Council and accepted by the Legislative
Assembly.
(4) If the Legislative Assembly does not accept any of the recommendations of the
Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in
the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly without any of the amendments
recommended by the Legislative Council.
(5) If a Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the Legislative
Council for its recommendations is not returned to the Legislative Assembly within the said
period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the
expiration of the said period in the  form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly.
* * * * *
207. Special Provisions as to financial Bills.—(1) A Bill or amendment making provision
for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 199 shall not be
introduced or moved except on the recommendation of the Governor, and a Bill making such
provision shall not be introduced in a Legislative Council:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for the moving of
an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
(2) A bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters
aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary
penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or
by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of
any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill, which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be passed by a House of the Legislature of
the State unless the Governor has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4415RS(S3)—03-02-2017.