THE SLUMS AND JHUGGI-JHOPRI AREAS (BASIC AMENITIES AND
CLEARANCE) BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for the basic amenities and clearance of Jhuggi-Jhopri areas and slum areas
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Slums and Jhuggi-Jhopri areas (Basic Amenities and
Clearance) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “building” includes any structure or erection or any part of a building but
does not include a plant or machinery comprised in a building.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No. LVI of 2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 4TH DECEMBER, 2015

2
Competent
authority to
declare slum
areas.
(b) “competent authority” means such officer or authority as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as the competent
authority for the purpose of this Act;
(c) “jhuggi-jhopri” means a small roughly built house or shelter usually made of
mud, wood or metal having thatched or tin sheet roof covering;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “slum” means an area consisting of jhuggi-jhopri areas, badly built and over-
crowded houses and buildings; and
(f) “slum clearance” means the clearance of any slum area by demolition and
removal of buildings therefrom.
3. The competent authority may, from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare any area to be a slum area within the meaning of this Act.
4. For the purpose of effective implementation of this Act, the Central Government
shall, through the competent authority,—
“(i) carry out the works of improvement in slums and jhuggi-jhopri areas from
time to time in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) provide all basic amenities in slums and jhuggi-jhopri areas in such manner
as may be prescribed;
(iii) extend financial assistance or vocational training to the inhabitants of
slums and jhuggi-jhopri areas for their self-employment; and
(iv) construct and allot dwelling units to the inhabitants of slums and jhuggi-
jhopri areas where such areas have been declared as slum basic amenities and
clearance areas.
5. (1) Where the competent authority is satisfied that most satisfactory method of
dealing with conditions in a slum area is the demolition of all the buildings in the area, the
authority shall by an order notified in the Official Gazette declare the area to be a slum
clearance area, that is to say, an area to be cleared of all buildings in accordance with
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
(2) The competent authority shall give adequate notice to the inhabitants of slums and
jhuggi-jhopri areas before demolition of houses, shelters or buildings.
(3) The competent authority shall not remove or demolish any jhuggi-jhopri aeas till
all residents of the area have been evacuated and allotted alternative dwelling units with all
basic amenities at convenient locations.
6. On and from the date of commencement of the Act, no person shall be allowed to set
up any jhuggi-jhopri in any area.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds every year for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for time being
in force.
Central
Government
to provide
basic
amenities to
inhabitants of
slums and
construct new
dwelling unit
through
competent
authority.
Competent
authority to
declare any
slum area to
be a clearance
area.
Ban on
setting up of
jhuggi-jhopri
areas.
Central
Government
to make
provision of
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matter dealt with in this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total priod of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
Power to
make Rules.
10
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A considerable people of our country are at present living in slums and jhuggi-jhopri
areas under inhuman conditions. There are no basic facilities of potable water, electricity,
sanitation and health services in these areas. However, people have no other option but to
live in such slums and jhuggi-jhopri area under inhuman conditions. The problem is more
appaling in Metropolitan cities and other big cities where people migrate in large numbers in
search of employment. Poverty forces them to find shelter in slums and jhuggi-jhopri areas.
However, there is no policy to deal with the problems of slums and jhuggi-jhopri areas.
Being a welfare state, it is the duty of the Government to provide alternate houses with
basic facilities to persons who are living in slum areas. The Government should also see that
slum areas do not come up and those which are already there should be cleared.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
B.K. HARIPRASAD
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide basic facilities
to those who are living in slum areas. Clause 7 of the Bill provides that Central Government
shall provide adequate funds for carrying out the purpose of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand five hundred crore will be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to maters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the basic amenities and clearance of Jhuggi-Jhopri areas and slum areas
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri B.K. Hariprasad, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3388RS(S3)—07-12-2015.