THE  COMPULSORY VOTING  BILL,  2006
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory voting in an election by each and every citizen of the
country and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory V oting  Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. LVII of 2006
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 28TH JULY, 2006.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2.  Every citizen, who is eligible to cast his vote in any election, shall exercise his right
to vote compulsorily when called for by the Election Commission:
Provided that a citizen may be exempted from compulsory voting only if—
(a) he is physically incapacitated from an illness of a serious nature and produces
a medical certificate from a registered medical practitioner testifying such incapacity;
or
(b) the Election Commission or any such other officer empowered by it, satisfies
himself after receiving request from the citizen before or after the election that the
reasons for such an exemption are bonafide and genuine.
3. After every election the Election Commission shall send the lists of names of all
those eligible voters, who have not cast their votes, to the Central Government and each
state government.
4. The Election Commission shall ensure that,—
 (i) the polling booths in adequate numbers, at convenient places are established
in each Lok Sabha/Vidhan Sabha constituency at the time of election.
(ii) the polling booths are established in such a manner that the number of
electorate in each polling booth remains equal and distance between two polling
booths is not more than half a kilometer:
Provided that the polling booths in hilly and desert areas shall be established
according to the geographical convenience and density of population.
(iii) safety and security to all the voters coming to cast their votes is provided at
the polling booths.
(iv) appropriate arrangements are made for enabling persons deputed for polling
duty to cast their votes.
(v) separate arrangements are made in each polling booth for exercising of
their franchise by the senior citizens, physically incapacitated persons and pregnant
women.
5. Any eligible citizen, who fails to cast his vote in any election—
(i) shall be liable to a fine of rupees five hundred; or
(ii) shall be punishable with imprisonment for two days; or
(iii) shall be punishable with forfeiture of his ration card; or
(iv) shall be debarred from contesting any election for a period of ten years from
the date of his conviction; or
(v) shall  be debarred from allotment of any plot or house in a Central/State
Government owned organisation; or
(vi) shall be debarred from taking loan of any kind in all the Central/State
Government owned financial institutions; or
(vii) shall be debarred from entitlement to any welfare scheme announced by the
Central/State Governments from time to time.
Provided that if such a person is an employee of the Central or the State
Government or any public sector undertaking owned by Central/State Government, he
shall be punished with—
(a) forfeiture of ten days salary: and
(b) delay in promotion for a period of two years.
Election
Commission
to send the list
of voters who
have not cast
their vote.
Establishment
of polling
booths etc.
Punishment.
Compulsory
voting by
every eligible
citizen.

3
6.  Any citizen who in spite of his illness or physical incapacity has cast his vote at an
election or any citizen who has cast his vote at all elections held during a period of fifteen
years preceding the commencement of this Act without any break shall be—
(a) given preference in services under the Central Government.
(b) given preference in admission to his children in the institutions of higher
education.
7. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any law for
the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act except to the extent
the provisions of other laws are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
 8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
3
Reward.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Power to make
rules.

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our country is the largest democratic country in the world and its population has
already crossed the one billion mark. But only about 35 to 45 per cent of voters of the
country exercise their franchise in any election. Often, it has been observed during
elections that the number of actual voters casting their votes is far less than the eligible
voters and the average number of votes polled is also very less.
It is evident from the general elections held for Lok Sabha and Vidhan Sabha in the
last few years that voting was less than 35 per cent in many States and in number of cases
people had boycotted elections and thus did not vote deliberately.
All the citizens should exercise their right to elect their representatives, so that the
elections reflect the will of the whole electorate and not merely a part of it.
With a view to increasing the voting percentage, the Bill proposes to make it
compulsory for every eligible voter to vote and provide for exemption only in cases where
the voter is physically incapacitated due to illness of serious nature or the voter has a
genuine reason for not casting his vote.
Since the provision is being made compulsory, punishment is also sought to be
given to those who do not vote in elections. However, reward is also proposed to be
given to those persons who vote at elections in spite of their illness or vote without any
break.
Hence this Bill.
JAI  PARKASH  AGGARWAL

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that polling booths in adequate numbers shall be
established in each constituency. It also provides for special arrangements for the persons
deputed for public duty, incapacitated persons and women besides safety and security
of citizens coming to cast their vote.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees eight crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fourteen crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purpose of the Bill and the rules relate to matters of details only. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory voting in an election by each and every citizen of the
country and for matters connected thereto and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1788RS(S-5)—28-07-2006.