AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH APRIL, 2012
Bill No. LVII of 2011
THE PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT OF CONFLICT OF INTEREST BILL, 2011
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER  II
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
3. Duty of public authority or body.
4. Duty of individual.
5. Disclosure of insider information.
6. Not to influence the decision of another person.
7. Restriction on gifts, services and benefits.
8. Procedure on conflict of interest.
9. Removal of person from office having conflict of interest.
CHAPTER III
P
ROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO MEMBERS OF COMMITTEE, PANELS, BOARD, AUTHORITY, COMMISSION OR
OTHER DECISION MAKING OR IMPLEMENTING BODY
10. Prohibited activities.
11. Restriction applicable to the Committee or Panel or Board or Authority or, other decision
making or implementing body.
12. Restriction applicable to former members.
CHAPTER IV
DISCLOSURE
13. Public disclosure statement.
14. Failure to file public disclosure statement.
15. Availability of public disclosure statement.
CHAPTER V
P
UNISHMENTS FOR OFFENCES
16. Offences and penalties.

17. Offences by companies.
18. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.
19. Cognizance of offences.
20. Punishment for act done with criminal intention.
CHAPTER VI
C
ONFLICT OF INTEREST COMMISSION
21. Constitution of conflict of Interest Commission.
22. Appointment of Chairperson and members.
23. Terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.
24. Salary and allowances of Chairperson and Members.
25. Removal from office.
26. Vacation of office of Chairperson or Members.
27. Vacancies, etc. not to invalidate the proceedings of the Commission.
28. Appointment of Commissioner, officers and staff.
29. Procedure for transacting business.
CHAPTER VII
F
UNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION
30. Functions of the Commission.
31. Powers of the Commission.
32. Actions to be taken after inquiry.
CHAPTER VIII
I
NVESTIGATION INTO BREACHES
33. Request for investigation.
34. Investigation and inquiry.
35. Police investigation of charge.
36. Report of Chairperson.
37. Recommended sanctions.
38. Public disclosure of sanctions.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
39. Power to make rules.
40. Annual report and audit statement.
(ii)

THE PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT OF CONFLICT OF
INTEREST  BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of an Institution for prevention and management of conflict of
interest and to realise the rights and duties of every citizen in a welfare state like
India and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
CHAPTER I
P
RELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention and Management of Conflict of Interest
Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH APRIL, 2012
Bill No.  LVII of  2011
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
10

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Chairperson" means Chairperson of Conflict of Interest Commission
appointed under section 22 of the Act;
(b) "Commission" means Conflict of Interest Commission set up under section
21 of the Act;
(c) "Conflict of Interest" means the existence of conflict between the public duty
of a public official or consultant and the private interest of such official or consultant
or any other person, in which the private interest of such official, consultant or other
person could improperly influence the performance of official duties and responsibilities
by any person, or result in breach of public trust, or be calculated to further the private
or commercial interest of any person or organisation;
Explanation I.— A conflict of interest may exist even if no unethical or improper
act results from it.
Explanation II.— A conflict of interest situation exists when a public official/
consultant/person serving on a public body/authority/project or whose
recommendations are sought for any public project by any public authority or body, or
who is inducted or proposed to be inducted on any committee or sub-committee or
advisory body established for any public project has served in a private organisation
within the past twenty four months, or is currently serving in a private organisation or
will be serving in a private organisation within the following twenty-four months.
(d) "Consultant" means any person whose expert services, advice or
recommendations are sought for any public project by any public authority or body, or
who is inducted or proposed to be inducted on any committee or sub-committee or
advisory body established for any public project;
(e) "Person" means any individual or association of persons or body or
organisation, whether incorporated or not, and includes any trust, foundation or
multilateral agency or organisation;
(f) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "Private interest" means an interest that is of personal financial, commercial
or other benefit to a public official or the organisation to which he belongs or has
belonged or has links to, or that can lead to financial, commercial or other benefits to
any person or corporation or organisation.
(h) "Public authority or body" means and includes:
(i) the Central Government or any Ministry or Department thereof;
(ii) a State Government or any Ministry or Department thereof;
(iii) any authority, organisation or body established by or under the
Constitution of India or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of
any State;
(iv) any authority, organisation or body owned, controlled or financed,
directly or indirectly, by funds provided by the Central Government or any State
Government;
(v) any non-government organisation which is substantially financed,
directly or indirectly, by funds provided by the Central Government or any State
Government;
(vi) any scientific, technical or research institution, university or deemed
university which is consulted by, or whose facilities or faculty are utilized for
obtaining expert services or recommendations for decision-making by,
Governments or entities enumerated in sub-clauses (i) to (v) of this clause;
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(vii) any private organisation, agency or body which is consulted by, or
whose facilities or employees are utilized for obtaining expert services or
recommendations for decision-making by, Governments or entities enumerated
in sub-clauses (i) to (v) of this clause.
(i) "Public project" means any project or program or activity or scheme proposed
or undertaken by the Central Government, a State Government or any of the entities
enumerated in sub-clauses (i) to (v) of clause (h) of this Section, including projects,
programs or activities proposed or undertaken through public-private partnership,
privatization, international or multilateral co-orporation or collaboration, or in furtherance
of international treaties or conventions;
(j) "Public official" means any person employed or for the time being engaged by
a public authority or body, whose services are at the relevant time utilized for any
public project, and includes any member of a committee or consultative group
constituted by any public authority or body for the purposes of a public project.
CHAPTER II
C
ONFLICT OF INTEREST
3. (1) A public authority or body which is engaged in planning or performance of a
public project shall not engage or utilize any public official or person or consultant for such
project if they know or have reason to believe that such public official or person or consultant
has or is likely to have a conflict of interest in respect of such project.
(2) If at any time it comes to the notice of such public authority or body that any public
official or person or consultant has or is likely to have a conflict of interest in respect of such
project, the public authority or body shall forthwith ensure that such public official or person
or consultant ceases to be engaged or employed or associated with such project, regardless
of whether such public project commenced before or after the coming into force of this Act,
or whether the appointment or engagement of such public official, person or consultant was
prior to coming into force of this Act.
(3) If at any time it comes to the notice of such public authority or body that any
recommendation was made or decision taken with the participation of a public official, person
or consultant who has or was likely to have a conflict of interest in respect of the particular
public project, the public authority or body shall forthwith re-examine such recommendation
or decision after complying with sub-section (2), and upon such re-examination shall take a
fresh decision or make a fresh recommendation if it deems fit.
(4) a public authority or body referred to in sub-section (1) shall not, except when it is
unavoidable in the public interest, accept funding or donations from any person if they know
or have reason to believe that such person has or is likely to have a conflict of interest in
respect of such project:
Provided that where acceptance of funding from such person is unavoidable in the
public interest, reasons shall be recorded for the same and the public authority or body shall
seek to obtain such funding from all competitors in the concerned filed.
4. A public official, consultant or a member or employee of any public authority or
body shall not render advice or make a recommendation or decision or participate in making
a recommendation or decision in respect of a public project if the concerned person has a
conflict of interest or knows or reasonably should know that in the making of the
recommendation or decision there is the opportunity to further the concerned person's
private interest or to further another person's private interest.
5. (1) A public official, consultant or a member or employee of any public authority or
body shall not use information that is obtained in his or her capacity as a public official,
consultant, member or employee and that is not available to the general public to further or
Duty of public
authority or
body.
Duty of
individual.
Disclosure of
inside
information.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
to seek to further the concerned person's private interest or to further another person's
private interest.
(2) A public official, consultant or a member or employee of any public authority or
body shall not divulge or communicate information mentioned in sub-section (1) to another
person if the concerned person knows or reasonably should know that the information may
be used for a purpose described in that sub-section.
6.  A public offical, consultant or a member or employee of any public authority or body
shall not use his or her office to seek to influence a decision made by another person so as
to further the concerned person's private interest or to further another person's private
interest.
7.  (1) A public offical, consultant or a member or employee of any public authority or
body shall not accept any direct or indirect benefit including but not limited to fee, payment,
gift, services that are monetary or in kind, hospitality including travel costs, personal benefit,
research funding, gifts to family members and the like, except lawful compensation, from any
person who he knows or has reason to believe or is likely to have a conflict of interest in
respect of any public project with which the public official, consultant, member or employee
of a public authority or body is concerned.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to a gift or personal benefit that is
received as an incident of the protocol or social obligations that normally accompany the
responsibilities of office:
Provided that such gift or personal benefit is immediately reported in writing to the
concerned public authority or body.
(3) The gift disclosure statement shall,—
(a) be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner; and
(b) indicate the nature of the gift or personal benefit, its source and the
circumstances under which it was given and accepted.
8. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 4, a public official, consultant or a
member or employee of any public authority or body who knows or has reasonable grounds
to believe that he or she has a conflict of interest in a matter that is before the Committee or
Panel or Board or Authority or Any other decision making or implementing body, shall, if
present at a meeting considering the matter, —
(a) disclosure the general nature of the conflict of interest, and
(b) withdraw from the meeting without voting or participating in consideration
of the matter.
9. (1) If it is found that any public official, consultant or employee or member of any
public authority or body has or had a conflict of interest, then such person shall forthwith be
removed from the said public body or authority, and all decision taken by the said public
authority or body during the tenure of such a person herein be cancelled and, shall thereafter,
be reviewed by public authority or body after the removal of such a person.
(2) Such public authority or body shall inform the Commission about the removal of
the concerned person and the results of the review of all the decisions taken during the
tenure of the said person, and shall also notify the same on the concerned public authority's
or body's website.
CHAPTER III
P
ROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO MEMBERS OF COMMITTEE, PANELS, BOARD, AUTHORITY, COMMISSION
OR OTHER DECISION MAKING OR IMPLEMENTING BODY
10. A member of a Committee, Panels, Board,  Authority, Commission or other decision
Making or implementing body shall not,—
(a) engage in any trade, occupation or employment or in the practice of any
profession that can be construed as giving rise to conflict of interest; or
Not to
influence the
decision of
another
person.
Restrictions
on gifts,
services and
benefits.
Procedure on
Conflict of
Interest.
Prohibited
activities.
Removal of
person from
office having
conflict of
interest.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

5
(b) engage in the management of a business carried on by a corporation or a
Business Interest Organisation; or
(c) carry on business through a partnership or sole proprietorship; or
(d) hold or trade in securities, stocks, futures or commodities, of commercial
enterprises that may benefit directly or indirectly through policy decisions or
implementation; or
(e) hold an office or directorship in a commercial enterprise or a Business Interest
Organisation or have held an office or directorship in a commercial  enterprise or a
Business Interest Organisation for the past twenty four months.
11.  Any authority, committee, Panel, Board or other decision making or a  implementing
body or a member of such a body shall not knowingly award a contract to or approve a
contract with, or grant a benefit to, a former member of the body until twenty-four months
have expired after the date on which the former member ceased to hold office.
12. No former member of a Committee, Panel, Board, Authority or Other decision-
making or Implementing body shall, unless twenty-four months have expired after the date
when he or she ceased to hold office as a member of the said body,—
(a) accept a contract or benefit that is awarded, approved or granted by the Committee,
Panel, Board, Authority or Other decision-making or implementing body.
(b) make representations on his or her own behalf or on behalf of any other  person,
corporation, commercial sector or Business Interest Organisation with respect to a contract
or benefit.
CHAPTER IV
D
ISCLOSURE
 13. (1) Every public official, consultant, member or employee concerned with a public
project shall file with the public authority or body, a public disclosure statement in the form
prescribed by the Commissioner.
(2) Where a consultant or member of any committee, sub-committee, advisory or
recommendatory body established by a public authority or body is employed or engaged by
any other person, corporation or organization, or is nominated or deputed for the purpose by
any other person, corporation or organization, then such other person, corporation or
organization shall also file with the public authority or body, a public disclosure statement in
the form prescribed by the Commissioner.
(3) A public disclosure statement shall be filed,—
(a) within thirty days after becoming a member of a Committee, sub-committee,
Advisory body, Panel, Board, Authority or Other decision-making or implementing
body; and
(b) within each subsequent year at the time specified by the Chairperson.
(4) Every person mentioned in sub-section (1) who is a member on the coming into
force of this section shall file a public disclosure statement in the prescribed form within
thirty days after the coming into force of this section.
(5) Subject to sub-section (6), a public disclosure statement shall contain,—
(a) interests of the member, and, so far as is known by the member, of the
member's spouse and minor children, and of private corporations controlled by the
member, the member's spouse and minor children, or any of them, and
(b) any salary, financial assistance or other benefit the member has received from
Restrictions
applicable to
the
Committee,
Panel, Board,
Authority,
Other
decision-
making or
implementing
body.
Restrictions
applicable to
former
members.
Public
disclosure
statement.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
any person, corporation or organisation other than the employer during the preceding
twelve months, or is likely to receive during the next twelve months.
(6) In a public disclosure statement with respect to a member or the member's spouse
or minor children, the following shall not be disclosed,—
(a) the primary residence owned or controlled by any such person;
(b) the primary recreational property owned or controlled by any such person;
(c) automobiles owned or controlled by any such person;
(d) items of domestic, household or personal use of ownership, including cash,
non-convertible bonds, trust and bank certificates and registered retirement savings
plans which are not self-administered.
(7) The person concerned shall file a statement of material change in the disclosure
with the public authority or body, in the form prescribed by the Chairperson, within thirty
days after,—
(a) a change in the assets, liabilities or financial or business interest of the
member or his or her spouse and minor children, or any private corporation represented
by any of them; or
(b) an event causes a person to become or cease to be a member of the member's
family, if such change or event shall reasonably be expected to have a significant effect
on the information previously disclosed.
14. (1) Where a public official, consultant, member or employee concerned with a
public project fails to file a public disclosure statement within the prescribed period, the
public authority or body shall not permit such person to attend the meetings of, or to
participate in the Committee, sub-committee, advisory or recommendatory body or in any
other aspect of the concerned public project, and shall forthwith report about the failure to
the Chairperson.
(2) Where a member fails to file a public disclosure statement by the date specified by
the Chairperson under sub-section (1) or fails to appear for consultation by the date specified
by the chairperson shall then he pepare a report with the name of the member concerned and
for public disclosure.
15. The public disclosure statement filed by the concerned person, corporation or
organization is deemed to be a public document, and shall be notified by the responsible
public body or authority and the Commission on their website and  shall be made available
on payment of reasonable charges to any person.
CHAPTER V
P
UNISHMENTS FOR OFFENCES
16. (1) Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets in the contravention
of provisions of section 3 or section 4 or section 5 or section 6 or section 8 or section 9 shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extent to five years, or with fine which
may extend to rupees ten lakh, or with both.
(2) Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets in the contravention of
the Provisions of section 11 or section 12 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to rupees five lakh, or with
both.
(3) Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets in the contravention of
any provisions of this Act or the Rules framed thereunder, for which no other penalty is
prescribed, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year,
or with fine which may extend to rupees one lakh, or with both.
Failure to file
public
disclosure
statement.
Availability of
Public
disclosure
statement.
Offences and
Penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
17. (1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time of the offence was directly incharge of, and was responsible to, the
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,—
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
18. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
19. No Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or  a Magistrate of the first
class shall take cognizance of and try any offence punishable under this Act.
20. For violation of any of the provisions of the Act with criminal intention, the person
shall be punished with minimum two years of rigorous imprisonment and a maximum of seven
years of rigorous imprisonment or with fine of rupees five lakh and both according to  the
gravity of offence.
CHAPTER VI
C
ONFLICT OF INTEREST COMMISSION
21. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, constitute
a body to be known as the Conflict of Interest Commission to exercise the powers conferred
on, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Commission  shall consist of the following:—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence and has done outstanding
work for promoting human rights and a serving or retired judge of Supreme Court;
(b) eight Members, out of which at least six shall be from civil society
organisations, and to shall be women, to be appointed by the Central Government from
amongst persons of eminence, ability, integrity, standing and experience in the
following fields:—
(i) education; or
(ii) public health including women and children's health; or
(iii) food and nutrition; or
(iv) employment and livelihood; or
(v) agriculture; or
(vi) environmental sciences; or
(vii) natural resource management; or
Constitution
of the
Conflict of
Interest
Commission.
Offences by
companies.
Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.
Cognizance of
offences.
Punishment
for act done
with criminal
intention.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(viii) economics; or
(ix) law.
(3) The office of the Commission shall be at Delhi.
22. The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint the
Chairperson and such other Members as defined in sub-section (2) of section 21:
Provided that the Chairperson shall be appointed on the recommendation of a three
member Selection Committee constituted by the Central Government under the Chairmanship
of the Prime Minister.
23.  (1) The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office for a term of three years
from the date of assuming the office:
Provided that Chairperson or any Member shall not hold the office for more than two
terms:
Provided further that no Chairperson or any Member shall hold office as such after he
or she has attained,—
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of sevently years; and
(b) in the case of a Member, the age of sixty five years.
(2) The Chairperson or a Member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
Central Government, resign his office at any time.
24. The Salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of, the Chairperson and Members, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
the Chairperson and Members, as the case may be, shall be varied to his or her disadvantage
after his or her appointment.
25. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the Chairperson may be removed
from office by an order of the Central Government on the ground of proved misbehaviour or
incapacity.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Central Government
may by order remove from office the Chairperson or any other Member, if the Chairperson or
any other Members, as the case may be,—
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) engages during his or her term of office in any paid employment outside the
duties of his office; or
(c) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(e) has so abused his office as to render his or her continuance in office detrimental
to the public interest; or
(f) is charged with Conflict of Interest; or
(g) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence, which in the
opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude; or
(h) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent from
three consecutive meetings of the Commission.
(3) No person shall be removed under this section until that person has been given an
opportunity of being heard in the matter.
Appointment
of
Chairperson
and Members.
Term of
Office and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and Members.
Salary and
allowances of
Chairperson
and Members.
Removal from
Office.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
26. (1) If the Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be,
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications as mentioned in section 25;
or
(b) tenders his or her resignation under sub-section (2) of section 22, his or her
seat shall thereupon become vacant.
(2) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a Member, whether by
reason of his or her death, resignation or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled within a
period of ninety days by making afresh appointment in accordance with the provisions of
section 22 and the person so appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the term of
office for which the chairperson, or the Member, as the case may be, in whose place he or she
is so appointed.
27. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of,—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Commission; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as the Chairperson or a Member;
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the merits
of the case.
28. (1) The Commission may appoint a Commissioner  and such number of Officers
and Staffs, as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions as provided
under the Act:
Provided that no appointment shall be made without prior approval of the Central
Government.
(2) The salary and allowances, and other terms of conditions of service shall be as
may be prescribed.
29. (1) The Commission shall meet regularly at its office at such time as the Chairperson
thinks fit, but three months shall not intervene between its last and the next meeting.
(2) All decisions at a meeting shall be taken by majority:
Provided that in the case of equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his or her absence
the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.
(3) If for any reason, the Chairperson is unable to attend the meeting of the Commission,
any Member chosen by the Members present from amongst themselves at the meeting, shall
preside.
(4) The Commission shall observe such rules of procedure in the transaction of its
business at a Meeting, including the quorum at such meeting, as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(5) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the Chairperson
or any other officer of the Commission in this behalf.
CHAPTER VII
F
UNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION
30. (1) The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely,—
(a) examine and review the safeguards provided by or under any law for the time
being in force for prevention of Conflict of Interest in decision making and
Vacation of
office of
Chairperson
or Member.
Vacancies, etc.
not to
invalidate the
proceedings of
the
Commission.
Appointment
of
Commissioner,
Officers and
Staff.
Procedure for
transacting
the business.
Functions of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
implementation of any policy or programme of the Government of India and State
Government;
(b) present to the Central Government, annually and at such other intervals, as
the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(c) examine all policies and programmes of the Central Government for Conflict
of Interest in decision making and implementation and initiate proceedings in such
cases;
(d) examine proposals for Public Private Partnerships for conflict of interest and
make recommendations to the Central Government;
(e) examine policies, programmes and Public Private Partnerships initiated before
the setting up of the Commission for conflict of interest and institute remedial action if
such conflict of interest is found to be existing or having existed when the decision
was taken or the programme was implemented;
(f) study treaties and other international instruments and undertake periodical
review of existing policies, programmes and other activities for conflict of interest;
(g) spread Conflict of Interest literacy among various sections of the society and
promote awareness of the safeguards available to prevent it through publications,
media, seminars and other available means;
(h) inquire into complaints and take suo motu notice of matters relating to conflict
of interest;
(i) such other functions as it may consider necessary for safeguarding the
interests of the people and their human rights and any other matter incidental to the
above functions.
(2) The Commission shall not inquire into any matter which is pending before a State
Commission or any other Commission duly constituted under any law for the time being in
force.
31. (1) The Commission shall, while inquiring into any matter referred to in clause (h)
of sub-section (1) of section 30 have all the powers  of a civil court trying a suit under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and, in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely,—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
or her on oath;
(b) discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or  office;
and
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.
(2) The Commission shall have the power to forward any case to a Magistrate having
jurisdiction to try the same and the Magistrate to whom any such case is forwarded shall
proceed to hear the complaint against the accused.
32. The Commission may take any of the following steps upon the completion of an
inquiry held under this Act, namely:—
(i) where  the inquiry discloses Conflict of interest, initiate measures to remove
such conflict; and
(ii) approach the Supreme Court or the High Court concerned for such direction,
orders or writs as that Court may deem necessary.
Powers of the
Commission.
Action to be
taken after
inquiry.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5 of 1908.

11
CHAPTER VIII
INVESTIGATION  INTO  BREACHES
33. (1) Any person may request in writing to the chairperson for investigating an
alleged breach of this Act by a Member of a policy or decision-making or implementing body.
(2) A request under sub-section (1) shall be in the form of an affidavit and shall set out
the grounds for the belief and the nature of the alleged breach.
(3) The decision-making or implementing body may also request the Chairperson to
investigate any matter in respect of an alleged breach of this Act by a Member.
34. (1) On receiving a request under section 33, the Chairperson may conduct an
investigation with or without conducting an inquiry.
(2) The Chairperson shall provide the Member who is the subject of the investigation
with reasonable notice and shall give the member an opportunity to respond to the allegation.
(3) When the Chairperson conducts an investigation or an inquiry under this section
the Member who is the subject of the request under section 33 shall respond promptly and
completely to all of the Chairperson’s questions and requests for information.
(4) Where the Chairperson elects to conduct an inquiry under this section, he
has all the powers and privileges conferred on a Chairperson under of this Act under
sub-section (2) of section 31.
(5) If the Chairperson is of the opinion that the request is frivolous, vexatious or not
made in good faith, or that there are no grounds or insufficient grounds for an investigation,
the Chairperson may refuse to conduct an investigation, or may cease the investigation.
(6) If the Chairperson refuses to conduct an investigation or ceases an investigation,
then he or she shall inform,—
(a) the member against whom the allegation was made, and
(b) the person or the decision-making or implementing body who made the
request for investigation.
Explanation .—
For the purposes of this section, the powers and actions taken by the Chairperson or
other authorities hereunder, shall be without prejudice to the provisions of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 or any other law dealing with conduct, discipline or vigilance of
Government servants or public authorities.
35. If the Chairperson, when conducting an investigation, discovers that the subject
matter of the investigation is being investigated by police or that a charge has been laid, the
Chairperson shall suspend the investigation until the police investigation or charge has
been finally disposed of, and shall make public disclosure of the matter.
36. (1) Where a request is made under section 33 and the chairperson has determined
that the request does not fall within the scope of sub-section (5) of section 34, the Chairperson
shall, upon completion of an investigation, report to,—
(a) the decision-making or implementing body to which the Member belongs,
(b) the Member who is the subject of the investigation,
(c) if the request was made by a person under sub-section (1) of section 33 that
person.
(2) Where it appears to the Chairperson that a report may adversely affect a Member,
the Chairperson shall inform the Member of the particulars and give the Member an
opportunity to make representations, before the Chairperson completes the report.
Request for
investigation.
Investigation
and inquiry.
49 of 1988.
Police
investigation
of charge.
Report of
Chairperson.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(3) The report of the Chairperson shall set out,—
(a) the facts found by the Chairperson,
(b) the findings as to whether or not a Member has breached the Act and the
nature of the breach, and
(c) the recommended sanction, if any.
(4) The Chairperson's report shall remain confidential until it is laid before the decision-
making or implementing body to which the Member belongs, and no person shall disclose all
or any portion of it before that time.
37. Where the Chairperson conducts an investigation under section 34 and finds that
a member has breached any of sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 11, 13, inclusive, or has failed to file
a gift disclosure statement, a public disclosure statement or a statement of material change
within the time provided by this Act or has failed to disclose relevant information in that
statement, the Chairperson may recommend that the Member be expelled from membership
of the said decision-making or implementing body.
38. Where the Chairperson conducts an investigation under section 34 and finds that
a Member has breached any of the sections mentioned in 37, the Chairperson shall make a
public disclosure of the findings and the sanctions against the Member and the same on the
website of the Commission.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
39. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette and make
rules for carrying out provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall
threafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
40. (1) The Chairperson shall in each year submit to both Houses of Parliament an
annual report describing the progress and activities of the Commission in the previous year.
 (2) The Annual Report and Audited statement of the commission shall be tabled in
both Houses of Parliament.
Recommended
sanctions.
Public
Disclosure of
sanctions.
Power to
make rules.
Annual Report
and audit
statement to
be laid before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Conflict of interest may be defined as a situation in which politicians, public servants,
consultants, technical or scientific experts, subject matter specialists or even academics
have an actual or potential interest (usually financial) that may influence or appear to influence
the conduct of their official duties or the quality of advice or recommendations rendered by
them in the context of decision making by the governance structures and institutions for
public good, conflict of interest becomes even more critical in cases where the corporate or
private sector or their lobbyists are involved.
Duty of Loyalty is a term used in corporate law to describe a fiduciaries' "conflicts of
interest" and requires fiduciaries to put the corporation's interests ahead of their own.
Extending this logic to governance structures and institutions, government employees, and
those representing the government in any form or manner are required to put public interest
or citizens' interests and rights ahead of their own interests or that of any other party.
The Fundamental Rights are set out in Part III of the Constitution. The State cannot
abridge those rights. The "right to life" is enshrined in article 21 as a fundamental right. This
right has been extended to cover the right to live with human dignity. In Bandhua Mukti
Morcha Vs. Union of India  Justice Bhagwati referring to Francis Coralie Mullin Vs.
Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi, stated:
 That it is the fundamental right of everyone in this country, assured under the
interpretation given to article 21 by this Court in Francis Mullen's case, to live with
human dignity, free from exploitation. This right to live with human dignity enshrined
in article 21 derives its life breath from the Directive Principles of State Policy and
particularly Clauses (e) and (f) of article 39 and articles 41 and 42 and at the least,
therefore, it must include protection of the health and strength of workers, men and
women, and of the tender age of children against abuse, opportunities and facilities
for children to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and
dignity, educational facilities, just and human conditions of work, etc. These are
the minimum requirements which must exist in order to enable a person to live with
human dignity and no State, neither the Central Government nor any State
Government has the right to take any action which will deprive a person of the
enjoyment of these basic essentials.
Thus, Duty of Loyalty dictates that every government employee, institution, or anyone
representing the government directly or indirectly in any manner ensure that, in cases where
conflict of interest exists, the citizens' right to live with human dignity is put ahead of all other
interests.
The need to avoid conflicts of interest in governmental decision making, and particularly
when constituting expert committees or advisory bodies, has found statutory recognition in
section 13(1) of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 which requires that the experts co-
opted on such committees must be "independent." The Supreme Court, in its Order dated
February 8, 2011 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 681 of 2004 (Central for Public Interest Litigation
v/s Union of India and Others, enforced this requirement for independence to avoid conflicts
of interest.
International and multilateral agencies and bodies have also accepted and recognised
the need to protect public decision making from private conflicts of interest. For example,
Article 5.3 of the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control spells out clearly the duty of
the state: "when Parties are setting and implementing public health policies related to tobacco
control, they shall 'act to protect these policies from commercial and other vested interests of
the tobacco industry in accordance with national law’." Similarly, the various agencies and
bodies constituted under the aegis of the United Nations, including the World Health
13

14
Organisation and other agencies, have framed guidelines to prevent conflicts of interest.
The current market liberalization has ushered in an era of new relationships between the state
and the markets, with a potential for creating a new relationship between the state and the
citizen. Private sector is increasingly being invited to present their solutions to the nation's
ills. Yet many services, such as public goods—health care, nutrition, education, water
sanitation, protection of the environment, etc.—cannot be provided by markets. The primary
duty of the private sector is to increase its profits for its shareholders, whereas the fundamental
and inalienable duty of the State is to provide all its citizens, especially the weakest and
poorest, with the minimum requirements to live a life with safety and dignity, regardless of
the cost. The Constitution of India makes it incumbent that the State gives primacy to article
21 and its expanded interpretation as the right to live with human dignity.
The differing priorities—that of the State and that of the private sector—present in
themselves a serious conflict of interest. The current draft legislation on Conflict of Interest
is an attempt to safeguard the duty of the State towards its citizens and to uphold article 21
of the Constitution.
Hence, this Bill.
DR.  E.M.  SUDARSANA  NATCHIAPPAN

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 21 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Commission to be known as the
conflict of Interest Commission. Clause 24 provides for the salary and allowances of
Chairperson and Members.
Clause 28 provides for the appointment of Commission Officers and staffs and their
salary and allowances and other terms of condition of service.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expanditure from the consolidated Fund of India.
However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantity the exact amount of recurring and
non-recurring expenditure to be involved.
15

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 40 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
16

GMGIPMRND—439RS(S3)—27-04-2012.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of an Institution for prevention and management of conflict of
interest and to realise the rights and duties of every citizen in a welfare State like
India and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. E.M.  Sudarsana Natchiappan, M.P .)