1
THE OLD DELHI CONSERV ATION AUTHORITY BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to conserve the iconic Old Delhi located in the heart of the National Capital Territory of
Delhi and to provide for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Old Delhi Conservation Authority Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise required,—
(a) "Authority" means the Old Delhi Conservation Authority established under
section 3 of the Act.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LVIII of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER 2019
5
Definitions.
10

2
(b) "building" includes any structure or erection or part of a structure or erection
which is intended to be used for residential, industrial, commercial or other purposes,
whether in actual use or not;
(c) "building operations" includes rebuilding operations, structural alterations
of, or additions to, buildings and other operations normally undertaken in connection
with the construction of buildings;
(d) "development" with its grammatical variations means the carrying out in a
building, engineering, mining or other operations or in, on, over or under the land or
the making of any material change in any building or land and includes re-development;
(e) "establishment" means,—
(i) any body or authority established by or under a Central Act or a State
Act or an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided by the Government
or a local authority, or a Government company as defined in section 2 of the
Companies Act, 2013, and includes a Department of the Government; or
(ii) any company or body corporate or association or body of individuals,
firm,  cooperative or other society, association, trust, agency, institution;
(f) "local authority" means the municipal corporation or municipality or Panchayat
or any other local  body constituted under any law for the time being in force for
providing municipal services or basic services, as the case may be, in respect of areas
under its jurisdiction;
(g) "Old Delhi" means all pubic areas localities, colonies, residential and
commercial structures, etc. falling within such zone as may be demarcated by notification
in the official gazette by the Central Government from time to time;
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
T
HE OLD DELHI CONSERVA TION AUTHORITY
3. The Central Government  shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Authority to be known as the Old Delhi Conservation Authority to exercise the powers
conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
4. The Authority shall consist of,—
(a) a person of repute having experience in the field of heritage conservation to
be nominated by the Central Government, as Chairperson; and
(b) the following persons as members:—
(i) a representative of the Delhi Development Authority nominated by the
Lieutenant Governor;
(ii) a representative each of the Delhi Urban Arts Commission, the
Disaster Management Centre, Government of National Capital Territory of
Delhi, and the Archeological Survey of India, to be nominated by the Central
Government;
(iii) a reputed historian who has been working for the conservation of
Old Delhi to be nominated by the Central Government;
(iv) two reputed architects with experience in heritage conservation to be
nominated by the Central Government; and
(v) a representative each of the BSES Rajdhani Power Limited, the Delhi
Jal Board, the Public Works Department, and the North Delhi Municipal
Corporation of Delhi; and
Constitution
of the Old
Delhi
Conservation
Authority.
Composition
of the
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
18 of 2013.

3
(vi) Shahjahanabad Redevelopment Corporation, to be nominated by the
Government of NCT of Delhi.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other members of the Authority shall be such, as may
be prescribed.
(3) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and
staff headed by a Secretary who shall be the Member Secretary to the Authority, with
such terms and conditions of service, as may be prescribed from time to time.
(4) The Authority shall observe such procedure in the transaction of its business
as may be prescribed.
5. The Authority shall perform the following functions, namely to,—
(a) act as the statutory body in the matter of preserving, developing and
maintaining the aesthetic quality of heritage of the Old Delhi.
(b) supervise, regulate and oversee local authorities or establishments in respect
of any project of building operations or engineering operations or any redeveloment
proposal undertaken which are likely to affect or shall affect the aesthetic quality of
any building or structure of historical significance in Old Delhi;
(c) tag all the heritage buildings or structures in Old Delhi and maintain a register
of these buildings or structure in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) grant funds to heritage structures or buildings including havelis, mosques,
temples, gurudwaras, etc. for their renovation and restoration;
(e) take steps to conserve, preserve and beautify monumental buildings or
structures in Old Delhi; and
(f) initiate any other project or lay-out to beautify and conserve the character of
Old Delhi.
6. The Authority shall have the power to reject or stop any redevelopment project
undertaken by any establishment or local authority if it is satisfied that the project is not in
public interest after recording the reasons thereof.
CHAPTER III
D
UTIES OF ESTABLISHMENT AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time being in force,
every establishment or local authority shall, before according approval in respect of any
proposal for building operations, engineering operations or redevelopment or development
work to be undertaken in Old Delhi, shall refer such proposal to the Authority for its scrutiny
and the decision made by the Authority  shall be binding, on such establishment or local
authority.
CHAPER IV
H
ERITAGE CELL
8. (1) A Heritage Cell shall be established under the Authority, in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(2) The Heritage Cell shall tag all the historically significant buildings or structures in
Old Delhi in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Heritage Cell shall regularly inspect all the historical buildings or structures
and shall make periodic recommendations to the Authority for their upkeep and
conservation.
Functions of
the Authority.
Power of
Authority to
reject
redevelopment
projects.
Duty of
Establishments
and Local
Authorities to
Refer
Development
Proposals to
the Authority.
Establishment
of a Heritage
Cell.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
9. Nothwithstanding anything provided in the Memorandum and Articles of
Association of Shahjahanabad Redevelopment Corporation, the Authority shall have the
powers to make by-laws, regulations, and pass directions on the redevelopment, construction
and renovation work with respect to Old Delhi.
10. The recommendations made by the Authority shall be binding in nature on all the
local authorities and establishemtns.
11. The Authority shall take the recommendations of stakeholders into account before
making any decision.
12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Authority for its functioning as well as for the
renovation, conservation, and redevelopment work carried on by the Authority.
13. The Authority shall have the powers to receive grants from international and
national organisations working for heritage conservation.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
carry out the provisions of this Act.
15. The Authority may, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act or the rules
thereunder, issue such directions to an establishment or a local authority, as it deems fit.
Overriding
powers of the
Authority.
Recommendations
of the
Authority to be
binding in
nature.
Authority to
take
stakeholders’
recommendations
into account.
Central
Government
to provide
funds to the
Authority.
Authority to
accept grants
from
international
and national
organisations.
Power to
make rules.
Power to issue
directions.
5
10
15

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are hundreds of old havelis, mosques, temples, bazaars, mohallas, chowks
and streets in old Delhi area which rival the finest heritage cities in the world. Because of
neglect and lack of funds these heritage structures and buildings are in dilapidated condition.
To redevelop a part of Delhi, i.e., Chandni Chowk, a redevelopment project was initiated by
the Government of NCT of Delhi. However, it has led to destroying the cultural and historical
character. It is pertinent to conserve the character of Old Delhi during the course of its
redevelopment in the future as well. Therefor, the Bill proposes establishment of Old Delhi
Conservation Authority under the Central Government to ensure the planned development
of Old Delhi while conserving its historical and cultural character.
The Old Delhi Conservation Authority shall be the exclusive authority to conserve,
redevelop and maintain aesthetic quality of Old Delhi. The Shahjahanabad Redevelopment
Corporation (SRDC), which is under the Government of NCT to Delhi, shall not have any
powers or functions with respect to the conservation and  redevelopment of Old Delhi. The
Shahjahanabad Redevelopment Corporation shall not intervene in the functioning of the
Authority and there shall be no overlap in the functions of the Authority and the Corporation.
The Old Delhi Conservation Authority shall also advise the North Delhi Municipal
Corporation, the Disaster Management Centre, and any other corporations undertaking
redevelopment work in Old Delhi. It shall take the opinion of stakeholders into account
before confirming any development or redevelopment or conservation  project. It shall also
have a heritage cell which will ensure that heritage structures in Chandni Chowk retain their
original Character.
Hence, this Bill.
VIJAY GOEL.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute an Authority for Conseration of Old Delhi. The
creation fo Authority as per section shall involve expenditure on account of office expenses,
salaries and allowances of the staff clause 12 provides for funds to be made available by the
Central Government for the functioning of the Authority.
2. Hence, the Bill, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. At this stage, it will be difficult to qualify the exact amount of expenditure of both
recurring and non-recurring nature on account of the constitution of the Authority.

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.
The matters in respect of which rules may be made or notification may be issued are
essentially matters of detail or procedure only. The delegation of legislative power, therefore,
is of normal character.

8
RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to conserve the iconic Old Delhi located in the heart of the National Capital Territory of
Delhi and to provide for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Vijay Goel, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4323RS(S3)—11-12-2019.