THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 10th day of July, 2013.
2. In article 102 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘‘(1A) Nothing in clause (1) of this article shall prevent the Parliament from
making any law containing special provisions concerning the elected members of
either House of Parliament with regard to the date of disqualification and such other
matters pertaining to the rights and privileges of the elected members.”
3. In article 191 of the Constitution, after clause(1), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘‘(1A) Nothing in clause (1) of this article shall prevent the Parliament from
making any law containing special provisions concerning the elected members of the
Bill No. LVII of 2016
Short title, and
commencement.
5 Amendment
of article
102.
Amendment
of article
191.
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 2ND DECEMBER, 2016

2
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State with regard to the date of
disqualification and such other matters pertaining to the rights and privileges of the
elected members.’’

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Representation of the People Act, 1951 provides for the conduct of elections of
the Houses of Parliament and the House or Houses of the Legislature of each State, the
qualifications and disqualifications for membership of those Houses, the corrupt practices
and other offences at or in connection with such elections and the decision of doubts and
disputes arising out of or in connection with such elections.
Section 8 of the said Act provides that a person convicted of an offence mentioned
in the said section shall be disqualified from the date of conviction and the disqualification
is to be continued for such period as specified in that section. sub-section ( 4) thereof
carves out an exception providing that the disqualification under sub-sections ( 1), (2) or
(3) of the said section shall not take effect in the case of a sitting member of Parliament or
the Legislature of a State until three months have elapsed from the date of conviction or,
if within that period an appeal or application for revision is brought in respect of the
conviction or  the sentence, until that appeal or application is disposed of by the court.
The Supreme Court in Lilly Thomas Vs. Union of India and others [W.P . (Civil) No.
490 of 2005], in its judgement dated 10th July, 2013 has held that Parliament has no power
to enact sub-section ( 4) of section 8 of the said Act and declared that the said provision
as ultra vires of the Constitution and judgement be given prospective effect the Court
also observed that in view of the provisions of the article 102(3)(1)(e)(a) and article 191
(1)(e), Parliamment has power to make law laying down the same disqualifications for a
person who is to be chosen as member of either House of Parliament or as a member of the
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State and for a person who is a sitting
member of a House of Parliament or a House of the State Legislature. The Honourable
Court has also held that disqualification is instantaneous unless judicially redressed by an
order of the appellate/revisional court suspending the operation of such conviction.
Having regard to the fact that there are rights and privileges constitutionally mandated
in respect of elected Members of the Parliament and Legislatures, imbued with the obligation
of espousing the cause of the electorate in the law-making bodies, it is deemed fit and
proper to enable the law to recognise such distinction between the elected members and
persons who seek such election vis-a-vis the effects of disqualification under the law
referable to article 102(1)(e) and article 191(1)(e).
It is further noticed that the disqualification of an elected member immediately from
the date of conviction and sentence and vacation of his Parliamentary or Legislative seat
creates vacuum in respect of representation of the people in the Lower House and Vidhan
Sabha as case may be. There cannot be any vaccum in respect of representation of people
in an elective democracy. This is more so because, the right of the electors to be represented
in the legislative process is a tenet of elective democracy. Further, the elections to the seat
so vacated by elected member owing to his disqualification given effect instantaneously,
would incur considerable expenditure to the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is further noticed that should a High Court or Supreme Court in its final judgement
overrule or set aside the conviction or sentence, any process of bye-election initiated
within six months of the vacancy under section 151A of the Representation of People Act,
1951 resulting in election of another person, cannot be reversed. In the Interregnum, if the
elected member is deprived of his rights and Privileges of being an elected Member, the
injury to the elected Member is irreparable including the right of the electors to be
represented by such elected Member.
Therefore, it has been proposed to amend the provisions of article 102 and article 191
of the Constitution of India to empower Parliament to provide for special provisions in
regard to elected membes vis-a-vis disqualification by operation of law referable to article

4
102(1)(e) and 191(1)(e) of the Constitution validating section 8(4) of the Representation
of People Act, 1951, by legislatively removing the basis of the judgement of the Supreme
Court in Lily Thomas case. The amendment is proposed with retrospective effect, i.e.,
10th July, 2013, the date on which the honourable Supreme Court prospectively declared
section 8(4) of the Representation of People Act, 1951 as ultra vires.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence  this Bill.
V.  VIJAYASAI  REDDY

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
102. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being
chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of Parliament—
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State, other than an office declared by Parliament by law not to
disqualify its holder;
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a
foreign State, or is under any acknowledgement of allegiance or adherence to a foreign
State;
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause a person shall not be deemed to hold
an office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State by reason
only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State.
(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of either House of Parliament if
he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.
* * * * *
191. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being
chosen as, and for being, a member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a
State—
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government
of any State specified in the First Schedule, other than an office declared by the Legislature
of the State by law not to disqualify its holder;
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign
State, or is under any acknowledgement of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, a person shall not be deemed to hold
an office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State specified
in the First Schedule by reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such
State.
(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative Assembly or
Legislative Council of a State if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.
* * * * *

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri V . Vijayasai Reddy, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3647RS(S3)—02-12-2016.