1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parilament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In  article 16 of  the Constitution  for clause (4), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
''(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens,
in proportion to their population which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately
represented in the services under the State.''
Bill  No. LVII of  2022
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of article 16.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022

2
STA TEMENT   OF   OBJECTS   AND   REASONS
In terms of the principles of affirmative action enabled under the Constitution of India
to ameliorate the conditions of Other Backward Classes (OBCs), periodic measures have
been taken by the previous Governments. However, OBCs have not secured representation
proportionate to their population in Government jobs.
2. The representation of the citizens from socially and educationally backward classes
in Government jobs, as provided by the Constitution is only 27 per cent while their population
is fairly more than this.
3. The proposed Bill would enable adequate, Reservation for OBCs in appointments
or posts and make the system of appointments more equitable and thereby increase the
representation of OBCs in proportion to their population in Government jobs.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
JA VED  ALI  KHAN.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*******
16. (1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of
birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or  discriminated against in respect of, any
employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law prescribing, in
regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office under the Government
of, or any local or other authority within, a State or Union territory, any requirement as to
residence within that State or Union territory prior to such employment or appointment.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in
the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
reservation in matters of promotion, with conseqential seniority, to any class or classes of
posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in the services
under the State.
(4B) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State considering any unfilled vacancies
of a year which are reserved for being filled up in that year in accordance with any provision
for reservation made under clase (4) or clause ( 4A) as a separate class of vacancies to be
filled up in any succeeding year or years and such class of vacancies shall not be considered
together with the vacancies of the year in which they are being filled up for determining the
ceiling of fifty per cent, reservation on total number of vacancies of that year.
*******
Equality of
opportunity
in matters of
public
employment.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Javed Ali Khan, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1783RS(S3)—12-12-2022.