iF

eqnerm |

Bill No. LVI of 2004

THE UNIVERSITY OF ALLAHABAD BILL, 2004

ARRAGEMENT OF CLAUSES
Ciauses
‘Short title and commencement
Declaration of University of Allahabad as Institution of national importance.
Definitions
Incorporation of University of Allahabad.
Effect of incorporation of Alishabad University.
Objects of University.
Powers of University.
Jurisdiction,
University open to all persons irrespective of gender, class or creed.
The Visitor.
IL. Chief Rector.
Officers of University,
The Chancellor.
The Vice-Chancellor.
The Pro-vice-Chancellor.
Deans of Faculties.
‘The Registrar.
‘The Finance Officer.
Other officers,
Authorities of University.
‘The Court.
‘The Executive Council.

Bern owen ह+

RREGH

The Finance Committee,
Other authorities.

The Faculties and Departments.
Power to make Statutes.
‘Statutes, how to be made,
Power to make Ordinances.

SRSRNRREERERBSES

RS

Annual report,



&

Ciauses
33. Furnishing returns, ete
4. Conditions of service of employees.
35, Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.
36. Right ro appeal
37. Provident and pension funds.
38. Dispuies as to constitution of authorities and bodies.
39. Filling and casual vacancies,
40, Proceedings of authorities 06 bodies not invalidated by vacancies.
41, Protection of action taken in good faith
42. Mode of proof of University record.
43. Power of remove difficulties.

4, Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazete and to
be laid before Parliament.

45. Transitional provisions.
46. Amendment of U.P Act 10 of 1973,

THE SCHEDULE



ae INTROOUCED # THE Rarva Santa +

Bill No. LVI of 2004
—__—=

THE UNIVERSITY OF ALLAHABAD BILL, 2004
4
BILL.
to declare the University of Allahabad to be an institution of national importance and
10 provide for its incorporation and matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto,
86 it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. (1) This Act may be called the University of Allahabad Act, 2004

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, @ppoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.

2, Whereas the objects of the University of Allahabad in the State of Uttar Pradesh are
Such as to make it an Institution of national importance, it is hereby declared that the said
University is an Institution of | national importance.

Short tithe
ad
commencsment

Dectaration
of University
of Allahabad
as institution
of national

importance.


| 5
3... In this Act, and in al! Statutes. made hereunder, unless the context otherwise

requires, —

(a) “Academic Council” means the Academic Council of the University;

(6) “academic staff" means such categories of staff as are designated as academic
staff by the Statutes; 5

(c) “appointed day” means the date of establishment of the University of
Allahabad under sub-section (1) of section 4;

(व) "Centre" means a unit of the University 04 of a University Institute providing
teaching, consultancy and research facilities;

(e) “Chancellor” means the Chancellor of the University appointed under section 10
3;

(1 “Constituent College” means a college prescribed as such by the Sututes;

(6) “Constitwent Instinute” means an Institute prescribed as such by the Statutes;

(A) “Court” means the Court of the University;

() “Department” means a Department of a Faculty, 1s
(0 “Director” means the head of a University Institute or Constituent Institute;

(8 “employee” means any person appointed by the University and includes
teachers agd other staff of the University;

()) “Executive Council” means the Executive Council of the University;
(m) “Faculty” means a Faculty of the University; ao

(n) “Finance Officer” means the Finance Officer of the University appointed
under section 18;

(o) “Ordinances” means the Ordinances of the University;
(p) “Principal” means the head of a University College or a Constituent College,

(q) “Pro-Vice-Chancellor” means the Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the University 25:
appointed under section 15;

(r) “Registrar” means the Registrar of the University appointed under section
mm

(5) “Regulations” means the Regulations of the University;

(0 “Statutes” means the Statutes of the University; So

(४) “teacher” means Professors, Readers and Lecturers appointed or recognised
by the University;

(v) “University” means the University of Allahabad established and incorporated
under section 4;

{w) “University appointed teacher" means « teacher appointed by the University 357
for imparting instruction and conducting research in the University 06 any college or
institution maintained by the University,

(x) “University College” means a college or an institution maintained by the
University or admitted to the privileges of the University as a Faculty;

(y) “University Institute” means an Institute, established and maintained by the to
University,


=

(2) “University recognized teacher” means a teacher recognized by the University
for imparting instruction and conducting research in a college or institution admitted
to the privileges of the University;

(za) “Vice-Chancellor means the Vice-Chancellor of the University appointed
5 under section 14,

4. (J) The University of Allahabad in the State of Uttar Pradesh, established under the —|ecorporatien
UP Act of Uttar Pradesh Universities Act, 1973, shall be established as a body corporate under this of University
1973. Act having perpetual succession and.a common seal and shall, sue and be sued by thesaid — °! Allshabad
name.

lo (2) The first Chancellor, the first Vioe-Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the

Executive Council and the Academic Council, and all persons who may hereafter become
such officers or members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, shall

constitute the University.
(3) The headquarters of the University shall be at Allahabad.
is 5. On and from the appointed day, — Effect of

(a) any reference to the University of Allahabad in any law (other than thisAct) of 14९४० ०९
of in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the University, University

(6) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the University of
Allahabad shall vest in the University;

2° (c)all rights and Habitities of the University of Allahabad shall be transferred to,
and be the rights and liabilities of, the University;

(d) every person employed by the University of Allahabad immediately before
the appointed day shall hold his office or service in the University by the same tenure,
at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same

25° rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other matters
as he would have held the same if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to
do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration
and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:

Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his

3०... employment may be terminated by the University in accordance with the term of the

contract with the employee or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment

to hie by the University of compensation equivalent to three months’ remuneration in

case of permanent employees and one month's remuneration in the case of other
employees:

= Provided further that every person employed before the appointed day, pending
the execution of a contract under section 34, shall be deemed to have been appointed
in accordance with the provisions of a contract consistent with the provisions of this
Act and the Statutes:

Provided also that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Vice-

4 Chancellor and Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the University of Allahabad in any law for the

time being in force, or in any instrument or other document, shall be construed as a

reference respectively to the Vice-Chancellor and the Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the
University;

(०) the Vice-Chancellor of the University, appointed under the provisions of the

UP Ast 1004S Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973 shall be deemed to have been appointed as

wn the Vice-Chancellor under this Act, and shall hold office for a period of three months or
till such time the Vice-Chancellor is appointed, whichever is earlier.



Powers of

4

6. The objects of the University shall be to disseminate and advance knowledge by
Providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of earning as it may deem fit;
to make provisions for integrated courses in the Humanities, the Social Sciences, the basic
and applied Science and Technology in the educational programmes of the University; to

take appropriate measures for promoting innovations in teaching-learning process, inter- 5

disciplinary and professional studies and research, removal of pender disparities and the
digital divide, and the application of knowledge to social advancement, national progress
and human welfare; and to educate and train human resource for the development of the
country.

‘University.

7. The University shall have the following powers, namely: — Lad

(7० provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the University may,
from time to time, determine and to make provisions for research and for the advancement
and dissemination of knowledge;

(ii) ४ grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas
of certificates and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of 15
examinations, evaluation or any other method of testing and to withdraw any such
diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic distinctions for good and sufficient
cause,

(iii) © confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed
by the Statutes;

(iv) to organise and to undertake open learning peogrammes, extramural studies,
training and extension services;

{v) to institute Chairs, Principalships, Professorships, Readerships and
Lecturerships and other teaching and academic positions, required by the University
and 10 appoint persons to such Chairs, Principalships, Professorships, Readerships 2357
and Lecturerships and other teaching and academic positions;

(vi) to recognize persons as University recognized teachers;

(vif) ४७ declare persons working in any other University or organisation, as
teachers of the University;

(viii) to appoint, on contract or otherwise, visiting Professors, Emeritus 3०
Professors, Consultants, Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to the
‘advancement of the objects of the University,

(é) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments
thereto;

(2) ४० lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including 357
their code of conduct,

(xi) to establish and maintain University Colleges and University Institutes for
imparting instruction and conducting research;

(xii) to admit to its privileges colleges and institutions situated within the territorial
jurisdiction of the University, as University Colleges, Constituent Institutes and Go
Constituent Colleges, and to withdraw all or any of those privileges in accordance
with such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes;

(xtif) to confer autonomous status on a college or an institution ज a Department,

35 the case may be, and to withdraw such status, in accordance with the Statutes;

(xvi) to co-operate of collaborate or associate with any other University ०० पढ़"
; |
such purposes as the University may determine;



i

(rv) to determine standards of admission, including examination, evaluation or
any other method of testing. 10 the University, and the institutions maintained by or
admitted to the privileges of the University;

(xv/) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges:

5 (xvii) to establish and recognise hostels and supervise the residence of the
Students of the University, make arrangements for promoting their health and general
welfare and guide the Constituent Colteges to like ends in respect of the students
enrolled thereat;

(evil) to regulate and enforce di ipline among the students and the employees,
te and to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the
University to be necessary:
(xix) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals
and prizes;

(xx) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage
is and dispose off any property, movable or immovable, including trust and endowment
Properties, forthe purposes of the University; 7
Provided that no immovable praperty shall be disposed off except with the prior
approval of the Central Government;
(ex) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of
2e the property of the University, money for the purposes of the University; and
(xxii) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or
conducive to the attainment of ail or any of the objects of the University,

8. (/) Save as otherwise provided by this Act, the powers conferred on the University
shall be exercisable in respect of the area within a radius of sixteen kilometres from the
25 Convocation Hall of the University, without prejudice to the territorial jurisdiction over the
said area that may be assigned to any other University.
(2) On and from the appointed day, alt institutions admitted to the privileges of, or
maintained by, the University of Allahabad as incorporated under the Uttar Pradesh State
UP Act 10 of Universities Act, 1973 shail stand admitted to the privileges of, or maintained by, the University
1१8 3४० and shall be governed by such conditions as may be prescribed by Statutes,

9. The University shall be open to all persons of either sex and of whatever caste,

Steed, race or class and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose on any
Person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any office therein or be admitted as a
33° student in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from
making special provisions for the employment or admission of women, physically handicapped
or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

Me 10. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.

(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one oF more persons to review the work
and progress of the University, inchading the colleges and institutions maintained by it, and
to submit 3 report thereon; and upon receipt of such report, the Visitor may, after obtaining
the views of the Executive Council thereon through the Vice-Chancellor, take such action

4S and issue such directions as he considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt
within the report and the University shall be bound to comply with such directions,

(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection 10 be made, by such person
of persons.as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, laboratories and equipment, and



6

of any college of institution maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges; and
also of the examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by the University and
to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the
administration of finances of the University, and the said colleges and institutions,

(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub-section (4), give notice of his 5
intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made—
(a) to the University, if such inspection or inquiry is to be made im respect of the
University of any college or institution maintained by it, or

(8) to the Management of the college or institution, if the inspection or inquiry
is to be made in respect of a college or institution admitted to the privileges of the so
University, and the University or the Management, as the case may be, shall have the
right to make such representations to the Visitor, as it may consider necessary.

(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University or the
Management, as the case may be, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or
inquiry as is referred to in sub-section (3). a

(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be mate by the Visitor, the
University or the Management shall be entithed to appoint a representative, who shall have
the right to be present and be heard at such inspection or inquiry.

(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made im respect of the University of
any college or institution maintained by it, address the Vice-Chancellor with reference to the 2
result of such inspection or inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the
action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address
made by the Visitor, the Vice-Chancellor shall communicate to the Executive Council, the
views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer upon the action to be taken
thereon.

(8) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of any college or
institution admitted to the privileges of the University, address the Management concerned
through the Vice-Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry, his
views thereon and such advice as he may be pleased to offer upon the action to be taken
thereon. 3°
(9) The Executive Council or the Management, as the case may be, communicate,
through the Vice-Chancellor to the Visitor such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has
been taken upon the result of such inspection or inquiry.

(70) Where, the Executive Council or the Management, as the case may be, does not,
within # reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after 3357
considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the Executive Council or
the Management, issue such directions as he may think fit and the Executive Council or the
Management, as the case may be, shall comply with such directions,

(17) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by
order in writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the ५०
Act or the Statutes or the Ordinances:

Provided that before making any such order, the Visitor shall call upan the Registrar to
show cause why such an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within #
reasonable time, he shall consider the sare,

(72) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes, y s~

-

Chief Rector. 11, The Governor of the State of Uttar Pradesh shall be the Chief Rector of the
University,


i=

12. The following shall be the officers of the University, — Officers ef
Univesity
(1) the Chancellor;

(2) the Vice-Chancellor:

(3) the Pro-Vice-Chanceiloe:
s (4) the Deans of Faculties;

(5) the Registrar;

(6) the Finance Officer; and
(7) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of
the University,

te 13. (4) The Chancetlor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be The
prescribed by the Statutes, Chanceltor

(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office. be the head of the University and shall,
if present, preside at the Convocations of the University held for conferring degrees and

meetings of the Count
= 14. (J) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner and on ‘The Vice-
Such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes. Chanceltor

(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the
University and shall exercise Beneral supervision and control over the affairs of the University
and give effect to the'decisions of all the authorities of the University.

ze (3) The Vice-Chancellor may, if be is of the opinion that immediste action is necessary
on any mater, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under
this Act and shall report to such authority the action taken by him on such matter;

Provided that such exercise of power shall be made only in emergent situations and in
90 case in respect of creation, and upgradation of posts and appointments thereto:

as Provided further that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that such action
Sught not to have been taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon
shall be final:

Provided also that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the

action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under this sub-section shall have the right 10 appeal

Be against such action to the Executive Council within three months from the date on which

decision on such action is communicated to him and thereupon the Executive Council may
confirm, modify oF reverse the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor,

(4) The Vice-Chancellor, ifhe ७ of the opinion that any decision of sny authority of the

University is beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the

3s Statutes or the Ordinances or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University

may ask the authority concerned to review its decision within sixty days of such decision

and if the authority refises to review the decision either in whole or in part or no decision is

taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor
whose decision thereon shail be final.

ue (5) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes onthe Ordinances.

15. The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and The Pro-Vice-
conditions of service, and shall exercise suck powers and perform such duties, as may be Chancellor
prescribed by the Statutes.



4 — दा
St 05 ८ ee

‘The Deans of
Paculties.

The Registra

The Fisaece
Officer.

Other officers

Authorties of
University

The Court

‘The Executive
Council.

The Academic
Council

‘The Finance
Commitiee

Other
authorities.

8
16, Every Dean of Faculty shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such
powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

17, (/) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and 5
authenticate records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

18, The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and
conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties. as may be
prescribed by the Statutes.

19. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the University
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
20. The following shall be the authorities of the University,—
(/) the Court;
(2) the Executive Council; =
(3) the Academic Council;
(4) the Boards of Faculties,
(3) the Finance Committee, and
(6) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of
the University.
21. (1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following powers
and functions, namely—
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes ofthe = 2."
University and te suggest measures for the improvement and development of the
University,
(6) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and annual
accounts of the University and the audit report on such accounts,
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for 5०
advice, and

(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
22. (7) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the University.

(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its
powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes. 357
23. (1) The Academic Couneil shall be the principal academic body of the University
and shail, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, co-ordinate
and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University.

(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members and its
powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes. yo
24, The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall be prescribed
by the Statutes.
25, The constitution, powers and functions of the Boards of Faculties and such other

authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the University shall be
prescribed’ by the Statutes. पड़ा

49


9
26. (/) The University shail have such Faculties as are prescribed by the Statutes, ‘The Faculties
ant
(2) Each Faculty shall haye such Departments as are prescribed by the Statutes, and Departments.
each Department shall have such subjects of study as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances,

27. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for allorany ofthe Power ३०
= following matters, namely:— make

Statetes.
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities and other bodies of
the University as may be constituted from time to time;

(8) the appointment and continuance’in office of the members of the said

authorities and bodies, the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters

10 relating to those authorities and other bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable
to provide;

(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their
emoluments and conditions of service;

(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the
is University, their emoluments and conditions of service;

fe) the recognition of persons as University recognized teachers.

{/) the declaration of persons working in other Universities or other organisations
as teachers of the University for a specified period;

(g) the conditions of service of employees of the University including provisions
ae for pension, insurance and provident fund, the manner of termination of service and
disciplinary action relating to such employees ;
(h) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the
University;

(0) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or
25 students and the University;

() the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employes or student
against the action of any officer ot authority of the University;

(4) the conditions under which colleges and institutions may be admitted to the
privileges of the University and the withdrawal of such privileges;

je () the establishment and abolition of Faculties, Departments, University
Institutes, Centres and University Colleges;

(m) the conferment of autonomous status on & college or institution or a
Department and the withdrawal of such status;

j= the conferment of honorary degrees;
3 (०) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic
distinctions,
- (p) the registration of graduates;
(g) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;
(r) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students; and

Yo {s) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the
'o ‘Statutes.

28, (/) The First Statutes are those set out in the Schedule. Statweet, how

(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or
may amend of repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-section (/):

to be made.



Power 10
make
Ordinances

NN  —_—
10

Provided that the Executive Council shalt not make, amend or repeal any Statute affecting
the status, powers of constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has
been given an opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and
any opinion so expressed shail be considered by the Executive Council.

(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes ot any amendment or repeal of a डा
Statute shall require the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or
femit 10 the Executive Council for re-consideration.

(२) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no
validity unless it has been assented to by the Visitor.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sections, the Visitor fo
may make new or additional Statutes, or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-
section (1), during the period of three years immediately afier the commencement of this Act:

Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make,
within one year from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he may consider
necessary and such detailed Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament, is

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Visitor may direct the
University to make provisions iat the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and
ifthe Executive Councit is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt,
the Visitor may, afer considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council
for its inability to comply with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably. 2e

29. (1) Subject 19 the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may
Provide for all or any of the following matters, namely,—

(७) the admission and enrolment of students to the University and institutions
maimained by or admitted to the privileges of the University;

(4) the courses of study to be taid down for all degrees, diplomas and 25"
certificates of the University;

(c) the medium of instruction and examination;
(6) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions,

the qualifications for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and
obtaining of the same; _

(०) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission
10 the examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;

(0 the institution of, and conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships,
studentships, medals and prizes;

(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of 357
“ppointment and the duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;

(A) the conditions of residence of students of the University;

(0 the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence,
discipline and teaching of women students and the prescribing of special courses of
studies for them; ¢

() the establishment of Centres, University Institutes, Boards of Studies,
है Laboratories and Committees;

(4) the creation, Composition and functions of any other body which is considered
necessary for improving the academic life of the University;

(2) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other Universities, 4 5~
Institutions and other Agencies including learned bodies or associations;



is

as

as

मन

षड़

u
(m) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and

(nm) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are to be or may be,
provided for by the Ordinances.

(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice-Chancellce with the previous approval
of the Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added
to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.

30, The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with this Act,
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the
Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the
Ordinances and for such matters as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.

31. (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of the
Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University
towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or after such date
a5 may be prescribed by the Statutes and the Court shall consider the report in its annual
meeting.

(2) The Court shall subenit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments, if
any,

{3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-section (/), shall also be
Submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be
laid before both Houses of Parliament.

32, (1) The annual accounts and balance sheet of the University shall be prepared
under the directions of the Executive Council and shall once at least every year, and at
intervals of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or by such persons as he may authorise in this behalf,

(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be
submitted to the Court and the Visitor along with the observations of the Executive Council,

(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to
the notice of the Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered
by the Executive Council, be submitted to the Visitor.

(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the
Visitor, shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be,
cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of
Parliament shall be published in the Gazette of India.

33. The University shall furnish to the Central Government such retums or other
information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from
time to time, require.

34. (1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a written contract,
which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished to the
employee concerned.

(2) Any dispute arising owt of the contract between the University and any employee
shall, at the request of the employee, be referred toe Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of
one member appointed by the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee
concerned and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.

(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and no suit shall Iie in any civil court in
respect of the matters decided by the Tribunal.

Annual
report,

Accounts and
modit

Femahag
fesurts, ete,

Conditiens of
service of
employees.



12

(4) Every request made by the employee under sub-section (2), shall be deemed to be
a submission to arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996,

(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the
Statutes. =
1 Procedure of 35. (J) Any student or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed .
i) pe cd from the rolls of the University by the orders or resolution of the Vice-Chancellor, Discipline
wie 18 Committee of Examination Committee, as the case may be, and who has been debarred from
cases against appearing at the examinations of the University for more than one year, may, within ten days
| students, of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, appeal to the (0
Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision of
the Vice-Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may 06.
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against
a student shall, at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the
provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 34 shall, as far as may be, apply to (ड"

26 of 1996,

a reference made under this sub-section.
| Right w 36. Every employee or student of the University or of an Institution maintained by the
i eppeal University or admitted to its privileges shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this

| Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the
। Executive Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the University, and 2७
thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed
against.
Provident and 37. (1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its employees such provident
pension famds or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such manner and
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes. as
| (2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central
| Government may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925, shall apply to 19 of 1925.
such fund as if it were a Government provident fund.
Disputes es to 38. If any question arises as to whether any person has been duly appointed or elected

constitution —_ as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body of the University, the matter 30
of authorities shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.

aad bodies,
Filling of 39, All casual vacancies among the members, other than ex officio members, of any
casual authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person or

vacatsies. ody who appoints, elects or co-opts the member whose place has become vacant and
person appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority a

4 ‘or body for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been

| member,

Proceedings of 40, No act of proceedings of any authority of other body of the University shall be

authorities २4. invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy of vacancies among its members.

Protection of 41. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer or other employee of yo
chon taken in the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance
8००4 faith of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.

Mede of 42, Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or in any | of 1872,
proof of other law for the time being in force, a copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding

University o¢ resolution of any authority or other body of the University, or any other document in 45”
possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University,
if certified by the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie evidence of such receipt,
application, natice, order, proceeding, resolution or document or the existence of entry in the


is

3e

ye

us

tegister and shall be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the
original thereof would, if produced, have been admissible in evidence,

43. (1) any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette. make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, a8 appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
temoving the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the commencement of this Act.

(2) Every order made under sub-section (/) shall be laid, 2s soon as may be afier itis
made, before each House of Partiaenent while itis in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses agree
that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of rm effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
order,

44. (1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published
in the Official Gazerte.

(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it (s in session, for 3 total
Period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 06 in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Statute,
Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation
should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification of annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.

(2) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to
sive retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act,
10 the Statute, Ordinance or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be
given to any Statute, Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of
any person to whom such Statute, Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.

45.(/) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes, —

(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner and on such conditions as may be deemed fit and
each of the said officers shall hold office for such term, not exceeding five years, as
may be specified by the Central Government;

(6) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the
Cehtral Government and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three
years;

{c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than
thirty-one members and fifteen members, respectively, who shall be nominated by the
Central Government and shall hold office for a term of three years;

(व) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than thirty-one members,
who shall be nominated by the Central Government and shall hold office for a term of

three years:

Power tw
defculoes

‘Transitional
provisions,



Amendment
of 0. P Act
10 of 1973

i4

Provided that if arty vacancy occurs in the above-mentioned offices or authorities, the
same shall be filled by appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Central
Government, and the person so appointed or nominated shall hold office for so long as the
officer or member in whose place he is appointed or nominated would have held office if suclt Pd
vacancy had not occurred.

(2) Till such time as the first Ordinances are not made under sub-section (2) of section
29, in respect of the matters that are 10 be provided for by the Ordinances under this Act and
‘Statutes, the relevant provisions of the Statutes and the Ordinances made immediately
before the commencement of this Act under the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh State
Universities Act, 1973 shall be applicable insofar as they are not inconsistent with the /PU.P Act 10
provisions of this Act and the Statutes. of 1973,

46. (1) In the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973,—

(a) the word “Allahabad”, except in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 12,
sub-section (1) of section 318, clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 74, clause (j) of
sub-section (3) of section 74, and entries relating to Serial No. 5 in the Schedule, /¢
wherever it occurs, shall be omitted;

(5) in the Schedule, Serial No, 2 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted,
(2) Notwithstanding such omission,

(a) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and other academic distinctions
conferred, diplomas and certificates awarded, privileges granted, or other things done 20
(including the registration of gradustes) under the Uttar Pradesh State Universities
Act, 1973, shall be deemed to have been respectively made, issued, conferred, awarded, UP Aci 10
granted or done under the corresponding provisions of this Actand, exceptas otherwise of 1973
provided by or this Act or the Statutes, continue in force unless and until they are
superseded by any order made under this Act or the Statutes, and £ * हुए

(6) all proceedings of Selection Committees for the appointment or promotion of
teachers that took place before the commencement of this Act and all actions of the
Executive Council in respect of the recommendations of such Selection Committees
where no orders of appointment on the basis thereof were passed before the
commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding that the procedure for selection has Jo
been modified by this Act, be deemed to have been valid but further proceeding in
connection with such pending selections shall be taken in accordance with the
provisions of this Act and be continued from the stage where they stood immediately
before such commencement, except if the concemed authorities take, with the approval
of the Visitor, a decision to the contrary. 35


=
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 28)
‘THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY

1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from ॥ panel of not less than The
> Ss three persons recommended by the Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence in (Chancetier,
|! the academic or public life of the country:
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended,
he may call for fresh recommendations from the Executive Council.

(2) The Chancellor shall hold office fora term of five years and shall not be eligible for
10 re-appointment:
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office the Chancellor shall
continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.

2. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less The Vice-
is than three persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause Chaacellor
(छः
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included In the
panel, he may call for an extended or a fresh panel,

(2) The Committee referred to in clause (/) shall consist of three persons, out of whom
two shail be nominated by the Executive Council and one by the Visitor and the nominee of
Qo the Visitor shall be the convener of the Committee:

Provided that pone of the members of the Commitice shall be an employee of the
University or an institution maintained by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University or
a member of any authority of the University.

(3) The Vice-Chancellor shat! be a whole-time salaried officer of the University.

as (4) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which
he enters upon his office, or until he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier,
and he shall not be eligible for re-2ppointment:

Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upan his office:

३० Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice-Chancellor after his term has
expired, to continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may
be specified by him or till his successor is appointed and enters upon his office, whichever
iseartier,

(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor shall be us
35° follows:

(0 the Vice-Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances, other than
house rent allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to time
and he shall be entithed, without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout
his-term of office and no charge shalt fall on the Vice-Chancellor in respect of the

५० maintenance of such residence;

(i) the Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances
a5 may be fixed by the Central Government from time to time:

Provided that where an employee of the University, or a college or an institution
maintained by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University, or of any other University or
us any college or institution maintained by or admitted to the privileges of, such other University,
is appointed as the Vice-Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any



provident fund of which he is a member and the University shall contribute to the account of
such person in that provident fund at the same rate at which the person had been contributing
immediately before his appointment as the Vice-Chancellor:

Provided further that where such employee had been member of any pension scheme,
the University shall make the necessary contribution to such scheme; s
(iti) the Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rates as
may be fixed by the Executive Council;

(i) the Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to feave on full pay at the rate of thirty
days in a calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two
half-yearly instalments of fifteen days each on the first day of January and July every jo
year:

Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office
of the Vice-Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited
ii proportionately at the rate of two and-a-half days for each completed month of service;

(रो in addition to the leave referred to in sub-clause (fv), the Vice-Chancellor shall 57
also be entitled to half-pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of
service, and half-pay leave may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on
medical certificate:

Provided that when such commuted leave is availed of, twice the amount of half-
| pay leave shall be debited against half-pay leave duc. ae

(6) If the office of the Vice-Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or
otherwise, or ifhe is unable to perform his duties duc to ill-health or any other cause, the Pro-
Vice-Chancellor shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor:

Provided that if the Pro-Vice-Chancellor is not available, the senior mast Professor
shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor until anew Vice-Chancellor assumes office or 2.$~
until the existing Vice-Chancellor resumes the duties of his office, as the case may be.

Powers and 3. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be ex officio Chairman of the Executive Council, the
इस of Academic Council and the Finance Committee and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor,
Chaacellor. preside at the Convocations held for conferring degrees and at meetings of the Court
i (2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of 3°
any authority or other body of thediniversity, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless
he is a member of such authority or body.

(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to se¢ that this Act, the Statutes, the

Ordinances and the Regulations are duly observed and he shall have all the powers necessary
to ensure such observance. 3°

(4) The Vice-Chancellor shallhave all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance
on of discipline in the University and be may delegate any such powers to such person or

persons as he deems fit.
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shalbiave the power to convene or cause to be convened the
meetings of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee. Wo
Pro-Vice- 4. (/) The Pro-Vice-Chancelior shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the

Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor is not accepted by the
| Executive Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the
in person recommended by the Vice-Chancellor or ask the Vice~Chancellor to recommend another’ 4 5
person to the Executive Council:

}
} Chancetlor. —_ recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor:
*
if



=

Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice-
Chancellor, appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of a Pro-Vice-Chancellor in addition
to his own duties as a Professor.

(2) The term of office of a Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the
S Executive Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration of the
term of office of the Vice-Chancellor, which ever is earlier:

Provided that a Pro-Vice-Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be eligible
for re-appointment:
Provided further that, in any case, a Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall retire on attaining the
lo age of sixty-five years:

‘ Provided also that 2 Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties of the
Vice-Chancellor under clause (6) of Statute 1, continue in office notwithstanding the expiration
of his term of office as Pro-Vice-Chancellor, until the Vice-Chancellor resumes office or anew
Vice-Chancellor assumes office, as the case may be.

is (3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Pro-Vice-Chanceflor
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.

(4) The Pro-Vice-Chanceilor shall assist the Vice-Chancellor in respect of such matters
as may be specified by the Vice-Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and shall also
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the

Ae Vice-Chancellor,

5. (1) Every Dean of Faculty shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor from amongst Desens of
the Professors in the Faculty by rotation in the order of seniority for a period of three years; Facslties

Provided that in case there is only one Professor or no Professor in a Faculty, the Dean
shall be appointed, for the time being, form amongst the Professor, if any, and the Readers in
2४ the Faculty by rotation in the order of seniority:

Provided further that in the case of a Faculty comprising a University College, the
Principal of such University College shall be the ex afficio Dean of the Paculty.

(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness,
absence or any other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office
३० shall be performed by the senior-most Professor or Reader, as the case may be, in the Faculty.

(3) The Dean shall be the ex officio Chairman of the Board of the Faculty and shall be
3 responsible for the conduct and maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in
v the Faculty and shall have such other functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances,

(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the
3S Boards of Studies or Committees of the Faculty, but shall not have the right to vote thereat
unless he is a member thereof,

» (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), every teacher serving as Dean

+ of a Faculty immediately before the appointed day, shall continue as such up to the date on
whieh he would have continued as Dean if the Act had not been enacted and thereafter the

“Ye Dean of the concerned Faculty shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of
clause (1) above.

m 6. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council onthe recommendation Registrar
of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole-time Salaried
officer of the University.

4s (2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re-appointment.

(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be
such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances;



18
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years:

Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty
years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until
the éxpiry of a period of one year, whichever is earlier.

(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacam or when the Registrar is, by reason of 57
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of
the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the
Purpose.

(5) (०) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the
employees, excluding teachers and other academic staff, as may be specified in the order of 10
the Executive Council and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them
or to impose on them the penalty of censure or the withholding of increment:

Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person has been given a
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard ७
to him.

(5).An appeal shall lie to the Vice-Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing
‘any of the penalties specified in sub-clause (a),

(c) tn ॥& case where the inquiry dischoses that « punishment beyond the power of the
Registrar is called for, the Registrar shall, upon the concluding of the inquiry, make a report
to the Vice-Chancellor along with his recommendations: ae

Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice-
Chancellor imposing any penalty,

(6) The Registrar shalt be ex officio Secretary of the Court, the Executive Council and
the Academic Council, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities.

(7) It shall be the duty of the Registrar — as”

(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property
of the University as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge;

(b) 40 issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council,
and the Academic Council, the college development council and of any Committees
appointed by those authorities; 3e

(©) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council
and the Academic Council and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;

(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council
and the Academic Council;

(e) to arrange for and superintend the examinations of the University in the 3६7
manner prescribed by the Ordinances;

(f) 10 supply to the Visitor copies of the agenda of the mectings of the authorities
of the University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;

(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University,
sign powers of attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representative for the Yo
Purpose; und

(A) 0 perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances
or the Regulations or as may be required from time to time by the Executive Council or

the Vice-Chancellor.
» The Finance 7. (1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the ५5८
Officer. recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a

owhole-time salaried officer of the University.



19

(2) The Finance Officer shall ७६ appointed for aterm of five years and shall be eligible
for re-appointment.

(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances:

5 Provided that the Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years:
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age
of sixty years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office
oF until the expiry of a period of one year, whichever is earlier.
(A When the office ofthe Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by

10. reason Of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the
duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor thay appoint for

(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio Secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall
not be deemed to be a member of such Committee.

Is (6) The Finance Officer shall —

(०) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise
it as regards its financial policy; and

(8) perform such other financial funétions as may be assigned to him by the
Executive Council or as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances,

ao (7) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the Finance Officer shall —

(2) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including
trust and endowed property;

(8) ensure thatthe limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non-
fecurring expenditure for s year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on
as the purpose for which they are granted or allotted;
(6) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the
University and for their presentation to the Executive Council;
(dykeep a constant watch on the state Of the cash and bank balances and on the
state of investments;

3e (०) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of
collection employed;
==
maintained up-to-date and that stock-checking is conducted, of equipment and other
consumable materials in all offices, Departments, University Institutes, Centres and
3S Specialised Laboratories;
(2) bring to the notice of the Vice-Chancellor unauthorised expenditure ‘and
other financial irregularities and suggest disciplinary sction against persons at fault;

and

(A) call for from any office, Department, University Institute, independent Centre,
Yo Specialised Laboratory or User Facility maintained by the University any information
or returns that he may consider necessary for the performance of his duties,
(4) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised
in this behalf by the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be
Sufficient discharge for payment of such money.



|
! ञ
| The Cowet 8, (J) The Court shall consist of the fotlowing members, namely:—
pal (a) Ex officio Members
4 (0 the Chancellor;
W (ii) the Vice-Chancellor, ‘
ait (iii) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, ifany; i

(iv) the members of the Executive Council other than the Vice-Chancellor,
the Pro-Viee-Chancellor and the Deans of Faculties,
(v) the Deans of Faculties;
(vi) the Finanice Officer;
(vif) the Dean of Research and Development, in case he ismotamember to
under any other provision of this sub-clause;
(viii) the Dean of College Development, in case he is nota member under
any other provision of this sub-clause;
(2x) the Librarian,
| (x) such Heads of Departments, Directors of University Institutes, Directors is
| of Constituent Institutes and Heads of Centres which are not comprised in any
University Institute, as are not members under any other provision of this sub-
clause; and
| (xi) two Principals of Constituent Colleges, to be selected by rotation in
the order of length of substantive service as Principals. ao

Tel goes
Sap Pte!

CRIES

(b) Representatives of the academic staff
(0) five Professors, three Readers and three Lecturers from among the
University appointed teachers of the Faculties, to be selected by rotation in the
order of seniority;
(ii) one Professor, one Reader and one Lecturer from among the University as
} recognized teachers of the University Colleges, to be selected by rotation in the
order of seniority;

(iid) two Professors, two Readers and two Lecturers from among the
teachers of the University Institutes, to be selected by rotation in the order of
seniority;

(2) two Professors, one Reader and one Lecturer from among the University
recognized teachers of the Constituent Institutes, to be selected by rotation in
the order of seniority, and

(सो six persons from among the University recognized teachers of the
Constituent Colleges, to be selected by rotation in the order of seniority, of 357

} whom at least two shall be Lecturers.
| (c) Representatives of Students
| one student from each group of subjects assigned to the Faculties who,
| having secured the highest marks in that group of subjects at the preceding
{ degree examination of the University, is pursuing a course of study for & Post- luce
rel 4 है graduate degree in the same group of subjects in the University or in a college
i of institution maintained by the University or admitted to the privileges of the
Pant University:
Provided that a representative of students shall no longer continue as
such representative on the termination of his enrolment as a student. us



lo

ts

as

3०

= दर

luo

21
(वी Representatives of Registered Gradwates

ten representatives of the registered Graduates, not being persons in the
service or students of the University or an institution maintained by or admitted
to the privileges of the University or a member of the management of such
institution, to be co-opted by the Court in accordance with the procedure laid
down in the Regulations,

(०) Representatives of Parliament

(7 three representatives of Parliament, two to be nominated by the Speaker
of the Lok Sabha and one by the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, from amongst the
members thereof:

Provided that consequent upon a Member of Parliament becoming a
Minister or Speaker/Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha or Deputy Chairman, Rajya
Sabha, his nomination shall be deemed to have been terminated.

) Nominees of the Visitor, the Chief Rector and the Chancellor

(i) seven persons representing learned professions and special interests,
including representatives of Industry, Commerce, Labour and Agriculture, to be
nominated by the Visitor;

(/8) two eminent educationists, to be nominated by the Chief Rector; and

(iti) three persons of distinction in public life, to be nominated by the
Chancellor.

(2) The term of office of the members of the Court under sub-clauses (a), (2), (८) and
(0 of clause (7) shall be three years and under sub-clauses (८) and (d) thereof shall be one
year.

(3) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed by the Executive
Council unless some other date has been fixed by the Court in respect of any year.

(4) At the annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working of the University during
the previous year, together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the balance
sheet as audited, and the financial estimates for the next year shall be presented.

(5),A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the balance sheet.and the
financial estimates referred to in clause (4) shall be sent to every member of the Court at least
seven days before the date of the annual meeting.

(6) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the
Vice-Chancellor or if there छ 00 Vice-Chancellor, the Pro- Vice-Chancellor or if there is no Pro-
Vice-Chancellor, by the Registrar,

(7) Twenty-five members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court

9. (1) The Executive Council shall consist of the following members, namely —

(०) the Vice-Chancetlor; दि
(6) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, if any;
(८) three Deans of Faculties, to be selected by rotation in the order in which the

Faculties are enumerated in clause (1) to Statute 14;

(d) one Director of a Constituent Institute, to be selected by rotation in the order
of length of substantive service as such Director;

(e) one Principal of a Constituent College, to be selected by rotation in the order
of length of substantive service as such Principal;
us (0) two Professors, two Readers and two Lecturers from among the University
appointed teachers, to be selected by rotation im the order of seniority;

The
Executive
Councal


22

(g) one person from among the University recognized teachers of University
Colleges, to be selected by rotation in the order of seniority,

(00 two persons from among the University recognized teachers of Constituent

Institutes, to be selected by rotation in the order of seniority, of whom at least one shall _

be a Lecturer;

(0 three persons from among the University recognized teachers of Constituent
Colleges, to be selected by rotation in the order of seniority, of whom at least one shall
be a Lecturer,

{j) four persons to be nominated by the Visitor,

(&) one person of academic eminence to be nominated by the Chief Rector; and fe

(i) one person of academic eminence to be nominated by the Chancellor

(2) The term of office of members of the Executive Council under sub-clauses (c) to (g)
of clause (1) shall be two years, and of members under sub-clauses (A) to (/) thereof shall be

three years.

(3) 1४० person shall continue to be a member of the Executive Council in more than one is

capacity, and whenever a person becomes such member in more than one capacity, he shall
within two weeks thereof intimate to the Registrar in writing as to the capacity in which he
desires to be such member and vacate the other seat, failing which the seat held by him earlier
in point of time shall be deemed to have been vacated.

(4) Seven members of the Executive Council shall form a quorum for a meeting of the 2°

Executive Council

10. (1) The Executive Council shall have the power of management and administration
of the revenues and property of the University and the conduct of all administrative affairs
of the University not otherwise provided for.

Powers and
functions of
the Executiv
‘Council

(2) Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive as."

‘Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely;—

(0 to create teaching and other academic posts, to determine the number and
emoluments of such posts and to define the duties and conditions of service of
Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff:

Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect ofthe ३०
number and qualifications of teachers and other academic staff otherwise than after
consideration of the recommendations of the Academic Council,

(ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff,
as may be necessary, and the Directors of University Institutes and Heads of
independent Centres on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted 957
for the purpose and to fill up temporary vacancies therein,

(६६) to recognise persons as University recognized teachers in the manner
prescribed by the Ordinances;

(iv) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts (including
Chairs) and to make appointments thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances; te

(४) to grant leave of absence to any salaried officer of the University other than
the Vice-Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the
functions of such officer during his absence;

(vi) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the

Statutes and the "4 us~



23

(vi) 10 manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property,

business and all other administrative affairs of the University and foe that Purpose to
appoint such agents as it may think fit;

(viii) to fix limits on the toeal tecurring and the waa) non-Tecurring expenditure
S fora year on the recommendation of the Finance Conunittee;

(00) 10 invest any money belonging 10 the University, including any unapptied
income, in such stocks, funds, share or Securities, from time to time as it may think fit
छा in the purchase of immovable Property in India, with the like powers of varying such

investment from time to time: ,

1० (x) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable Property on
behalf of the University;

(xi) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means
needed for carrying on the work of the University;

(xi) 10 enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;

is (zii/) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances
of the employees and students of the University who may, for any reason, feel
augrieved;

(iv) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them,-
and to fix their foes, emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting
Ae theAcademic Council;

(3४) (0 select ३ common seal for the University and provide for the custody and
use of such seal:

(xvi) to make such special Srrangements as may be necessary for the residence
and discipline of women students:

as (evil) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;

(viii) (0 provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors,
Consultants and Scholars and determine the terms and conditions of such
appointments; and

(200) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be
go conferred or imposed on it by the Act or the Statutes

11. (/) The Academic Council shall consist of the following members, namely:— The Acagemic
(a) the Vice-Chancellor; Snel
=: the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, if any;
(c) the Deans of the Faculties:
357 (d) the Dean of Research and Development:
(e) the Dean of Students Welfare:
(f) the Dean of College Development,
(0 the Librarian;

(W) such Heads of Departments, Directors of University Institutes and Heads of
Me Centres not comprised in any University Institute, as are not members under sub-
clauses (5) to (1:

Provided that where a subject assigned to any Faculty is mot placed under any
Department, the Chairman of the Board of Studies Of the subject shall be a member of



mu
the Academic Council in case he is not already a member under sub-clauses (b) to (g);

(U) one Professor, one Reader and one Lecturer from each Faculty, selected by
rotation in the order of seniority of Professors, Readers or Lecturers, as the case may
be, of the concerned Faculty;

() the Directors of Constituent Institutes; A iy

(A) one Professor (not being Director) of each Constituent Institute. selected by
rotation in the order of seniority;

(1 two Principals of Constituent Colleges, selected by rotation in the order of
length of substantive service as Principal;

(m) two members of the academic staff (not being Principals) of Constituent
Colleges from cach group of subjects assigned to a Faculty of the University, selected
by rotation in the order of seniority as such members of the academic staff of the
concemed group of subjects; and

(n) five persons, not being persons in the service of the University of a college
or an institution admitted to the privileges of the University, to be co-opted by the [<7
Academic Council

(2) The term of office of members (other than ex officia members) of the Academic
Council shall be three years.

(3) Twenty-five members of the Academic Council shall form a quorum for a meeting

of the Academic Council ae
Powers and 12. Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic
३ verted Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely:-—
Council (a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University

and to give directions regarding methods of instruction, co-ordination of teaching &
among the Constituent Colleges, evaluation of research and maintenance and 2५7
improvement of academic standards;

(8) to promote co-ordination between Faculties, Departments, University
Institutes and independent Centres, collaboration between the University and
Constituent Institistes and establish swch committees, boards or schools as may be
deemed necessary for these purposes; ३०

(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative, or
‘on a reference by # Faculty, University Institute, independent Centre or Constituent
Institute or the Executive Counell, and to take appropriate action thereon;

(a) to advise the Executive Council on all academic matters, including -

(0 matters relating to the examinations conducted by the University; 3s-

(i) the qualifications required to be possessed by persons imparting
instruction in particular subjects for the degrees of the University; and
(Wii) matters referred to it for advice by the Executive Council;
(6) to consider and approve proposals submitted by the Boards of Studies
through the Boards of Faculties or by University Institutes or independent Centres or ty g
Constituent Institutes in respect of courses of study and research degree programmes;

(0) to recommend for the consideration of the Executive Council the principles
and criteria on which examiners and Inspectors for various kinds of inspection of the
University Colleges, Constituent Institutes and Constituent Colleges may be appointed; ag
and



25

(g) to frame such Regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the

Ordinances regarding the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residence,

admissions, award of fellowships, scholarships, Sudentships, medals and prizes, fees,
| concessions, corporate life and attendance.

डा 13. (/) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, namely: — The Finance
९
(i) the Vice-Chancellor; 29
(# the Pro-Vice-Chancellor;

(iii) three persons to be nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at
least one shall be a member of the Executive Council: and

19 (iv) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor.

(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for # meeting of the
Finance Committee.

(3) All the members of the Finance Commitee, other than ex officio members, shall hold
| office for a term of three years.

प्र (4) A member of the Finance Commitee shall have the tight to record a minute of
dissent if he does not agree with any decision of the Finance Commitiee.

(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the accounts
ang to scrutinise proposals for expenditure.

(OV All Proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been
aoe inchided in the Budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered
by the Executive Council.

(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the
Finance Officer shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments
and thereafter submitted to the Executive Council for approval,

ar (8) The Finance Commitige shall recommend limits forthe total recurring expenditure
and the total non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of
the University (which, in the case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans),

14. (7) The University shall have the following Faculties, namely — Feculties and
(2 the Faculty of Arts; ४७७७
3e (ii) the Faculty of Commerce;
(॥0 the Faculty of Law;
= the Faculty of Medicine; and
(y) the Faculty of Science,

. (2) The constitution and term of office of members of the Board of each Faculty, its
3s powers and flanctions and the provisions in respect of the meetings thereof shall be prescribed
by the Ordinances: ‘

Provided that the first Board of each Faculty shall be nominated by the Executive
Council and shall hold office for a period of ome year,

(3) The Faculty of Arts shall consist of the following Departments, namely:-
(0 Ancient History, Culture and Archaeology;
(Hi) Anthropology;

ad (iif) Arabic and Persian;

Yo

(i) Education;



26
101 English and Modern European Languages;

(ut) Geography,
(vn) Hindi and Modern Indian Languages:
(viii) Journalism and Mass Communication;

(ix) Medieval and Modern History;

“

(90 Music and Performing Ars,

4४7 Philosophy.

(av) Physical Education,

(iii) Political Science:

(stv) Psychology yo
(re) Samserit; Pali, Prakrit and Oriental Languages:

(rei) Urdu; and

(xvii) Visual Arts.

(4) The Faculty of Commerce shail consist of the following Departments, namely:—

(0 Commerce and Business Administration; und is

(4) Economics.

(5) The Faculty of Law shall consist of the following Department, narely:—

Law.

(6) The Faculty of Medicine shail consist of the following Departments, namely:-

(7) Annesthesia:
एम) Anatomy,
(iii) Cardiotogy;
(#) Bar, Nose und Throat,
(v) Forensic Medicine,
(vi) Medicine; as
(vii) Microbiology;

(viii) Obstetrics and Gynaecology;

(x) Ophthalmology;

(x) Orthopaedics,

(xi) Paediatrics; ge
(vii) Pathology and Bacteriology;

(xii) Pharmacy;

(xiv) Pharmacology:

(xv) Physiology:

{xv/) Radiology; 357
(कक) Social and Preventive Medicine;
(evil) Surgery: and


uy

= as

35°

27
(vir) Tuberculosis.

(7) The Faculty of Science shall consist of the following Departments, namely;~
(7 Botany; ;
(4) Bio-Chemistry;

(44) Chemistry;

(0) Defence and Strategic Studies;
(९) Earth and Pinnetary Sciences;
(v#) Electronics and Communication;
(wil) Home Science;

(न) Mathematics;

(5) Physics;

(x) Statistics; and

(xi) Zoology.

(8) Each Depurtment shall be headed by a Head of the Department, whose manner of
Appointment, term of office and functions shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.

(9) Each Department shall have a Departmental Committee, the constitution, term of
office of members and functions whereof shall be prescribed by the Ordinances,

(10) There shall be a Board of Studies for each subject, the constitution, term of office
of members and functions whereof shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.

15. (1) There shall be Selection Committees for tmaking recommendations to the
Executive Council for appointment to the Posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Registrar,
Centres maintained by the University.

(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in Column | of the
Table below shall consist of the Vice-Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons
specified in the corresponding entry in Column 2 of the said Table:

TABLE
[SA 2
Professor/Reader (i) The Dean of the Faculty,
(ii) The Head of the Department.
(iii) ‘Three experts in the concerned subject/field, to
be appointed by the Executive Council, out of the pane!
recommended by the Academic Council.
Lecturer (i) The Dean of the Faculty/Head of the Department,
(i) Three experts in the concerned subject/field, to be
appointed by the Executive Council, out of the pane!
recommended by the Academic Council.

Rogistrar/Finance Officer () Two members of the Executive Council nominated by
it

(0)... One person not in the service of the University or an
institution maintained by, or admitted to, the privileges
of the —_____ 6 the University, nom nominated by the Executive Council,

Selection
Committees



Librarian {0 Three persons not in the service of the University or
an institution maintained by, or admitted to, the
privileges of the University, who have special

d knowledge of the subject of the Library Science!
Library Administration to be nominated by the
Executive Council,
(0. One person not in the service of the University or an
institution maintained by, or admitted to, the privileges
of the University, nominated by the Executive Council.

Director of University Three experts in the concerned subject/field, to be appointed
Institute or Head of by the Executive Council, out of the panel recommended by
independent the Academic Council, x

Centre maintained by

the University.

—————— ek in dininiinne me

Explanation |, Where the appointment is being made for an inter-disciplinary project,
the head of the project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department
concerned.

Explanation 2, In the case of a University Institute, the Director and in the case of an
independent Centre, the Head thereof shall be deemed to be the Head of
the Department concerned,

(3) The Vice-Chancellor, of in his absence the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, shall convene and
preside at the meeting of the Selection Committee:

Provided that the meeting of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior
consultation with, and subject to the convenience of Visitor's nominee and the experts
approved by the Executive Council.

(4) Four members, including at least two experts, must be present to form the quorum
for a meeting of the Selection Committec.

(5) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee shall be laid down in the
Ordinances.

(6) 116 Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by the Selection
‘Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.

(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated below—

(0) # the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than one academic session, it
shall be filled 0७ the advice ofthe Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure
indicated in the foregoing clauses:

Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor |s satisfied that in the interests of work it is
necessary to fill the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary
basis On the advice of a local Selection Committee referred to in sub-clause (ii) for a
period not exceeding six months.

(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for # period less than a year, an appointment to
such vacancy shall be made on the recommendation of 8 local Selection Committee
consisting of the Dean of the Faculty concerned, the Head of the Department and a
nominee of the Vice-Chancellor:

Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of
the Department, the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice~
Chancellor,

jo

ne

as

35°

Ws


BB

257

3s

4o

us-

29

(tid) No teacher appointed temporarily on the advice of a local Selection Committee
shall be continued in service on such temporary employment, uniess he is subsequently
selected by a regular Selection Committee, for temporary or permanent appointment.

(i) Where a teacher has been appointed to a Department on the recommendation
of a regular Selection Committee on a temporary post, and such post subsequently
becomes permanently vacant or another permanent post of the same rank and grade
becomes available in the same Department, the Executive Council may appoint such
teacher on permanent basis in such Department without further reference to a regular
Selection Committee.

16. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 15, the Executive Council may
invite a person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to accept a post of
Professor or Reader or any other academic post in the University, as the case may be, on
such terms and conditions as it deems fit and on the person agreeing to do 40 appoint him to
the post.

(2) The Executive Council may declare a person working in any other University or
Organisation as teacher of the University for a specified period.

(3) Appointments to Chairs and of Emeritus Professors shall be made by the Executive
Councit in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Ordinances for such tenure and
on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.

(४) The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in accordance with the
Procedure laid down in Statute 15 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it deems
fit,

17, (1) The sesdemio staff shall consist of teachers and staff employed for imparting
instruction or for conducting, or assisting in the conduct of, research,

(2) The manner of appointment of the academic staff, other than teachers, shall be
such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.

18, (1) The qualifications of University recognised teachers shall be such as may be
determined by the Ordinances.

(2) 41 applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as
‘may be laid down by the Regulations made by the Executive Council in that behalf,

” (3) The Executive Council may, on a reference from the Vice-Chancellor, withdraw
recognition from a teacher:

Provided that the teacher or the college or institution concerned may, within a period
of thirty days from the date of the order of withdrawal, appeal against the order to the Visitor
whose decision shall be final,

19. (1) Any authority of the University may appoint as many standing or speciat
Committees as it may deem fit, and may sppoint to such Committees persons who are not

12) Any Committee appointed under clause (1) may deal with any subject delegated
to it subject to subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing it.

20. (7) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absenice
of any agreement to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and
code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.

(2) The emoluments of members of the academic staff shall be such as may be prescribed
by the Ordinances,

(3) Every teacher and other member of the academic staff of the University shall be
appointed on a written contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances,

Special mode
of
appointment

Recognition
of teachers,

Committees.



Teems and
coaditions of
service and
cote of
conduct of
other
employees.

‘Seniority list

Removal of
emplayces of
the
University.

30

(4) A copy of every contract referred to in clause (3) shall be deposited with the
Registrar.
21. (7) All the employees of the University, other than the academic staff, shall, in the

absence of any contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms ‘and conditions of service
and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations. >

(2) The manner of appointment and emoluments of employees, other than the academic
staff, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.

22. (1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or be
a member of an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority
shall be determined according to the length of continuous service of such person in his 10
grade and in accordance with such ather principles as the Executive Council may, from time
to time, prescribe.

(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of cach class
of persons to whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up-to-date
seniority list in accordance with the provisions of clause (/).

(3) Iftwo or more persons have equal length of continsous service in & particular grade
or the relative seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on
his own motion and shall, at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the
Executive Council whose decision thereon shall be final.

(4) The provisions of this Statute shall not affect the inter se seniority ofthe employees Ro
working in the University before the appointed day.

23, (1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a member of the academic
staff or other employee of the University, the Vice-Chancellor, in the case of such member of
the academic staff, and the authority competent १0 appoint (bereinafter referred to as the
appointing authority) in the case of other employee may, by order in writing, place such 25°
member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, under suspension and
shall forthwith report to the Executive Council the circumstances in which the order was
made:

Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances
of the case do pot warrant the suspension of the member of the academic staff, revoke such 3०
order.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or
of any other terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Executive Council in
respect of the academic staff, and the appointing authority in respect of other employees,
shall have the power to remove such member of the academic staff or other employee, asthe 357
case may be, on grounds of misconduct

(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, of as the case may be, the appointing
authority, shall not be entitled to remove any member of the academic staff or other employee
except for a good cause and after giving three months’ notice of on payment of three months”
salary in lieu thereof. ae

(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall br removed under
clause (2) or clause (3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause
against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him. x.

(5) The removal of a member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect
from the date on which the order of removal is made: us

Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is
under suspension at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on
which he was placed under suspension,



-

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a
teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee may resign —

(a) if he is @ permanent employee, only after giving three months’ notice in
‘writing to the Executive Council o the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by
= Paying three months’ salary in lieu thereof,
(8) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month's notice ia
writing to the Executive Councit ०६ as the case may be, the appointing authority or by
Paying one month’s salary in liew thereof:

Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the resignation
1० ‘ssccepred by the Executive Councilor the appointing authority as the case may ber

shall exercise such powers and perforin such duties as may be prescribed by Ordinances

25. There shall be 3 Dean of Research and Development to assist the Vice-Chancellor

{S inthe planning and co-ordination of research, development and consultancy and extension

services in the University, who shail be appointed from amongst the Professors in the
manner prescribed by the Ordinances.

26. (/) The Executive Council ‘may, 0७ the recommendation of the Academic Council
22 00 8 fesolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds ofthe members present
Qo and voting, make Proposals 10 the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:

Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own motion,
make such proposals.

(2) The Executive Council may, bya resolution passed by a majority of not less than
_ two-thirds Of the members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the
as Visitor, any honorary degree conferred by the University.

27. The Executive Councit may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not |
than two-thirds ofthe members present and voting, withdraw a degree ot academic पल ला
conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to any person by the University for good
and sufficient cause:

tn notice why such a resolution should nat be passed and until his objections, If any: and
any evidence he may produce im support of them, have been considered by the Executive
Council.

3s" 28. (7) All powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and disciplinary action in
‘elation to the students of the University shall vest in the Vice-Chancellor

(2) There shall be a Proctor of the University to assist the Vice-Chancellor in the
exercise of the powers referred to in clause (/), who shall be appointed by the Executive
Council from amongst the Professors and Readers a the manner prescribed by the Ordinanens

५७ {3) The Vice-Chancellor may delegate थ। or any ofthe powers refered to in clause),
he deems proper, tothe Proctor and to such other officers as he may specify inthis behale

The
Libearion

Promotion of
seseareh,
development
and
consultancy
and extension
services
Honorary
degrees,

Withdrawal of
eprees, ete

Muintenence
of discipline
amongst
students of
the
University



Maintenasce
of discapline

among
‘Students of

32

for one or more years, or that the results of the student or students concerned in the
examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared be cancelled.

(5) The Deans of Faculties, Heads of Departments and Centres, Directors of University
Institutes and Constituent Institutes and Principals of University Colleges and Constituent
Colleges shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the students sa
in their respective Faculties, Departments, independent Centres, University Institutes,
Constituent Institutes, University Colleges and Constituent Colleges, as may be necessary
for the proper conduct of the work thereof.

(6) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice-Chancellor and the Deans, Heads,
Directors and Principals specified in clause (5), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct lo
Shall be made by the University, and such Deans, Heads, Directors and Principals may also
make such supplementary rules as they deem necessary for the purposes stated therein.

(7) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the
effect that he submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction af the Vice-Chancellor and other

authorities of the University. is

29, All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of an
{institution admitted to the privileges of the University, shall vest in the Director o¢ Principia,
‘ss the case may be, of the institution, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the
Ordinances.

30. (1) The Institutes of the University immediately before the commencement of the Qe

Act, namely>—
(i) The Institute of tnter-Disciplinary Studies;
(Wd) The Institute of Professional Studies; and
(sii) The National Centre of Experimental Mineralogy and Petrology,

SE 22% 52248" 207291, 82178

shall continue as University Institutes and the Centre of Behavioural and Cognitive Sciences 25°

shall continue as an independent Centre of the University, and all matters relating thereto
shall be provided for by the Ordinances.

(2) The Institute of Correspondence Courses and Continuing Education shall continue
as a temporary self-financing University Institute, and all matters relating thereto shall be

provided for by the Ordinances. 3* |!

(3) The manner of establishing University Institutes, Centres and University Colleges
{maintained by the University and other matters relating to them shall be prescribed by the
Ordinances.

(4) The following shall be the University Colleges, namely:-—

‘The Motilal Nehru Medical College and Swarup Rani Netru Hospital, Allahabad, 357

(3) The following shall be the Constituent Institutes, namely:—
(0 The Govind Ballabh Pant Social Science Institute, Allahabad;
(i) The Harish Chandra Research Institute of Mathematics and Mathematical
Physics, Allahabad; and
(di) The Kamala Nehru Postgraduate Medical Institute, Allahabad.
(6) The admission of institutions to the privileges of the University as Constitvent
Institutes and University Colleges and other matters relating to Constituent Institutes and
University Colleges shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.

Wo



le
31. (/) The following shall be the Constituent Colleges, namely: — “मा
(0 Allahabad Degree College, Allahabad;
(i) Arya Kanya Degree College, Allahabad;
(iti) Chaudhary Mahadeo Prasad Degree College, Allahabad;
की (iv) Ewing Christian College, Allahabad;

(>) Iswar Saran Degree College, Allahabad:
(vf) Hamidia Girls Degree College, Allahabad;
(vi/) Jagat Taran Girls Degree College, Allahabad:
(vii) K. P, Training College, Allahabad;
to (é2) Rajarchi Tandon Girls Degree College, Alishabad;
| (0 Sanwal Dass Sadan Lal Khanna Girls Degree College, Allahabad: and

(xi) Shyama Prasad Mukherji Government Degree College, Allahabad.

(2) Matters relating to the constitution of the management, the powers of the Vice-
Chancellor to issue directions to, and to enforce his orders against, the management, the
is Conditions for the continuance, enlargemesit and withdrawal of the privileges of Constituent
Colleges and the grant to and withdrswal from them of the autonomous status shall be
Prescribed by the Ordinances:
Provided that every Constituent College shall be required to undergo the process of
assessment by a visiting Peer Team of the National Assessment and Accreditation Council,
dof 1956. Qe Set up under section 12 (ccc) of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, and accreditation
by the said Council within a period of three years from the date of the commencement of the
Act,

UWP, Ast 10 (3) Where under the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973 #
of 1973, Constituent College had been granted permission by the predecessor University to impart
25° instruction for a Post-graduate degree other than the degree of Bachelor of Laws or to
५ exercise the privileges of an Autonomous College, such permission shall cease to have effect
uipon the expiry of the academic year immediately following the academic year during which
the Act has commenced or of the period for witich such permission had been granted by the
predecessor University, whichever is earlier, without Prejudice to the right of the Constituent
te College concerned to apply aftesh for such permission in accordance with the provisions of
the Statutes and the Ordinances,
(9 There shall be constituted, by Ordinances, a College Development Council to
monitor and promote the academic functioning and development of the Constituent
Colleges.
3s" (5) The College Development Council shall be headed by the Dean of College
Development, who shall be appointed by the Executive Council from among the Professors
of the University in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.

33, Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other purposes Coavecations
shall be held in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.



Ac
‘Chairman of
meetings.

Resignation

Residence
condition for
membership
and office
Membership
of ewiborities
by virtee of
membership
of other
bodies

Reputered
Geaduates

Dean ead
Bosed of
Studests
‘Welfare

Ordinances.
tow made

उब

33, Where no provision is made fora President or Chairman to preside over a meeting
of any authority of the University of any Committee of such authority or when the President
or Chairman so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one from among
themselves to preside at such meeting.

34, Any member, other than an ex officio member, of the Court, the Executive Council, 5
the Academic Council or any other authority of the University or any Committee of such
authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect
as soon as such letter is received by the Registrar

35. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of
any of the authorities of the University— te

(7) if be is of unsound mind;
(44 if he is an undercharged insolvent,

(Hi) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving thoral
turpitude and sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six
moaths. i=

(2) any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the
disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his
decision shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such
decision

36, Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily 20
resident in India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the University or a member of any
authority of the University.

37. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post
in the University or és a member of any authority or body of the University in his capacity as
a member of a particular authority or body or as the holder of # particular appointment shall 257
hold such office or membership only for so long as he continues to be a member of that
particular authority or body or the holder of that particular appointment, as the case may be.

38, The provisions in respect of the registration of graduates and the maintenance of
the register of Registered Graduates shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.

39. (1) There shall be a Dean of Students Welfare to co-ordinate the measures for 5७
promoting the welfare of the students of the University, who shall be appointed by the
Executive Council from among the Professors and Readers of the University in the manner
prescribed by the Ordinances.

(2) There shall be constituted in the University, 2 Board of Students Welfare, the
constitution, term of office of members and functions whereof shall be prescribed by the 35>
Ordinances.

40, (1) The first Ordinances made under sub-section (2) of Section 28 may be amended,
repealed or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified in the
following sub-sections.

(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in sub-section (/) of Section 28 ५७
shall be made by the Executive Council unless a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed
by the Academic Council

(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance
proposed by the Academic Council under clause (2), but may reject the proposal or return
the draft to the Academic Council for re-consideration, either in whole or in part, together 4 5~
with any amendment which the Executive Council may suggest



=

(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance
proposed by the Academic Council, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh
and in case the original draft is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the
members present and voting and more than half the total number of members of the Academic

5S Council, the draft may be sent back to the Executive Council which shall either adopt it or
refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.

(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect immediately.

(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor
within two weeks from the date of its adoption, :

a (7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University to suspend the operation
of any Ordinance, .

(8) The Visitor shall inform the Executive Council about his objection to the Ordinance

referred to in clause (7) and may, after receiving the comments of the University, either

+ withdraw the order suspending the Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance, and his decision
451. shall be final

41, (/) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the Regulations
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the following matters, namety:-— sa
(0 laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number :
of members required to form a quorum;
22 () providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the
Ordinance to be prescribed by Regulations;
(di) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or
Committees appointed by them and not provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the
Ordinances.
as (2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving
of notice to the members of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the business to be
considered at meetings and for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.

(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify
of any Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.

3e 42. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority of Delegation of
the University may delegate his or its powers to any othet officer or authority or person Powers
under his or its respective contro! and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for
the exercise of the powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority
delegating such powers.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The University of Allahabad was incorporated and established as ३ central university
under the Allahabad University Act, 1887, Consequent upon implementation of the
Government of India Act, 1919 classifying education as a provincial subject, the University
became a provincial university in 1921 and was reorganized as a unitary, teaching and
residential university under the Allahabad University Act, 1921. Presently, it is governed by
the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973 (UP Act No.10 of 1973).

2. The University demonstrated excellence in academics and research over the years
but of late, it has started facing difficulties owing to a number of reasons and the need for
restoration of its central university status and its declaration to be an institution of national
importance has been felt for quite some time. It is expected that restoration of its central
university status would help in strengthening this prestigious university and improving the
quality of teaching and research.

3, The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives,

ARJUN SINGH.
New Dewu,
The 16th December, 2004


@ MEMORANDUM

Clause 4(1) of the Bill provides for establishment of the University of Allahabad in the
State of Uttar Pradesh as a body corporate by the name of University of Allahabad. The non-
plan requirement for maintenance of the University along with its University College,
Constituent Institutes and Constituent Colleges during the years 2004-2005, 2005-2006 and
2006-2007 is estimated at Rs, 85 crore, Rs. 95 crore and Rs. 105 crore respectively. Besides,
"Plan Assistance’ of Rs. 150 crore spread over three years has also been estimated for
upgradation of library, equipment, buildings and other infrastructure. The expenditure would
be met from the Consolidated Fund of India through the budgetary provision under the
Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 28 of the Bill provides that the first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule to
the Bill, It also empowers the Executive Council of the University to make new or additional
Statutes or to amend or repeal the Statutes of the University subject to the assent of the
Visitor. Sub-clause (5) of the aforesaid clause empowers the Visitor also to make new or
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes of the University during the period of
three years immediately after the commencement of the Act. Sub-clause (6) further empowers
the Visitor to direct the University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter
specified by him and if the Executive Council is unable to implement such directions within
sixty days of its receipt, the visitor may, after considering the reasons, if any, communicated
by the Executive Council for its inability to comply with such direction, make or amvend the
‘Statutes suitably. The matters in respect of which the Executive Council and the Visitor may
make, amend or repeal Statutes include the constitution, powers and functions of the
authorities and other bodies of the University, the appointment of officers and teachers of
the University, the conditions of service of employees of the University and other such
matters.

2. Sub-clause (2) of Clause 29 of the Bill empowers the Vice-Chancellor to make the
first Ordinances of the University with the previous approval of the Central Government and
Provides that the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by
the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes. ‘The matters in respect of
which Ordinances may be made, of as the case may be, amended, repealed or added to relate
10 admission of students, courses of study, medium of instruction and examination, the
establishment of Centres, Institutes, Boards of Studies, Specialised Laboratories and
Committees and the manner of ¢0-Operation and collaboration with other Universities,
Institutions and other agencies, the Setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of
employees and other such matters, ‘

3, Clause 30 of the Bill enables the authorities of the University to make Regulations,
consistent with the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of thelr own
business and that of the Committees appointed by them and also for such matters as may be
prescribed by the Statutes or Ordinances.

4 Clause 43 empowers the Central Government, by order, to remove certain difficulties,
which may appear to be necessary ur expedient. Further, such an order is not to be made after
the expiry of period of three years from the commencement of the Act and that such order
shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

5, Clause 44 provides that every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall be published
in the Official Gazette. Further, every Order, Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under the
Act shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

6 The matters for which the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations may be made pertain
to matters of procedure or detail and it is not possible to provide for them in the Bill. The
delegation of legistative powers is, therefore, of normal character.



RAJYA SABHA
a
| BaL
iW to declare the University of Allahabad to be an institution of national importance and to
| Provide for its incorporation and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
i]
|
f
I
i
|
]
|
1 mapas
Ht
|
|!
{
Bt
|

(Shri Arjun Singh, Minister of Human Resource Development)

MGIPMEND—3698R5— 17.17.2004