THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS (REGISTRA TION AND
REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation)
Amendment Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010, (hereinafter
called the principal Act), after sub-section (2) of Section 12, the following sub-sections shall
be inserted, namely:—
(3) The clinical establishment shall undertake that any individual, who comes or is
brought to them in emergency medical condition or otherwise shall not be subjected to
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LVIII of 2016
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 3RD  FEBRUARY, 2017
Amendment
of section 12.
5
10
23 of 2010.

2
unnecessary diagnostic tests and shall only confine to the diagnostic tests as may be
required for assessing the clinical condition of the individual.
(4) The clinical establishment shall undertake that the medical doctors or practitioners
or professionals or specialists working under its control shall prescribe generic medicines to
the extent of availability and shall not compel the patients or their attendants to use branded
medicines, leaving option for the patient and their attendants to choose the medicines of
their choice and shall not advocate efficacy of the branded medicines over the generic
medicines.
(5) The clinical establishment shall not charge more than the rates prescribed by
Central Government under sub-section (3) of section 13 this Act for various diagnostic tests
or procedures or surgeries or treatments based on classification and standards of clinical
establishments as prescribed by Central Government.
(6) The clinical establishment shall display a notice board at prominent place in its
premises about the concessions, subsidies, incentives, land at concessional rate, medical
equipment obtained by exemption of various taxes or any other benefit it obtained from the
Central Government, or the State Government or the Union Territory or any local body, as the
case may be, for information to the public.
(7) The clinical establishments, which have availed concessions or benefits from the
Central Government, or State Government or the Union Territory or any local body, as the
case may be subject to certain conditions shall display the conditions on a notice board at
prominent place in their premises along with the status of compliance of those conditions,
which shall be updated on a monthly basis.
(8) The clinical establishments which offer medical examination or treatment in intensive
care units or emergency wards, shall design the intensive care units or emergency wards, in
such a way that the outer wall of one of its side shall be fitted with transparent glass, closed
with cloth curtains to enable the attendants of the patient to see the patients, as and when
deemed necessary.
(9) The clinical establishments shall brief, atleast two times in a day, the attendants of
the patients being treated in intensive care units or emergency wards about the condition of
the patient and treatment being extended and shall also video record each briefing and shall
preserve it for a period of ninety days from the date of discharge of the patient from intensive
care units or emergency wards or date of death of the patient during treatment in such clinical
establishment, whichever is later.
3. In the principal Act, after sub-section (2) of section 13, the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
(3) The Central Government shall prescribe maximum rates for various diagnostic tests
or procedures or surgeries or treatments extended by clinical establishments based on
their classification and standards prescribed by it under sub-sections (1) and (2):
Provided that in prescribing the maximum rates for the diagnostic tests or
procedures or surgeries or treatments offered by clinical establishments, the
Central Government shall have regard to the local conditions.
4. In the principal Act, after clause (k) of sub-section (2) of section 52, the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
''(kk) the maximum rates for the diagnostic tests or procedures or surgeries or
treatments offered by clinical establishments under sub-section (3) of section 13;''
5. In the principal Act, after sub-section (1) of section 56, the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
Amendment
of section 13.
Amendment
of section 52.
Amendment
of section 56.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(1A) The States, having enactments specified in the Schedule, may are revisit their
enactments in the public interest and revise their enactments to make them more comprehensive
by including the provisions of the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation)
Act, 2010, as amended from time to time, to improve the public health within a period of
six months from the date of enactment of this Act.
23 of 2010.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 was enacted to
provide for the registration and regulation of the clinical establishments with a view to
prescribe minimum standards of facilities and services which may be provided by them so
that the mandate of article 47 of Constitution of India for improvement in public health may
be achieved.
2. This act was enacted in the year 2010. Certain Rules to operationalise the Act were
also issued. However, there is wide-spread commotion and unrest in the public that certain
clinical establishments are (i) subjecting the patients to unnecessary and unwanted diagnostic
tests and threatening the patients of dire medical consequences if they do not undergo the
tests prescribed to them, (ii) charging the patients with exorbitant prices for the diagnostic
tests and treatments (iii) prescribing expensive branded medicines ignoring availability of
generic medicines, (iv) totally keeping the attendants in dark about the condition of the
patient being treated and the treatment extended in the intensive care units and emergency
wards and (v) not complying with the conditions imposed by governments after getting
concessions and relaxations from the Government.
3. In this context there is a definite need of evolving a proper procedure/ mechanism to
streamline these clinical establishments and forcing them to adopt a uniform procedure in
charging for diagnostic tests, doctor fees, charges for medical facilities offered by them.
There shall be proper check on these clinical establishments and bills charged by them so
that they cannot exploit the common people approaching them for treatment of various
diseases apart from compelling them to use expensive branded medicines. There are instances
wherein these clinical establishments are charging the CGHS/Health Card/ Insurance Patients
to the extent of their maximum eligibility by compelling them to undergo various tests,
treatments, which may not be necessary for their recovery. The proposed Bill addresses the
above concerns to a certain extent.
Hence this Bill.
MOHD. ALI  KHAN
4

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS (REGISTRATION AND REGULATION) ACT, 2010
(23 OF 2010)
******
12. Condition for registration.— (1) For registration and continuation, every clinical
establishment shall fulfil the following conditions, namely:—
(i) the minimum standards of facilities and services as may be prescribed;
(ii) the minimum requirement of personnel as may be prescribed;
(iii) provisions for maintenance of records and reporting as may be prescribed;
(iv) such other conditions as may be prescribed.
(2) The clinical establishment shall undertake to provide within the staff and facilities
available, such medical examination and treatment as may be required to stabilise the
emergency medical condition of any individual who comes or is brought to such clinical
establishment.
13. Classification of clinical establishments.— (1) Clinical establishment of different
systems shall be classified into such categories, as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, from time to time.
(2) Different standards may be prescribed for classification of different categories
referred to in subsection (1):
Provided that in prescribing the standards for clinical establishments, the Central
Government shall have regard to the local conditions.
******
52. Power of Central Government to make rules.— (1) The Central Government may,
by notification, make rules for carrying out all or any of the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) allowances for the members of the National Council under sub-section (5) of
section 3;
(b) appointment of such person to be the Secretary of the State Council by the
Central Government under sub-section (10) of section 3;
(c) the determination of standards and for classification of clinical establishments
under section 7;
(d) the qualification and the terms and conditions for the members of the authority
under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 10;
(e) the procedure under which the powers of the authority may be exercised by
the District Health Officer or Chief Medical Officer for the purpose of provisional
registration of clinical establishment under sub-section (2) of section 10;
(f) the minimum standards of facilities and services under clause (i) of sub-
section (1) of section 12;
(g) the minimum number of personnel under clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of
section 12;

6
(h) the maintenance of records and reporting by the clinical establishment under
clause (iii) of subsection (1) of section 12;
(i) other conditions for registration and continuation of clinical establishment
under clause (iv) of subsection (1) of section 12;
(j) classification of clinical establishment under sub-section (1) of section 13;
(k) the different standards for classification of clinical establishments under
sub-section (2) of section 13.
(l) the minimum standards for permanent registration under section 28;
(m) the form and particulars to be contained in the register to be maintained
under section 38.
* * * * * *
56. Savings.—(1) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to the States in which the
enactments specified in the Schedule are applicable:
Provided that the States in which the enactments referred to in sub-section (1) are
applicable, and such States subsequent to the commencement of this Act, adopts this Act
under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution, the provisions of this Act shall, subsequent
to such adoption, apply in that State. (2) The Central Government may, as and when consider
necessary, by notification amend the Schedule.
* * * * * *

GMGIPMRND—4417RS(S3)—03.02.2017.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010
————
(Shri Mohd. Ali Khan, M.P.)