29 of 1986.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAryA SABHA

Bill No. LVII of 2000

THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2000

A

BILL
to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

1, This Act may be called the Environment (Protection) Amendment Act, 2000.
2, In section 2 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as

5. the principal Act),—

15

(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

‘(a) “environment” includes water both surface and underground and also
the territorial waters, air, and land including the surface of the earth, sub-soil
and the forests (the flora and the fauna) and the inter-relationship which exists
among and between water, air and land and human beings, other living creatures,
plants, micro-organism and property exclusive of mere amenities;’

(it) for clause (9), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(®) “environmental pollutant” means any solid, liquid or gaseous
substance introduced into the environment in such concentration as may, or

tend to alter substantially the composition of the environment or injurious to
environment and includes heat, radiation, dust and noise.’

Short ttle.

Amendment of


Amendment of 3. In section 3 of the principal Act,-—
section 3.
() for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) The Central or State Governments may, by order, published in
its or their Official Gazettes, constitute such enforcement agencies at Central
or State level as they consider necessary and expedient so to do for the
purposes of enforcing or implementing the provisions of this Act.”; and

(i) sub-section (3) shall be omitted.

Insertion of 4. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
new sections namely:— .
3A, 3B, 3C,
3D and 38,
Constitution “3A. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of section
of National 3, the Central Government shall constitute a National Environmental Quality
Environmental . .
Quality Agency (hereinafter referred to as Agency) and a National Environmental
Agency and Authority (hereinafter referred to as Authority) for the purposes of
National implementation of the provisions of this Act.
Environmental
Authority. (2) Notwithstanding any statutory agency already functioning in the State,
the Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Governments,
constitute Regional offices of the Agency and Authority in every State to be called
State Environmental Agency and State Environmental Authority.
(3) The Agency and the Authority shal! have the power to supervise and to
coordinate the functions of these regional offices:
Provided that the Agency and Authority may cnirust some of its functions and
delegate its powers to the Regional Offices.
Composition 3B. The Agency shall consist of five members who have specialised in the
of Agency. field of environmental and legal sciences, and a legal cell with specialists in the
field of environmental law, to be appointed by the Central Government.
Powers and ३९. (1) The powers and functions of the Agency shall include the following: —
functions of :
the Agency. (a) to strive to evolve a national environmental policy and to protect and

preserve environment in an acceptable state;

(6) to study man environment interaction and the implications of rapid
industrialisation and weather modification techniques and their impact on the
ecology;

(c) to promote research in the environmental field, and to collect and

disseminate the information in respect of matters relating to environmental
pollution and to publish annual environment assessment reports;

(d) to prepare manuals, codes or guide-lines for promotion and
improvement of environmental protection;

(e) to lay down standards for the quality of environment in its
manifestation aspects;

/ to identify and designate those industries and other activities that are
of significant sources of pollution;

(g) to lay down standards for emission or discharge of environmental
pollutants from various sources whatsoever;

(A) restriction of areas in which any industries, operations or processes or
class of industries, operations or processes shall or shall not be carried out subject
to certain prescribed safeguards;

25

35

45


25

35

a5

3

(i) to lay down procedures and safeguards for the prevention of accidents
which may cause environmental pollution and remedial measures for such
accidents;

9) to lay down procedures and safeguards for the handling of hazardous
substances;

(0 to examine such manufacturing processes, materials and substances
as are likely to cause environmental pollution;

() to suggest alternative methods of meeting rapidly increasing urban
tranSport needs;

(m) to study vehicle pollution control methods and inspect devices used
for their purpose and to encourage the use of low-pollution automobiles and
fuels;

(n) to undertake research for upgrading technology in order to reduce
pollution through noise and discharge of exhaust to the minimum possible
levels, and to regulate fuel composition and additives;

(0) to collect representative samples of instruments to control pollution
in automobiles, for periodical scrutiny.

(2) In particular, the Agency shail designate the following as priority areas for
research:—

(i) methods for comprehensive environmental development of human
settlements, both urban and rural, and the exploitation and optimum use of
natural resources;

(i) quantitative housing requirernents and other infrastructure in this
connection, and the activities of several public works departments;

(iii) water supply, sewerage and waste disposal systems adapted to local
conditions; and

(iv) the problem of deforestation, the use of chemicals and fertilisers to
control insects and weeds, soil conservation, silt from land erosion, heat from
industrial processes and power generating equipments, radio-active materials
and nuclear fall out pollution by noise from industries and automobiles.

(3) The legal cell of the Agency shall be responsible for laying down detailed
procedures as to the mode and quantum of compensation to be paid in cases of
loss of life or injury to property or the environment or health of human beings
caused by environmental pollution:

Provided that the Agency may work in close coordination with the specialists in
environmental planning and rural development.

3D. The Authority shall consist of three members to be appointed by the
Central Government and shall be responsible for enforcing and implementing
the long-term and short-term plans and environmental standards laid down by
the Agency.

3E. The Authority shall have the power to—

(a) inspect any premises, plant, equipment, machinery, manufacturing or
other process, materials or substances and giving, by order, such directions to
such authorities, officers or persons as it may consider necessary to take steps
for the prevention, control and abatement of environmental pollution;

(6) to initiate legal proceedings against persons or concerns contravening
the provisions of this Act;

Composition
of Authority

Powers and
functions of
Authority,


Substitution of
new section
for section 4.

Appointment
of officers and
their powers
and functions,

Substitution of
new section
for section 19.

Filing of suts.

4

(c) to collect samples of air, water and soil from the premises of industrial
and other potential sources of pollution;

{d) to investigate into and report on the alleged violations of the provision
of this Act on the basis of complaints lodged by individuals or bodies of
individuals;

{e) to take immediate remedial steps in cases of emergency.”

5. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—

“4, (7) The Authority may appoint officers with such designations as it
thinks fit for the purposes of this Act and may entrust to them such of the powers
and functions under this Act as it may deem fit.

(2) The officers appointed under sub-section (1) shall be subject to the general
control and direction of the Authority.”

6. For section 19 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—

“19. (7)-No Court below the rank of a District Court shall be empowered to
decide disputes arising under this Act.

(2) A case under this Act may be filed either by an individual or a body of
individuals directly or through the State Environmental Authority or by the Authority
itself.

(3) On being approached by any individual or a body of individuals with a
complaint against an alleged contravention of this Act, the Authority shall make a
preliminary investigation into allegations, and if it is satisfied that a prima facie case
exists, it shall file a case against the alleged polluter.

(4) The Court shall, in deciding any matter under this Act,—

(i) be assisted by at least two environmental experts to be made available
by the State Government;

(ii) require the State Authority to investigate into the matter and file the
report thereof before it.”.

20

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

With a view to effectively control environment pollution to the desired levels the
Environment (Protection) Act was enacted in 1986. This was in addition to the already
existing laws to check the air and water pollution in the country. But despite its best intentions
and with a consistent supporting hand of the Parliament, Government has failed to effectively
contain the environment pollution in the country, The air of the National Capital and other
metropolitan cities has become polluted to the poisonous level resulting in various respiratory
diseases such as bronchitis, asthma, Sinus and even lung cancer. According to a report, by
the end of this century the city of Delhi will become unfit for human habitation. The air
pollution goes unchecked despite stiff penalties provided in the Motor Vehicle Act, 1989.
Though the air is generally polluted by motor vehicles other factors also contribute towards
polluting the air such as factories, power houses emanating fly ash and smoke, household
cooking, dhabas, restaurants, hotels smoking by citizens and ever increasing dust in the air.
Similarly water is also being polluted by discharge of affluents from factories containing
hazardous substances. The Municipalities turn the drains towards the rivers, citizens bathe,
defacate and sometimes throw corpses and carcases in the rivers thereby polluting them to
the worst level. Noise pollution is also becoming a nuisance in the country day by day. Thus
the process of polluting the environment is unabated affecting even the wild life and the
flora and fauna, The Government machinery is inadequate to implement the environmental
laws but at the same time it is high time the public is made aware of the problems connected
with environmental pollution. The citizens should be involved in safeguarding individual
and social interests. In this Bill an attempt has been made to suggest modifications in the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 with a view to make it more meaningful and effective
by plugging certain loopholes in dealing with problems of environmental pollution in the
country so that it may remain a safe place for habitation.

Hence this Bill.

SURESH PACHOURI


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, if it considers necessary,
constitute enforcement agencies for implementing the provisions of the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall constitute
National Environmental Quality Agency and National Environmental Authority and Regional
offices of these machineries in every State. The Agency and the Authority shall consist of
five and three members respectively, to be appointed by the Central Government. It further
provides that the Agency would undertake research work, collect information, lay down
standards for the quality of environment and for emission or discharge of environmental
pollution, preparation of manuals and codes in connection with environmental pollution. It *
further provides for payment of compensation for loss of life injury to property or health of
human beings due to environmental pollution. Clause 5 provides for appointment of officers
by the Authority.

The Bull, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. An estimated annual recurring expenditure of rupees four crores is likely to
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two crore is also likely to be involved.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) ACT, 1986.
(29 oF 1986)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “environment” includes water, air and land and the inter-relationship which
exists among and between water, air and land, and human beings, other living creatures,
plants, micro-organism and property;

(6) “environmental pollutant” means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance
present in such concentration as may be, or tend to be injurious to environment;

3. (1) * * * * *

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-

section (1), such measures may inclade measures with respect to all or any of the following
matters, namely:—

() co-ordination of actions by the State Governments, officers and other
authorities—

(a) under this Act, or the rules made thereunder; or

(0) under any other law for the time being in force which is relatable to
the objects of this Act;

(ii) planning and execution of a nation-wide programme for the prevention,
control and abatement of environmental pollution;

(it) laying down standards for the quality of environment in its various aspects;

(iv) laying down standards for emission or discharge of environmental pollutants
from various sources whatsoever:

Provided that different standards for emission or discharge may be laid down
under this clause from different sources having regard to the quality or composition
of the emission or discharge of environmental pollutants from such sources;

(v) restriction of areas in which any industries, operations or processes or class
of industries, operations or processes shall not be carried out or shall be carried out
subject to certain safeguards;

(vi) laying down procedures and safeguards for the prevention of accidents
which may cause environmental pollution and remedial measures for such accidents;

(vii) laying down procedures and safeguards for the handling of hazardous
substances;

(viii) examination of such manufacturing processes materials and substances as
are likely to cause environmental pollution;

(ix) carrying out and sponsoring investigations and research relating to problems
of environmental pollution;

(x) inspection of any premises, plant, equipment, machienry, manufacturing or
other processes, materials or substances and giving, by order, of such directions to
such authorities, officers or persons as it may consider necessary to take steps for the
prevention, control and abatement of environmental pollution;

7

Definition,

Power of
Central
Government to
take measures
to protect and
improve
environment.


8

(zi) establishment or recognition of environmental laboratories and institutes to
carry out the functions entrusted to such environmental laboratories and institutes
under this Act;

(xii) collection and dissemination of information in respect of matters relating
to environmental pollution;

(xiii) preparation of manuals, codes or guides relating to the prevention, control
and abatement of environmental pollution;

(xiv) such other matters as the Central Government deems necessary or expedient
for the purpose of securing the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.

(3) The Central Government may, if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do for

“the purposes of this Act, by order, published in the Official Gazette, constitute an authority

4 ready 2, 2115
deeereatir ay
of officers and

their powers
and functions.

or authorities by such name or names as may be specified in the order for the purpose of
exercising and performing such of the powers and functions (including the power to issue
directions under section 5) of the Central Government under this Act and for taking measures
with respect to such of the matters referred to in sub-section (2) as may be mentioned in the
order and subject to the supervision and control of the Central Government and the provisions
of such order, such authority or authorities may exercise the powers or perform the functions
or take the measures so mentioned in the order as if such authority or authorities had been
empowered by this Act to exercise those powers or perform those functions or take such
measures,

care

Government may appoint officers with such designations as it thinks fit for the purposes of
this Act and may entrust to them such of the powers and functions under this Act as it may
deem fit.

(2) The officers appointed under sub-section (7) shall be subject to the general control
and direction of the Central Government or if so directed by that Government, also of the
authority or authorities, if any, constituted under sub-section (3) of section 3 or of any other
authority or officer.



RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL
to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4515RS—9. 11.2000.