Bill No. LVIII of  2022
Short title, and
commencement.
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constituion of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2.  After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
21B. (1) The State shall ensure employment and living wages to all adult citizens in
such manner as the State may, by law, determine:
Provided that in case of failure to ensure employment and living wages to adult citizens,
the State shall provide for monetary compensation in such manner as the State may, by law,
determine.
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022
Insertion of
new article
21B.
5
10
Right to
employment.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The guarantee to employment is a very important factor for quality of life and liberty of
an individual, as well as the society.  As a developing nation it is important that all individuals
in the nation get employment and decent wages.
The Bill proposes to provide every adult citizen the right to employment, or else, a
decent amount as compensation.
Only a monitored and ensured mechanism by the State can ensure the achievement of
the purpose.
The proposed legislation, hence, is required to ensure the quality of living of every
individual, and thereby the progress of the nation.
The Bill seeks to achieve this objective.
DR. V .  SIVADASAN
2
S3/F/Bill 2022\RS\1781RS

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill inter alia provides for monetary compensation to the adult citizens
to whom the State fails to ensure employment and living wages.  This Bill, therefore, would
involve recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not possible
to assess the actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at this state.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. V .  Sivadasan, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1781RS(S3)—12-12-2022.