1
Bill No.  LVII  of  2012
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 15 of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(6) The State shall not apply or prescribe any criteria including economic criteria
or decisions of any authority to the contrary in making any special provisions for the
advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes,”.
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Ammendment
of article 15.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 15(4) of the Constitution enables the State to make special provisions for the
advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Accordingly, provision for reservation in jobs
and educational institutions has been made.
The policy of reservation strengthens the concept of equality enshrined in the
Constitution by promoting social equality in our country. The socially and educationally
backward classes of citizens, the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes were
marginalized and oppressed for centuries as a result of caste system prevalent in the country.
Even after independence, they have not been able to attain the level of economic and
educational advancement enjoyed by the upper caste. It must be realised that discrimination
on the basis of caste threatens the very fabric of our nation and therefore, safeguards for
reservation which is a tool for promoting social equity should find a place in our Constitution.
Even after sixty-five years of affirmative action, the caste based discrimination and
caste based distinction exist on a large scale in our society. In its present form, it has not
succeeded in building capabilities and offering opportunities to those it has sought to
benefit. To make matters worse, efforts are being made to dilute the reservation system by
introducing economic criteria and concept of creamy layer.
It must be remembered that introducing economic or any criteria other than social and
educational backwardness will only nullify the object of this affirmative action. The economic
criterion is valid only in casteless societies. Since essence of discrimination and
marginalization in the Indian society is based on caste, exclusion of backward classes from
getting benefits under reservation on the basis of economic criteria or in the form of creamy
layer or in any other form would further marginalize the citizens belonging to these classes.
Hence this Bill.
VEER  SINGH
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
15. (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any
of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to—
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment;
or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort
maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general
public.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for
women and children.
(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from
making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent the
State from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and
educationally bakcward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions
including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than
the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.
* * * * * *
3
Prohibition
of
discrimination
on grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or
place of
birth.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Veer Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3963RS(S3)—07.12.2012.