Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LVII of 2007
THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2.  In the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
in section 3,—
Amendment of
section 3.
23 of 1940.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

2
(i) for clause (aa), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(aa) “Central Drugs Authority” means the Central Drugs Authority of
India constituted under sub-section (1) of section 5;
(aai)  “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Central Drugs
Authority;
(aaii) “clinical trial” means systematic study of any drug or cosmetic in
human subjects to generate data for discovering or verifying its clinical,
pharmacological (including pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic) or adverse
effects with the objective of determining safety, efficacy or tolerance of the drug
or the cosmetic;’;
(ii) in clause (b), for sub-clause (iv), the following sub-clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(iv) such medical device, medicated device, instrument, apparatus,
appliance, material, software necessary for their application, intended for internal
or external use in human beings or animals, whether used alone or in combination,
as may be specified from time to time by the Central Government by notification
in the Official Gazette, after consultation with the Central Drugs Authority, for
the purpose of diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or mitigation of any
disease or disorder; diagnosis, monitoring, treatment, alleviation of or
compensation for, any injury or handicap; investigation, replacement or
modification of anatomy or physiology; or control of conception, and which
does not achieve its intended action primarily by any pharmacological or
immunological or metabolical process, but is included in the pharmacopoeias
mentioned in the Second Schedule;”;
(iii) after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(bb) “Drugs Controller (India)” means the Drugs Controller (India)
appointed under sub-section (1) of section 5E;
(bbb) “Fund” means the Fund constituted under sub-section ( 1) of
section 5-I;’;
(iv) in clauses (c) and (e), for the words “Central Government”, wherever they
occur, the words “Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted;
(v) in clause (f), for the words “sale or distribution”, the words “sale or export or
distribution” shall be substituted;
(vi) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ff) “Member” means a Member of the Central Drugs Authority and
includes the Chairperson;’;
(vii) in clause (h), in sub-clause (ii), for the words “Drugs Technical Advisory
Board constituted under section 5”, the words “Central Drugs Authority” shall be
substituted.
3.  In the principal Act, after Chapter I, the following Chapters shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘CHAPTER IA
C
ENTRAL DRUGS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
5.  ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Authority to be known as the Central Drugs Authority of India.
(2) The Central Drugs Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,
Insertion of
new Chapters.
Constitution
of Central
Drugs Autho-
rity.

3
having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions
of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable,
and to contract, and may, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The Central Drugs Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and not more
than five, but at the least three, Members, to be appointed by the Central Government
by notification in the Official Gazette.
(4) The headquarters of the Central Drugs Authority shall be at Delhi.
(5) The Central Drugs Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish its offices at such other places in India as it considers necessary.
5A. The Chairperson and Members of the Central Drugs Authority shall be
appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons who have special
knowledge of, and at the least fifteen years’ professional experience in pharmaceutical
industry, research or teaching, or public administration, finance or law:
Provided that a person who is, or has been, in the service of Government shall
not be appointed as a Chairperson or Member unless such person has held the post of
Secretary or Additional Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in
the Central Government or a State Government or a Public Sector Undertaking.
5B. The Chairperson or Member shall hold office as such for a term of three years
from the date on which he enters upon his office, and shall be eligible for reappointment
for a further term of three years:
Provided that the Chairperson or Member shall not hold office as such on
attaining the age of seventy years.
5C. The salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, and other conditions
of service of, the Members shall be such, as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
5D. No act or proceeding of the Central Drugs Authority shall be invalidated
merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Central Drugs
Authority;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Central
Drugs Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the
merits of the case.
5E. (1) The Central Drugs Authority shall appoint a Drugs Controller (India), and
such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge
of its functions and exercise of its powers under this Act.
(2) The salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, and other conditions of
service of, the Drugs Controller (India), other officers and employees of the Central
Drugs Authority appointed under sub-section (1) shall be such as may be determined
by the Central Drugs Authority by regulations.
(3) The Drugs Controller (India) shall be the Secretary of the Central Drugs
Authority.
5F. (1) The Central Drugs Authority may issue licences under clause ( c) of
section 10, clause (c) of section 18 and clause (c) of section 33EEC, and collect fees
therefor.
Qualifications
of Chairperson
and Members.
Term of office
of Chairperson
and Members.
Salaries,
allowances,
pensions and
other condi-
tions of service
of Members.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings.
Staff of the
Central Drugs
Authority.
Powers and
functions of
Central Drugs
Authority.

4
(2) The Central Drugs Authority may cancel or suspend any licence issued
under sub-section (1).
(3) The Central Drugs Authority shall collect charges for granting permission for
conduct of clinical trials in respect of drugs and cosmetics.
(4) The Central Drugs Authority may constitute such committees or sub-
committees as it considers essential for the efficient discharge of its functions and
exercise of its powers under this Act.
(5) The Central Drugs Authority shall recommend to the Central Government—
(a) standards for drugs and cosmetics;
(b) the Central Drugs Laboratories for the purpose of testing drugs and
cosmetics;
(c) measures to regulate import of drugs and cosmetics;
(d) measures to regulate manufacture for sale or for export or for distribution,
or sale, stock or exhibition of drugs and cosmetics;
(e) standards for good manufacturing and laboratory practices and other
such practices;
(f) measures to regulate clinical trials;
(g) amounts of fees and other charges payable under this Act;
(h) any other measures for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions
of this Act.
(6) The Central Drugs Authority shall regulate its own procedure.
5G.  (1) The Drugs Controller (India) shall exercise the powers conferred upon
him under this Act or the rules framed thereunder or assigned to him by the Central
Drugs Authority.
(2) The Drugs Controller (India) shall be the Chief Executive Officer and the legal
representative of the Central Drugs Authority, and shall be responsible for—
(a) the day-to-day administration of the Central Drugs Authority;
(b) drawing up of proposals for the work programmes of the Central Drugs
Authority;
(c) implementing the work programmes approved and the decisions made
by the Central Drugs Authority;
(d) the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the
execution of the budget of the Central Drugs Authority;
(e) the preparation of draft annual report for submission to and approval
of the Central Drugs Authority.
(3) The Drugs Controller (India) shall have administrative control over other
officers and employees of the Central Drugs Authority.
5H. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, make to the Central Drugs Authority grants of such sums of money
as are required by it.
5-I. ( 1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Central Drugs
Authority of India Fund and there shall be credited thereto—
(a) all grants, fees and charges received by the Central Drugs Authority
under this Act; and
Powers and
functions of
Drugs Control-
ler (India).
Grants by
Central
Government.
Fund.

5
(b) all sums received by the Central Drugs Authority from such other
sources as may be determined by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Chairperson and
other Members and the administrative expenses, including the salaries,
allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the Drugs Controller (India)
and other officers and employees of the Central Drugs Authority; and
(b) the expenses to carry out the objects and purposes of this Act.
5J. (1) The Central Drugs Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Central Drugs Authority shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him
and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the
Central Drugs Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed
by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Central Drugs Authority
shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit
as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has, in connection with the audit of
the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers
and to inspect any of the offices of the Central Drugs Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Central Drugs Authority as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf,
together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central
Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may be
after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
5K. (1) The Central Drugs Authority shall prepare every year an annual report in
such form and manner and at such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government,
giving summary of its activities during the previous year and copies of the report shall
be forwarded to the Central Government.
(2) A copy of the report forwarded under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
5L. ( 1) The Central Government may, after consultation with, or on the
recommendation of, the Central Drugs Authority and after previous publication by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the
provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that consultation with the Central Drugs Authority may be dispensed
with if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen which
render it necessary to make rules without such consultation, but in such a case the
Central Drugs Authority shall be consulted within six months of the making of the
rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestions which
the Central Drugs Authority may make in relation to the amendment of the said rules.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for the following matters, namely:—
(a) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, and other conditions
of service of, the Members under section 5C;
Accounts and
audit.
Annual report.
Power to make
rules.

6
(b) the manner and form in which the accounts of the Central Drugs
Authority shall be maintained under sub-section (1) of section 5J;
(c) the form and manner in which and the time within which annual report
is to be made to the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 5K.
5M. (1) The Central Drugs Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to discharge
its functions and exercise its powers.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for the following matters, namely:—
(a) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, and other conditions
of service of, the Drugs Controller (India) and other officers and employees of
the Central Drugs Authority under sub-section (2) of section 5E;
(b) the regulation of the procedure of the Central Drugs Authority under
sub-section (6) of section 5F.
CHAPTER IB
C
LINICAL TRIALS
5N. No person shall conduct clinical trials in respect of any drug or cosmetic
except under, and in accordance with, the permission granted by the Central Drugs
Authority.
5O. (1) Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, conducts clinical
trials in contravention of section 5N shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever having been convicted of an offence under sub-section (1) is again
convicted of an offence under that sub-section, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to ten years and with fine which may extend to twenty lakh
rupees.
5P. (1) No prosecution under section 5-O shall be instituted except upon com-
plaint made in writing in this behalf by an officer authorised by the Central Drugs
Authority.
(2) No Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or of a Judicial Magis-
trate of the first class shall try an offence punishable under section 5-O.
5Q.  (1) The Central Government may after consultation with, or on the recom-
mendation of, the Central Drugs Authority and after pervious publication by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions
of this Chapter:
Provided that consultation with the Central Drugs Authority may be dispensed
with if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen which
render it necessary to make rules without such consultation, but in such a case the
Central Drugs Authority shall be consulted within six months of the making of the
rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestions
which the Central Drugs Authority may make in relation to the amendment of the said
rules.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for the form and conditions of the permission under section 5N, the charges
payable therefor, and the cancellation or suspension of such permission in any case
where any provision of this Act or the rules made thereunder is contravened or any of
the conditions subject to which the permission is granted is not complied with.’.
Power to make
regulations.
No clinical
trial without
permission.
Punishment
for conduct-
ing clinical
trial without
permission.
Trial of
offences.
Power to
make rules.

7
4.  In the principal Act, in Chapter II, for the Chapter heading “THE DRUGS TECHNICAL
ADVISORY BOARD, THE CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY AND THE DRUGS CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE”,
the Chapter heading “ THE C ENTRAL  D RUGS L ABORATORY AND T HE D RUGS C ONSULTATIVE
COMMITTEE” shall be substituted.
5. In the principal Act, section 5 shall be omitted.
6. In the principal Act, in section 6,—
(a) for the word “ Laboratory”, wherever it occurs, the words “ Laboratory or
Laboratories” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the word “Board”, the words “Central Drugs Authority”
shall be substituted.
7. In the principal Act, in section 7,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “Drugs Technical Advisory Board”, the
words “Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted;
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) the Drugs Consultative Committee shall consist of such number of
representatives of the Central Government, industry, consumer associations,
academic and research institutions, as may be prescribed and one representative
of each State Government to be nominated by the State Government concerned.”;
(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Central Drugs
Authority, make rules prescribing the number of representatives under sub-
section (2).”.
8. In the principal Act, section 7A shall be omitted.
9. In the principal Act, in section 8, in sub-section (2), for the word “Board”, the words
“Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted.
10. In the principal Act, in section 10, in the second proviso, for the word “Board”, the
words “Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted.
11. In the principal Act, in section 12,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the word “Board”, wherever it occurs, the words
“Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2), in clause (a), the words “the authority empowered to
issue the same” shall be omitted.
12. In the principal Act, in section 16, in sub-section ( 2), for the word “Board”, the
words “Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted.
13. In the principal Act, in section 18,—
(a) for the words “manufacture for sale or for distribution”, wherever they occur,
the words “manufacture for sale or for export or for distribution” shall be substituted;
(b) in the second proviso, for the word “Board”, the words “Central Drugs
Authority” shall be substituted.
14. In the principal Act, in sections 20 and 21, for the words “Central Government”,
wherever they occur, the words “Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted.
15. In the principal Act, in section 22, in sub-section (1), in clause (cca), for the words
“manufacture for sale or for distribution”, the words “manufacture for sale or for export or for
distribution” shall be substituted.
Substitution of
heading of
Chapter II.
Omission of
section 5.
Amendment of
section 6.
Amendment of
section 7.
Omission of
section 7A.
Amendment of
section 8.
Amendment of
section 10.
Amendment of
section 12.
Amendment of
section 16.
Amendment of
sections 20 and
21.
Amendment of
section 22.
Amendment of
section 18.

8
16. In the principal Act, in sections 27 and 27A, for the words “manufactures for sale
or for distribution”, at both the places where they occur, the words “manufactures for sale or
for export or for distribution” shall be substituted.
17. In the principal Act, in section 31, in sub-section (1), in clause (ii), for the words
“manufacture for sale, or for distribution”, the words “manufacture for sale or for export or
for distribution” shall be substituted.
18. In the principal Act, in section 33,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the word “Board”, wherever it occurs, the words
“Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) clause (b) shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause (e),—
(A) for the words “manufacture for sale or for distribution”, the
words “manufacture for sale or for export or for distribution” shall be
substituted; and
(B) the words “the authority empowered to issue the same, the
qualifications of such authority” shall be omitted;
(iii) clause (n) shall be omitted.
19. In the principal Act, section 33C shall be omitted.
20. In the principal Act, in section 33D,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical
Advisory Board”, the words “Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted;
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) the Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee shall
consist of such number of representatives of the Central Government, industry,
consumer associations, academic and research institutions, as may be prescribed
and one representative of each State Government to be nominated by the State
Government concerned.”.
21. In the principal Act, in section 33EEB, for the words “manufacture for sale or for
distribution”, the words “manufacture for sale or for export or for distribution” shall be
substituted.
22. In the principal Act, in section 33EEC,—
(A) in clause ( a), for the words “manufacture for sale or for distribution”, the
words “manufacture for sale or for export or for distribution” shall be substituted;
(B) in clause (c),—
(i) for the words “manufacture for sale or for distribution”, the words
“manufacture for sale or for export or for distribution” shall be substituted; and
(ii) the words “by the prescribed authority” shall be omitted.
23. In the principal Act, in sections 33F and 33G, for the words “Central Government”,
wherever they occur, the words “Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted.
24. In the principal Act, in section 33-I, for the words “manufactures for sale or for
distribution”, the words “manufactures for sale or for export or for distribution” shall be
substituted.
Amendment
of sections 27
and 27A.
Amendment
of section 31.
Amendment
of section 33.
Omission of
section 33C.
Amendment
of section
33D.
Amendment
of section
33EEB.
Amendment
of section
33EEC.
Amendment
of sections
33F and 33G .
Amendment
of section
33-I.

9
25. In the principal Act, in section  33L, for the words “manufacture for sale”, at both
the places where they occur, the words “manufacture for sale or for export or for distribution”
shall be substituted.
26. In the principal Act, in section 33N,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the word “Board”, wherever it occurs, the words
“Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) clause (b) shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause (e),—
(A) for the words “manufacture for sale”, the words “manufacture
for sale or for export or for distribution” shall be substituted; and
(B) the words “the authority empowered to issue the same” shall be
omitted;
(iii) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ff) prescribe the number of representatives under sub-section (2)
of section 33 D;”.
27. In the principal Act, in section 33-O, for the word “Board”, the words “Central
Drugs Authority” shall be substituted.
28. In the principal Act, for section 38, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“38. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation
should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or regulation.”.
Amendment of
section 33L.
Amendment of
section 33N.
Amendment of
section 33-O.
Substitution of
new section for
section 38.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (the Act) is a consumer protection legislation,
which is mainly concerned with the standards and quality of durgs and regulates the
import, manufacture, sale and distribution of drugs and cosmetics.
2. The Central Government had constituted an Expert Committee under the
chairmanship of Dr. R.A. Mashelker, Director General of the Council of Scientific and
Industrial Reaserch in January 2003 to undertake a comprehensive examination of drug
regulatory issues, including the problem of spurious drugs and to suggest measures to
improve the drug administration in the country. The Committee, inter alia, recommended
setting up of a Central Drugs Authority reporting directly to the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare and a system of centralised licensing. The Central Government considered
the recommendations of the Committee and proposes to make amendments in the Act, in
order to facilitate setting up of a Central Drugs Authority and introduction of Centralised
licensing for manufacture of drugs in pursuance of the said recommendations. The Drugs
and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007, inter alia, provides for:—
(a) substitutation of the "Drugs Technical Advisory Board" as well as the
"Drugs Technical Advisory Board for Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs" by the
"Central Drugs Authority";
(b) insertion of a new Chapter IA with a view to providing the constitution
of the Central Drugs Authority and other connected or incidental matters;
(c) insertion of a new Chapter IB in the Act, providing for grant of permission
for clinical trials, punishment for conducting clinical trial without permission, trial
of offences, etc.; and
(d) expansion of the compositions of the Drugs Consultative Committees.
3. Certain consequential changes in the Act are also proposed so as to make it in
consonance with proposal for setting up of the Central Drugs Authority.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; ANBUMANI  RAMADOSS.
The 7th June, 2007.
10

Notes on clauses
Clause 1 relates to short title and commencement of the Act.
Clause 2 amends section 3 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (hereinafter referred
to as the Act) in order to add definitions of the terms "Central Drugs Authority", "Chairperson",
"Member", "Drugs Controller (India)", "clinical trial" and "Fund", amend the definition of
the term "drug", and substitute the words "Central Government" in the definitions of the
terms "Government analyst" and "Inspector" with the words "Central Drugs Authority", the
words "sale or distribution" in the definition of the term "manufacture" with the words "sale
or export or distribution" and the words "Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted
under section 5" in the definition of the term "patent or proprietary medicine" with the words
"Central Drugs Authority".
Clause 3 inserts a new Chapter, CHAPTER IA titled “C
ENTRAL DRUGS AUTHORITY OF
INDIA” containing proposed new sections 5 to 5M and CHAPTER IB titled “CLINICAL TRIALS”
containing proposed new sections 5N to 5Q.
Proposed new section 5 provides for the constitution of the Central Drugs Authority
of India, its nature, composition, location of headquarters and power to set up offices in
other places in India.
Proposed new section 5A provides for qualifications of Chairperson and Members of
the Central Drugs Authority.
Proposed new section 5B provides for the term of office of the Chairperson and
Members of the Central Drugs Authority.
Proposed new section 5C gives the power to the Central Government for prescribing
the salaries, allowances, pensions payable to,  and other conditions of service of, the
Chairperson and Members of the Central Drugs Authority.
Proposed new section 5D provides that any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution
of, or any defect in the appointment of the Chairperson or a Member of the Central Drugs
Authority or any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of a case, would not
invalidate its proceedings.
Proposed new section 5E gives power to the Central Drugs Authority to appoint
Drugs Controller (India) and other officers and employees of the Authority and to fix their
salaries, allowances  and pensions. It also provides that the Drugs Controller (India) shall be
the Secretary of the Central Drugs Authority.
Proposed new section 5F enumerates the powers and functions of the Central Drugs
Authority.
Proposed new section 5G provides for the powers and functions of the Drugs Controller
(India).
Proposed new section 5H provides for grants to be made by the Central Government to
the Central Drugs Authority.
Proposed new section 5-I provides for constitution of the Central Drugs Authority of
India Fund as well as what shall be credited thereto. It also provides the purposes for which
the Fund shall be applied.
Proposed new section 5J provides for maintenance of proper accounts by the Central
Drugs Authority and the details regarding procedure for auditing of its accounts.
Proposed new section 5K provides for preparation of an annual report by the Central
Drugs Authority, which shall be forwarded to the Central Government and also laid before
each House of Parliament.
11

12
Proposed new section 5L lays down the power of the Central Government to make
rules, in consultation with the Central Drugs Authority, for giving effect to the provisions as
contained in CHAPTER IA.
Proposed new section 5M provides for power of the Central Drugs Authority to make
regulations for discharge of its functions and exercise of its powers.
Proposed new section 5N prohibits the conduct of clinical trials in respect of any drug
or cosmetic without due permission from the Central Drugs Authority.
Proposed new section 5-O provides for punishment for conducting clinical trials without
permission.
Proposed new section 5P provides for procedure for trial of offences under
section 5-O.
Proposed new section 5Q gives powers to the Central Government to make rules, in
consultation with the Central Drugs Authority, to give effect to the provisions of CHAPTER
I B.
Clause 4 provides for substitution of the existing heading of CHAPTER II of the Act
with “T
HE CENTRAL DRUGS LABORA TORY AND THE DRUGS CONSULTA TIVE COMMITTEE”.
Clause 5 provides for omission of section 5 of the Act dealing with the Drugs Technical
Advisory Board.
Clause 6 amends section 6 of the Act for substituting the word 'Laboratory' with the
words 'Laboratory or laboratories' and the word 'Board' with the wods 'Central Drugs Authority'.
Clause 7 amends section 7 of the Act for substituting the words "Drugs Technical
Advisory Board" with the words "Central Drugs Authority". It also provides for change in
the composition of the Drugs Consultative Committee.
Clause 8 omits section 7A of the Act.
Clauses 9 to 18 and clauses 20 to 27 amend various sections of the Act for replacing
the word "Board", wherever it occurs, with the words "Central Drugs Authority", the words
"manufacture for sale or for distribution", wherever they occur, with the words "manufacture
for sale or for export or for distribution" and the words "Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs
Technical Advisory Board", wherever they occur, with the words "Central Drugs Authority",
and to provide for new composition of the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative
Committee.
Clause 19 provides for omission of section 33C of the Act dealing with the Ayurvedic,
Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board.
Clause 28 substitutes new section 38 dealing with laying of every rule and every
regulation made under the Act before each House of Parliament within a stipulated timeframe.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007 proposes to insert, inter
alia, new section 5A in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 empowering the Central
Government to appoint the Chairperson and Members of the Central Drugs Authority of
India and new section 5C in the said Act empowering the Central Government to decide on
the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, and other conditions of service of, the
Members of the Central Drugs Authority of India. Some recurring expenditure will be involved
in regard to payment of salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Chairperson and
Members of the Central Drugs Authority of India. The exact amount of expenditure involved
will depend on the number of Members appointed and will be met out of the revenues of the
Central Drugs Authority of India.
2. It is estimated that no expenditure, either of recurring or non-recurring nature, from
the Consolidated Fund of India, would be involved.
13

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to insert new Chapters IA and IB (containing new
sections 5 to 5Q) in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. New section 5L proposes to confer
power on the Central Government to make rules for giving effect to the provisions of Chapter
IA after consultation with, or on the recommendation of, the Central Drugs Authority and
after previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette. New section 5M proposes
to confer power upon the Central Drugs Authority to make regulations consistent with the
said Act and the rules made thereunder to discharge its functions and exercise its powers.
New section 5Q proposes to confer power on the Central Government to make rules for
giving effect to the provisions of Chapter IB after consultation with, or on the recommendation
of the Central Drugs Authority and after previous publication by notification in the Official
Gazette. Clause 7 of the Bill proposes to insert new sub-section (4) in section 7 of the said Act
to confer power on the Central Government to make rules for prescribing the number of
Central Government's representatives in the Drugs Consultative Committee under sub-section
(2) of section 7 of the said Act, after consulation with Central Drugs Authority. Clause 26(b)
(iii) of the Bill proposes to insert new clause (ff) after clause (f) in sub-section (2) of section
33N of the said Act, to confer power on the Central Government to make rules for the purpose
of prescribing the number of Central Government's representatives in the Ayurvedic, Siddha
and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee under sub-section (2) of section 33D of the said
Act.
These matters are the matters of procedure and administrative detail. Hence, it is not
practical to provide for them in the Bill. The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore,
normal in character.
14

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940
(23 OF 1940)
* * * * *
3. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—
* * * * *
(aa) “the Board” means—
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, the Ayurvedic, Siddha
and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under section 33C;
and
(ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, the Drugs Technical Advisory
Board constituted under section 5;
* * * * *
(b) “drug” includes—
* * * * *
(iv) such devices intended for internal or external use in the diagnosis,
treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease or disorder in human beings or
animals, as may be specified from time to time by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette, after consultation with the Board;
(c) “Government Analyst” means—
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, a Government Analyst
appointed by the Central Government or a State Government under section 33F;
and
(ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, a Government
Analyst appointed by the Central Government or a State Government under
section 20;
* * * * *
(e) “Inspector” means—
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, an Inspector appointed
by the Central Government or a State Government under section 33G; and
(ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, an Inspector appointed by
the Central Government or a State Government under section 21;
(f) “manufacture” in relation to any drug or cosmetic includes any process or
part of a process for making, altering, ornamenting, finishing, packing, labelling, breaking
up or otherwise treating or adopting any drug or cosmetic with a view to its sale or
distribution but does not include the compounding or dispensing of any drug, or the
packing of any drug or cosmetic, in the ordinary course of retail business; and “to
manufacture” shall be construed accordingly;
* * * * *
‘(h) “patent or proprietary medicine”,—
(ii) in relation to any other systems of medicine, a drug which is a remedy or
prescription presented in a form ready for internal or external administration of human
beings or animals and which is not included in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia
for the time being or any other Pharmacopoeia authorised in this behalf by the Central
Governmetn after consultation with the Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted
under section 5;’
* * * * *
Definitions.
15

16
CHAPTER II
THE DRUGS TECHNICAL ADVISORY BOARD, THE CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY AND
THE DRUGS CONSUL TA TIVE COMMITTEE
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute a Board (to be
called the Drugs Technical Advisory Board) to advise the Central Government and the State
Governments on technical matters arising out of the administration of this Act and to carry
out the other functions assigned to it by this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(i) the Director General of Health Services, ex officio, who shall be Chairman;
(ii) the Drugs Controller, India, ex officio;
(iii) the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory, Calcutta, ex officio;
 (iv) the Director of the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, ex officio;
(v) the Director of the Indian V eterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar,
ex officio;
(vi) the President of the Medical Council of India, ex officio;
(vii) the President of the Pharmacy Council of India, ex officio;
(viii) the Director of the Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow,  ex officio;
(ix) two persons to be nominated by the Central Government from among persons
who are in charge of drugs control in the States;
(x) one person, to be elected by the Executive Committee of the Pharmacy Council
of India, from among teachers in pharmacy or pharmaceutical chemistry or
pharmacognosy on the staff of an Indian university or a college affiliated thereto;
(xi) one person, to be elected by the Executive Committee of the Medical Council
of India, from among teachers in medicine or therapeutics on the staff of an Indian
university or a college affiliated thereto;
(xii) one person to be nominated by the Central Government from the
pharmaceutical industry;
(xiii) one pharmacologist to be elected by the Governing Body of the Indian
Council of Medical Research;
(xiv) one person to be elected by the Central Council of the Indian Medical
Association;
(xv) one person to be elected by the Council of the Indian Pharmaceutical
Association;
(xvi)  two persons holding the appointment of Government Analyst under this
Act, to be nominated by the Central Government.
(3) The nominated and elected members of the Board shall hold office for three years,
but shall be eligible for re-nomination and re-election:
Provided that the person nominated or elected, as the case may be, under clause (ix) or
clause (x) or clause (xi) or clause (xvi) of sub-section (2) shall hold office for so long as he
holds the appointment of the office by virtue of which he was nominated or elected to the
Board.
(4) The Board may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, make
bye-laws fixing a quorum and regulating its own procedure and the conduct of all business
to be transacted by it.
The Drugs
Technical
Advisory
Board.

17
(5) The Board may constitute sub-committees and may appoint to such sub-commit-
tees for such periods, not exceeding three years, as it may decide, or temporarily for the
consideration of particular matters, persons who are not members of the Board.
(6) The functions of the Board may be exercised notwithstanding any vacancy therein.
(7) The Central Government shall appoint a person to be Secretary of the Board and
shall provide the Board with such clerical and other staff as the Central Government considers
necessary.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be establish a Central Drugs
Laboratory under the control of a Director to be appointed by the Central Government, to
carry out the functions entrusted to it by this Act or any rules made under this Chapter:
Provided that, if the Central Government so prescribes, the functions of the Central
Drugs Laboratory in respect of any drug or class of drugs or cosmetic or class of cosmetics
shall be carried out at the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, or at any other prescribed
Laboratory and the functions of the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory in respect of
such drug or class of drugs or such cosmetic or class of cosmetics shall be exercised by the
Director of that Institute or of that other Laboratory, as the case may be.
(2) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Board, make rules pre-
scribing—
(a) the functions of the Central Drugs Laboratory;
* * * * * *
(d) the procedure for the submission to the said Laboratory under Chapter IV or
Chapter IVA of samples of drugs or cosmetics for analysis or test, the forms of the
Laboratory’s reports thereon and the fees payable in respect of such reports;
(e) such other matters as may be necessary or expedient to enable the said
Laboratory to carry out its functions;
(f) the matters necessary to be prescribed for the purposes of the proviso to sub-
section (1).
7. (1) The Central Government may constitute an advisory committee to be called “the
Drugs Consultative Committee” to advise the Central Government, the State Governments
and the Drugs Technical Advisory Board on any matter tending to secure uniformity
throughout India in the administration of this Act.
(2) The Drugs Consultative Committee shall consist of two representatives of the
Central Government to be nominated by that Government and one representative of each
State Government to be nominated by the State Government concerned.
(3) The Drugs Consultative Committee shall meet when required to do so by the
Central Government and shall have power to regulate its own procedure.
7A. Nothing contained in sections 5 and 7 shall apply to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani
drugs.
CHAPTER III
I
MPORT OF DRUGS AND COSMETICS
8. (1) * * * * *
(2) The Central Government, after consultation with the Board and after giving by
notification in the Official Gazette not less than three months’ notice of its intention so to do,
may by a like notification add to or otherwise amend the Second Schedule for the purposes
of this Chapter, and thereupon the Second Schedule shall be deemed to be amended
accordingly.
The Central
Drugs
Laboratory.
The Drugs
Consultative
Committee.
Sections 5 and
7 not apply to
Ayurvedic,
Siddha or
Unani drugs.
Standards of
quality.

18
* * * * *
10. From such date as may be fixed by the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette in this behalf, no person shall import—
(a) any drug or cosmetic which is not of standard quality;
(b) any misbranded drug or misbranded or spurious cosmetic;
(bb) any adulterated or spurious drug;
(c) any drug or cosmetic for the import of which a licence is prescribed, other-
wise than under, and in accordance with, such licence;
(d) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is displayed in the pre-
scribed manner on the label or container thereof the true formula or lost of active
ingredients contained in it together with the quantities thereof;
(e) any drug which by means of any statement, design or device accompanying
it or by any other means, purports or claims to cure or mitigate any such disease or
ailment, or to have any such other effect, as may be prescribed;
(ee) any cosmetic containing any ingredient which may render it unsafe or harmful
for use under the directions indicated or recommended;
(f) any drug or cosmetic the import of which is prohibited by rule made under this
Chapter:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the import, subject to prescribed
conditions, of small quantities of any drug for the purpose of examination, test or analysis or
for personal use:
Provided further that the Central Government may, after consultation with the Board,
by notification in the Official Gazette, permit, subject to any conditions specified in the
notification, the import of any drug or class of drugs not being of standard quality.
* * * * *
12. (1) The Central Government may,  after consultation with or on the recommendation
of the Board and after previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central
Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make
rules without such consultation, but in such a case the Board shall be consulted within six
months of the making of the rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration
any suggestions which the Board may make in relation to the amendment of the said rules.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may—
(a) specify the drugs or classes of drugs or cosmetics or classes of cosmetics for
the import of which a licence is required, and prescribed the form and conditions of
such licences, the authority empowered to issue the same, the fees payable therefor
and provide for the cancellation, or suspension of such licence in any case where any
provision of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder is contravened or any of the
conditions subject to which the licence is issued is not complied with;
(b) prescribe the methods of test or analysis to be employed in determining
whether a drug or cosmetic is of standard quality;
(c) prescribe, in respect of biological and organometallic compounds, the units
of methods standardisation;
(cc) prescribe under clause (d) of section 9A, the colour or colours which a drug
may bear or contain for purposes of colouring;
Prohibition of
import of
certain drugs or
cosmetics.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.

19
(d) specify the diseases or ailments which an imported drug may not purport or
claim to prevent, cure or mitigate and such other effects which such drug may not
purport or claim to have;
(e) prescribe the conditions subject to which small quantities of drugs, the
import of which is otherwise prohibited under this Chapter, may be imported for the
purpose of examination, test or analysis or for personal use;
(f) prescribe the places at which drugs or cosmetics may be imported, and pro-
hibit their import at any other place;
(g) require the date of manufacture and the date of expiry of potency to be clearly
and truly stated on the label or container or any specified imported drug or class of
such drug, and prohibit the import of the said drug or class of drug after the expiry of
a specified period from the date of manufacture;
(h) regulate the submission by importers, and the securing, of samples of drugs
or cosmetics for examination, test or analysis by the Central Drugs Laboratory, and
prescribe the fees, if any, payable for such examination, test or analysis;
(i) prescribe the evidence to be supplied, whether by accompanying documents
or otherwise, of the quality of drugs or cosmetics sought to be imported, the procedure
of officers of Customs in dealing with such evidence, and the manner of storage at
places of import  of drugs or cosmetics detained pending admission;
(j) provide for the exemption, conditionally or otherwise, from all or any of the
provisions of this Chapter and the rules made thereunder of drugs or cosmetics
imported for the purpose only of transport through, and export from, India;
(k) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing in bottles, packages
or other containers, of imported drugs or cosmetics including the use of packing
material which comes into direct contract with the drugs;
(l) regulate the mode of labelling drugs or cosmetics imported for sale in pack-
ages, and prescribe the matters which shall or shall not be included in such labels;
(m) prescribe the maximum proportion of any poisonous substance which may
be added to or contained in any imported drug, prohibit the import of any drug in
which that proportion is exceeded, and specify substances which shall be deemed to
be poisonous for the purposes of this Chapter and the rules made thereunder;
(n) require that the accepted scientific name of any specified drug shall be
displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or wrapper of any imported, patent or
proprietary medicine containing such drug;
(o) provide for the exemption, conditionally or otherise, from all or any of the
provisions of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder, of any specified drug or class
of drugs or cosmetic or class of cosmetics.
*****
CHAPTER IV
M
ANUFACTURE, SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF DRUGS AND COSMETICS
16. (1) * * * * *
(2) The Central Government, after consultation with the Board and after giving by
notification in the Official Gazette not less than three months’ notice of its intention so to do,
may by a like notification add to or otherwise amend the Second Schedule for the purposes
of this Chapter, and thereupon the Second Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accord-
ingly.
* * * * *
Standards of
quality.

20
18. From such date may be fixed by the State Government by notification in the
Official Gazette in this behalf, no person shall himself or by any other person on his
behalf—
(a) manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or stock or exhibit or offer
for sale, or  distribute—
(i) any drug which is not of a standard quality, or is misbranded,
adulterated or spurious;
(ii)  any cosmetic which is not of a standard quality, or is misbranded or
spurious;
(iii) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is displayed in the
prescribed manner on the label or container thereof the true formula or list of
active ingredient contained in it together with quantities thereof;
(iv) any drug which by means of any statement design or device accom-
panying it or by any other means, purports or claims  to prevent, cure or
mitigate any such disease or ailment, or to have any such other effect as may
be prescribed;
(v) any cosmetic containing any ingredient which may render it unsafe
or harmful for use under the directions indicated or recommended;
(vi) any drug or cosmetic in contravention of any of the provisions of
this Chapter or any rule made thereunder;
(b) sell, or stock or exhibit of offer for sale, or distribute any drug or cosmetic
which has been imported or manufactured in contravention of any of the provisions
of this Act or any rule made thereunder;
(c) manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or stock or exhibit or offer
for sale, or distribute any  drug or cosmetic, except under, and in accordance with
the conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under this Chapter:
* * * * *
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the manufacture, subject to
prescribed conditions, of small quantities of any drug for the purpose of examination, test
or analysis:
Provided further that the Central Government may, after consultation with the Board,
by notification in the Official Gazette, permit, subject to any conditions specified in the
notification, the  manufacture for sale or for distribution, sale, stocking or exhibiting or
offering for sale or distribution of any drug or class of drugs not being of standard quality.
* * * * *
20. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Government
Analysts for such areas in the State and in respect of such drugs or classes of drugs or
such cosmetics or classes of cosmetics as may be specified in the notification.
* * * * *
(2) The Central Government may also, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Government
Analysts in respect of such drugs or classes of drugs or such cosmetics or classes of
cosmetics as may be specified in the notification.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub section (2),
neither the Central Government nor a State Government shall appoint as a Government
Prohibition of
manufacture
and sale of
certain drugs
and cosmetics.
Government
Analysts.

21
Analyst any official not serving under it without the previous consent of the Government
under which he is serving.
(4) No person who has any financial interest in the import, manufacture or sale of
drugs or cosmetics shall be appointed to  be a Government Analyst under sub-section (1) or
sub- section (2) of this section.
21. (1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to
be Inspectors for such areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be.
(2) The powers which may be exercised by an Inspector and the duties which may be
performed by him, the drugs or classes of drugs or cosmetics or classes of cosmetics in
relation to which and the conditions, limitations or restrictions subject to which, such powers
and duties may be exercised or performed shall be such as may be precribed.
(3) No person who has any financial interest in the import, manufacture or sale of
drugs or cosmetics shall be appointed to be an Inspector under this section.
(4) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, and shall be  officially subordinate to such authority,
having the prescribed qualifications, as the Government appointing him may specify in this
behalf.
22. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 23 and of any rules made by the Central
Government in this behalf, an Inspector may, within the local limits of the area for which he is
appointed,—
* * * * *
(cca) require any person to produce any record, register, or other document
relating to the manufacture for sale or for distribution, stocking, exhibition for sale,
offer for sale or distribution of any drug or cosmetic in respect of which he has reason
to believe that an offence under this Chapter has been, or is being, committed;
* * * * *
27.  Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf manufactures for sale or for
distribution, or sells, or stocks, or exhibits or offers for sale or distributes,—
(a) any drug deemed to be adulterated under section 17A or spurious under
section 17B or which when used by any person for or in the diagnosis, treatment,
mitigation, or prevention of any disease or disorder is likely to cause his death or is
likely to cause such harm on his body as would amount to grievous hurt within the
meaning of section 320 of the Indian Penal Code, solely on account of such drug being
adulterated or spurious or not of standard quality, as the case may be,  shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but
which may extend to a term of life and with fine which shall not be less than ten
thousand rupees;
(b) any drug—
(i) deemed to be adulterated under section 17A, but not being a drug
referred to in caluse (a), or
(ii) without a valid licence as required under clause (c) of section 18,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year
but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than five
thousand rupees:
Inspectors.
Powers of
Inspecters.
45 of 1860.
Penalty for
manufacture,
sale, etc., drugs
in contraven-
tion of this
Chapter.
45 of 1860.

22
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be
recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than
one year and of fine of less than five thousand rupees;
(c) any drug deemed to be spurious under section 17B, but not being a drug
referred to in clause (a) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than three years but which may extend to five years and with fine which
shall not be less than five thousand rupees:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons, to be
recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than
three years but not less than one year;
(d)  any drug, other than a drug referred to in clause (a) or clause  (b)  or
clause (c) in contravention of any other provision of this Chapter or any rule made
thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not  be less
than one year but which may extend to two years and with fine:
Provided that the Court may for any adequate and special reasons to be
recorded in the judgment impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than
one year.
27A. Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf manufactures for sale or
for distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhibits or offers for sale—
(i) any cosmetic deemed to be spurious under section 17C shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine;
(ii) any cosmetic other than a cosmetic referred to in clause (i) above in
contravention of any provisions of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both.
31. (1) Where any person has been convicted under this Chapter for contravening
any such provision of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder as may be specified by
rule made in this behalf, the stock of the drug or cosmetic in respect of which the
contravention has been made shall be liable to confiscation and if such contravention is in
respect of—
(i) manufacture of any drug deemed to be misbranded under section 17,
adulterated under section 17A or spurious under section 17B; or
(ii) manufacture for sale, or for distribution, sale or stocking or exhibiting or
offering for sale, or distribution of any drug without a valid licence as required
under clause (c) of section 18,
any implements or machinery used in such manufacture, sale or distribution and any
receptacles, packages or coverings in which such drug is contained and the animals
vehicles, vessels or other conveyances used in carrying such drug shall also be liable to
confiscation.
* * * * *
33. (1) The Central Government may “after consultation with, or on the
recommendation of, the Board” and after previous publication by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central
Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to
make rules without such consultation, but in such a case the Board shall be consulted
within six months of the making of the rules and the Central Government shall take into
consideration any suggestions which the Board may make the relation to the amendment
of the said rules.
Penalty for
manufacture,
sale, etc., of
cosmetics in
contravention
of this
Chapter.
Confiscation.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.

23
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may—
* * * * *
(b) prescribe the qualifications and duties of Government Analysts and the
qualifications of Inspectors;
* * * * *
(e) prescribe the forms of licences for the manufacture for sale or for Distribution
for the sale and for the distribution of drugs or any specified drug or class of drugs or
of cosmetics or any specified cosmetic or class of cosmetics, the form of application
for such licences may be issued, the authority empowered to issue the same the
qualifications of such authority and the fees payable therefor; and provide for the
cancellation or suspension of such licences in any case where any provision of this
Chapter or the rules made thereunder is contravened or any of the conditions subject
to which they are issued is not complied with.
*****
(n) prescribe the powers and duties of Inspectors and the qualifications of the
authority to which such Inspectors shall be subordinate and specify the drugs or classes of
drugs or cosmetics or classes of cosmetics in relation to which and the conditions, limitations
or restrictions subject to which, such powers and duties may be exercised or performed;
* * * * *
33C. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette and with
effect from such date as may be specified therein, constitute a Board (to be called the
Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs Technical Advisory Board to advise the Central
Government and the State Governments on technical matters arising out of this Chapter and
to carry out the other functions assigned to it by this Chapter.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(i) the Director General of Health Services, ex officio;
(ii) the Drugs Controller, India, ex officio;
(iii) the Principal Officer dealing with, Indian systems of medicine in Ministry of
Health ex-officio;
(iv) the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory, Calcutta, ex officio;
(v) one person holding the appointment of Government Analyst under section
33F, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(vi) one Pharmacognocist to be nominated by the Central Government;
(vii) one Phyto-chemist to be nominated by the Central Government;
(viii) four persons to be nominated by the Central Government, two from amongst
the member of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee, one from amongst the members
of the Unani Pharmacopoeia Committee and one from amongst the members of the
Siddha Pharmacopoeia Committee.
(ix) one teacher in Dravyaguna and Bhaishajya Kalpana, to be nominated by the
Central Government;
(x) one teacher in  ILM-UL-ADVIA and TAKLISWA-DAW ASAZI, to be
nominated by the Central Government;
(xi) one teacher in Gunapadam to be nominated by the Central Government;
(xii) three persons, on each to represent the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug
industry, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(xiii) three persons, one each from among the practitioners of Ayurvedic, Siddha
and Unani Tibb systems of medicine to be nominated by the Central Government.
Ayurvedic,
Siddha and
Unani drug
Technical
Advisory
Board.

24
33D. (1) The Central Government may constitute and Advisory Committee to be called
the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee to advise the Central
Government, the State Governments and the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical
Advisory Board on any matter for the purpose of securing uniformity throughout India in
the administration of this Act in so far as it relates to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.
(2) The Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee shall consist of
two persons to be nominated by the Central Government as representatives of that Government
and not more than one representative of each State to be nominated by the State Government
concerned.
* * * * *
33EEB. No person shall manufacture for sale or for distribution any Ayurvedic, Siddha
or Unani drugs except in accordance with such standards, if any, as may be prescribed in
relation to that drug.
33EEC. From such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify in this behalf, no person, either by himself or by any other person on his
behalf, shall—
(a) manufacture for sale or for distribution—
(i) any misbranded, adulterated or spurious Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani
drug;
(ii) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is displayed in the
prescribed manner on the label or container thereof the true list of all the
ingredients contained in it; and
(iii) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug in contravention of any of the
provisions of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder;
* * * * *
(c) manufacture for sale or for distribution, any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani
drug, except under, and in accordance with the conditions of, a licence issued for such
purpose under this Chapter by the prescribed authority:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to V aidyas and Hakims who
manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug for the use of their own patients:
Provided further that nothing in this section shall apply to the manufacture, subject to
the prescribed conditions, of small quantities of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug for the
purpose of examinations, test or analysis.
33F. (1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint such person as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to
be Government Analysts for such areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), neither the Central
Government nor a State Government shall appoint as a Government Analyst any official not
serving under it without the previous consent of the Government under which he is serving.
(3) No person who has any financial interest in the manufacture or sale of any drug
shall be appointed to be a Government Analyst under this section.
33G. (1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint such perosns as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to
be Inspectors for such areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be.
Regulation of
manufacture
for sale of
Ayurvedic,
Siddha and
Unani drugs.
Prohibition of
manufacture
and sale of
certain
Ayurvedic,
Siddha and
Unani drugs.
The Ayurvedic,
Siddha and
Unani Drugs
Consultative
Committee.
Government
Analysts.
Inspectors.

25
(2) The powers which may be exercised by an Inspector and the duties which may be
performed by him and the conditions, limitations or restrictions subject to which such powers
and duties may be exercised or performed shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) No person who has any financial interest in the manufacture or sale of any drug
shall be appointed to be an Inspector under this section.
(4) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code and shall be officially subordinate to such authority as
the Government appointing him may specify in the behalf.
* * * * *
33-I. Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf—
(1) manufactures for sale or for distribution,—
(a) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug—
(i) deemed to be adulterated under section 33EE, or
(ii) without a valid licence as required under clause
(c) of section 33EEC,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and
with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees;
(b) any Ayurvedic, Suddha or Unani drug deemed to be spurious under section
33EEA, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
one year but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than
five thousand rupees:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in
the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year and of fine
of less than five thousand rupees; or
(2) contravenes any other provisions of this Chapter or of section 24 as applied by
section 33H or any rule made under this Chapter, shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to three months and with fine which shall not be less than five
hundred rupees.
* * * * *
33L. The provisions of this Chapter except those contained in section 33K shall apply
in relation to the manufacture for sale, sale or distribution of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani
drug by any department of Government as they apply in relation to the manufacture for sale,
sale, or distribution of such drug by any other person
*****.
33N. (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with, or on the recommenda-
tion of, the Board  after previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:
*****.
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispense with  if the Central
Government is of opinion that circumstances arisen which render it necessary to make rules
without such have consultation, but in such a case, the Board shall be consulted within six
months of the making of the rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration
any suggestions which the Board may make in relation to the amendment of the said rules.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may—
(a) provide for the establishment of laboratories for testing and analysing
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani.
45 of 1860.
Penalty for
manufacture,
sale, etc., of
Ayurvedic,
Siddha or
Unani drug in
contravention
of this
Chapter.
Application of
provisions to
Government
Departments.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.

26
(b) prescribe the qualifications and duties of Government  Analysts and the
qualifications of Inspectors;
(c) prescribe the methods of test  or analysis to be employed determining whether
any Ayurvedic Siddha or Unani drug is labelled with the true list of the ingredients
which it is purported to contain;
(d) specify any substance as a poisonous substance;
(e) prescribe the forms of licences for the manufacture drugs for sale of  drugs
the forms of application for such licences, the conditions subject to which such licences
may be issued, the authority empowered  to issue the same and the fees payable
therefor and provide for the cancellation or suspension of such licences in any case
where any provision of this chapter or rules made thereunder is contravened or any of
the conditions subject to which they are issued is not complied with.
(f) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing of Ayurvedic, Siddha
and Unani durgs including the use of packing material which comes into direct contact
with the drugs, regulate the mode of labelling packed drugs and prescribe the matters
which shall or shall not be included in such labels;
(g) prescribe the conditions subject to which small quantities of Ayurvedic,
Siddha or Unani drugs may be manufactured for the purpose of examination, test or
analysis; and
(gg) prescribe under  clause (d) of section 33EE the colour or colours which an
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug may bear or contain for purposes of colouring;
(gga) prescribe the standards for Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs under section
33EEB;
(h) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under this Chapter.
33-O. The Central Government, after consultation with the Board and after giving, by
notification in the Official Gazette, not less than three months’ notice of its intention so to do,
may, by a like notification, add to or otherwise amend the first Schedule for the purposes of
the Chapter and thereupon the said Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
* * * * *
38. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the
expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only  in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
* * * * *
Power to
amend First
Schedule.
Rules to be
laid before
Parliament.

27
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmestics Act, 1940.
————
(Dr. Ambumani Ramadoss, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)
MGIPMRND—3120RS(S1)—14.8.2007.