THE SELF-FINANCING PROFESSIONAL EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS (CONTROL  AND REGULATION)
BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for proper planning and co-ordinated development of Self-financing
professional educational institutions throughout the country by regulating the
admission of students and prescribing fee structure in such Self-financing
Institution including prevention of commercialisation of professional
education and prohibition of Capitation fees and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
Whereas it is necessary to provide for proper planning and co-ordinated development
of Self-financing Institutions throughout the country by prohibiting collection of capitation
fees, preventing commercialisation of professional education, regulating admission procedure
and prescribing fees structure and other matters incidental thereto;
Bill No. LVII of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 18TH DECEMBER, 2015
5

2
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Self Financing Professional Educational Institutions,
(Control and Regulation) Act, 2015.
(2) It extents to the whole of India except the state of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
(4) It shall apply to all Self-financing Institutions.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requries,—
(a) "advisory body" means a body consisting of parents and teacher's
representatives, student representatives, elected Member of Parliament and Member
of Legislative Assembly from the area, President of District Panchayat and two
representatives of the Management;
(b) "capitation fees" means any amount by whatever name called whether in
cash or in kind, paid or collected or received directly or indirectly by the Management
or Governing Body or any member of the Management or Governing Body or staff of
any Self Financing Professional Educational Institution, including his/their relative or
any person associated in any manner whatsoever in the management of the said
institution, in addition to the fees prescribed or determined under section 5 from or in
relation to any candidates or student in consideration of his admission or continuance
of any course of study or his promotion to a higher class in such college or institution
under such management;
(c) "common entrance examination" means the entrance examination conducted
either by the Government or any other agency wholly controlled by the Government
for admission to the professional educational institution;
(d) "free seat" means any seat in a Self Financing Professional Educational
Institution against which the fee collected shall be the same as that prevailing for the
corresponding course in Government colleges;
(e) "government" means the Central Government or the State Government or
both as the case may be;
(f) "management" means any trust, co-operative society, Company registered
under the Companies Act, 2013 and such other similar association of persons, under
whose control or administration any self financing professional educational institution
is functioning;
(g) 'minority' means a community belonging to religions or miniority as may be
notified by the Government;
(h) 'minority institutions' means private professional educational institute
established and administered by minority and being conferred minority status by the
National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions;
(i) "parents representativé" means, a legal guardian of any student elected by
the parent-teachers association of the respective college;
(j) "payment seat" means any seat against which the management is permitted to
collect the fees prescribed under Section 5(1)(b);
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by this Act or rule made under the Act;
(l) "self-financing institution" includes any College, University, Deemed
University, institution established, administrated or maintained by any trust,
Co-operative Society, company registered under the Companies Act, 2013 and such
18 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Short title,
extent,
commencement
and Application.
Definitions.

3
other similar association of persons, affiliated to or recognized by a University or
Government Agency and not receiving any financial assistance from Government and
conducting course in any of the disciplines like Engineering and Technology, Medicine,
Dentistry, Pharmacy, Ayurveda, Homoeopathy, Siddha, Nursing, Law etc.;
(m) "statutory auditors" a group of auditors appointed by the Government to
audit Self-financing Institution collectively as item of not less than three auditors;
(n) "student representative" means a student elected by the students of a Self
Financing Professional Educational Institution through direct election.
CHAPTER  II
A
DMISSION AND FEES IN SELF FINANCING INSTITUTION
3. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to self financing institution established
or administered by the minority communities.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in
any judgment, decree or order of any court or any other authority or in any agreement, the
admission of students to a Self Financing Institution shall be made only on the basis of the
merit list prepared  though a common a entrance examination.
(2) In every self-financing institution seventy five per cent of the total seats shall be
free seats and the remaining twenty five percent shall be payment seats.
(3) Free seats shall be filled up on the basis of the rank in the common entrance
examination following the pricinples of reservation as  determined by the  Government from
time to time, to ensure freeships and scholarship to the candidates hailing from backward
areas and weaker section of society.
(4) Payment seats shall be filled up from the list prepared on the basis of common
entrance examination from among those students, who indicate their preference for being
allotted such seats:
Provided that the management shall ensure inter-se merit among the students opting
for a particular insitution, and lower rank holders will be eligible for the seat, only if the higher
rank holder relinquishes his or her claim through a written communication.
(5) Educational qualification for admission in the self-financing institution shall be
such as may be notified by the Government from time to time.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in
any judgment, decree or order of any court or any other authority or any committee or any
agreement,—
(a) the fees charged by any self financing institution for free seats shall be the
same as that charged by Government professional institutions for the corresponding
course.
(b) the fees charged for payment seats shall be prescribed by the Government on
the basis of the recommendation of an expert Committee constituted in this behalf by
the Government;
6. (1) The Government shall constitute an Expert Committee to determine the free
structure for payment seats in the self financing professional institutions.
(2) the Expert Committee shall consist of:—
(i) a retired judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court, who shall be the
Chairman of the Committee;
(ii) two experts in the relevant field of professional education;
(iii) two representatives of the Government;
(iv) three representatives of the management;
(v) two experts in the field of accountancy, cost audit or management.
Fee Structure.
Applicability.
Procedure for
admission.
Expert
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(3) (a) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members of the Expert Committee, shall be such, as may be
prescribed by the Government.
(b) the allowances payable to the Chairperson and members of the Expert Committee
for attending the meetings of the Committee shall be such, as may be prescribed by the
Government.
(4) The fee structure determined by the expert committee shall be revised every five
year.
7. The statutory auditors shall audit  all the self financing institutes at least once in
every year and submit their report to the Government.
8. (1) There shall be an Advisory body in every self  financing institution.
(2) The advisory body shall meet at least once in three months and shall have powers
to verify any record and shall advise on policies for ensuring quality of education.
9. (1) If any management contavenes any of the provisions of this Act, the Government
may temporarily take over the management of the Self Financing Professional Educational
Institution and administer the same in larger public interest:
provided that such take over and administration shall not exceed five years.
CHAPTER III
S
PECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO MINORITY SELF FINANCING INSTITUTION
10. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply only to self financing institution
established or administered by the minority communities;
11. (1) The admission of students to a self financing institution shall be made only on
the basis of merit.
(2) In every self financing instituion sixty percent of the total seats shall be free seats
and the remaining forty per cent shall be payment seats.
(3)Free seats be filled up on the basis of the rank obtained in the Common Entrance
Examination following  the principles of reservation as determined by the Government from
time to time; and also reserve freeships and scholarships to the candidates hailing from
backward areas and weaker sections.
(4) payment seats shall be filled up from the merit list prepared on the basis of Common
Entrance Examination from among those students who indicate their preference for being
allotted such seats:
Provided that a fixed percentage of the payment seats may be reserved for the
community which establishes or administers the institution as may be prescribed.
12. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in any
judgement, decree or order of any court or any other authority or any other authority or any
committee or any agreement,—
(a) The fees charged by any minority self financing Institution for free seats
shall be the same as that charged by Government professional institution for free seats
shall be the same as that charged by Government Professional Institution for the
corresponding course.
(b) the fees charged for payments seats shall be prescribed by the management
on the basis of recommendation of an expert committee constituted in this behalf by
the Governement.
13. (1) The Government shall constitute an expert committee to recommend the fees
structure for payment seats in the minority self financing institutions.
(2) The expert committee shall consist of
(i) a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court who shall be the
Chairman of the Committee;
Auditing.
Advisory
Body.
The powers of
the
Government
to take over.
Applicability.
Procedure for
Admission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Fee Structure
in Minority
Self Financing
Institution.
Expert
Committee.

5
(ii) two experts in the relevant field of professional education, of which one may
be the nominee of the management;
(iii) one representative of the Government;
(iv) three representatives of the management;
(v) two experts in the field of Accountancy/Cost Audit/Management;
(3) (a) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members of the Expert Committee, shall be such, as may be
prescribed, by the Government.
(b) The allowances payable to the Chairperson and members of the Expert Committee
for attending the meetings of the Committee shall be such, as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(4) The fee structure determined by the expert committee shall be revised every five year.
CHAPTER IV
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
14. (1) No capitation fee shall be collected by or on behalf of any self financing
professional college or by any person who is incharge of the affairs of the institution from
any candidate in considering his admission to or continuance in any course of study under
the management.
15. No self  financing institution shall collect fees for more than the current semester at
a time.
16. (1) Whoever entravenes the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder
shall, be punishable with simple imprisonment upto six month or with fine which may extend
upto fifty lakh rupees but not less than twenty lakh rupees or with both;
(2) A penalty under this sections may be imposed without prejudice to the penalty
specified in any other law for the time being in force.
17. No Court shall take congnizance of any offence punishable under this Act except
upon a written complaint, made by the person or student from whom the capitation fee is
alleged to have been demanded.
18. No suit prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any member of the
advisory body or any officer of the Government for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under this Act.
19. The Central Government may, in public interest, exempt any self-financing institution
from the applicability of this Act.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
20. (1) the appropriate Government may by notification in the Gazette, make rules not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of
this Act within three months from the date of commencement of the Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing rule making power, such rules
may provide for all or any of the following matters viz:—
(i) fixation of fee structure;
(ii) procedure to be followed by the expert committee for determining and fixing
fees;
(iii) the matters to be taken into account while fixing fees;
Prohibition
of capitation
fee.
Collection of
Fees.
Cognizance
of offence.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Exemption to
self fianncing
Institutions.
Penalities.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(iv) ensuring that no profiteering is carried on and to reserve freeships and
scholarship to the candidates hailing from backward areas and weaker sections of the
society.
21. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
other law for the time being in force, and nothing contained herein shall exempt any self
financing institution from any proceeding which might, apart from this Act, have been
instituted against it.
Act to be in
addition to
any other
Law.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 39 of the Constitution of India mandates that the State shall direct its policy
towards securing the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are
so distributed as best to subserve the common good and that the operation of the economic
system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the
common detriment. The opening up of the professional education sector and establishment
of Self-financing Institutions have resulted in the need for a comprehensive law regulating
various aspects of the establishment and conduct of such institutions including right to
establish and administer educational instituions of their choise by minorities in the light of
principles enunciated and directions issued by the Supreme Court of India in various decisions
especially in the areas of admission of students and the fee-structure etc. The Supreme Court
had issued the directions invoking its plenary powers under Article 142 which are to remain
in force till appropriate legislation is enacted by the Parliament. The Bill seeks to achieve the
object of regulating the admission of students and fees structure etc. of Self-financing
Institutions, in the light of the principles enshrined in the Constitution of India especially,
Article 39 thereof.
Hence this Bill
K.K.  RAGESH
7

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an Expert Committee to determine
and fix fee structure in the Self Financing Professional Insitutions. Similarly, Clause 13 also
deals with constitution of an Expert Committee to determine and fix fee structure in the Self
Financing Professional Institutions with reference to the minority-run eductional institutions.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. The recurring and non-recurring expenditure on this count cannot be estimated at this
stage, but has to be worked out at later stage by the appropriate authority while implementing
the provisions of the Act.
8

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 20 of Bill gives power to the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
9

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for proper planning and co-ordinated development of Self-financing
professional educational institutions throughout the country by regulating the
admission of students and prescribing fee structure in such Self-financing
Institutions including prevention of commercialisation of professional
education and prohibition of Capitation fees and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri K.K. Ragesh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3841RS(S3)—18-12-2015.