1
THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),
for the long title and first paragraph of the preamble, the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
“An Act to regulate the import, export, manufacture, distribution and sale of
drugs, cosmetics and medical devices to ensure their safety, efficacy, quality and
conduct of clinical trials and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of long title
and preamble.
23 of 1940.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. LVIII of 2013
5
10

2
WHEREAS it is expedient to regulate the import, export, manufacture, distribution
and sale of drugs, cosmetics and medical devices to ensure their safety, efficacy, quality
and conduct of clinical trials and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”.
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “and Cosmetics”,
the words “, Cosmetics and Medical Devices” shall be substituted.
4. Throughout the principal Act, for the word “Inspector”, wherever it occurs, the
words “Drugs Control Officer” shall be substituted.
5. In section 2 of the principal Act, for the words and figures “the Dangerous Drugs
Act, 1930”, the words and figures “the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act,
1985” shall be substituted.
6. In section 3 of the principal Act,––
(i) after clause (a), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(aA) “bioavailability study” means a study to assess the rate and extent
to which the active drug is absorbed from a pharmaceutical formulation and
becomes available in the systemic circulation or availability of drug at the site of
action;
(aB) “bioequivalence study” means a study to establish the absence of a
significant difference in the rate and extent of absorption of an active drug from
a pharmaceutical formulation in comparison to the reference formulation having
the same active drug when administered in the same molar dose under similar
conditions;’;
(ii) in clause (aa), after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:––
“(iii) in relation to Medical Devices, the Medical Device Technical Advisory
Board constituted under section 5A;”;
(iii) after clause (aa), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(ab) “Central Drugs Authority” means the Central Drugs Authority of
India constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 4A;
(ac) “Central Drugs Laboratory” means a drug testing laboratory
established by the Central Government, by whatever name, for carrying out the
functions assigned to it under this Act and rules made thereunder;
(ad) “Central Licensing Authority” means the Drugs Controller General of
India designated as such under sub-section ( 2) of section 4J;
(ae) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Central Drugs Authority;
(af) “clinical trial” means––
(i) in respect of drugs, any systematic study of new drug,
investigational new drug or  bioavailability or bioequivalence study of
any drug in human subjects to generate data for discovering or verifying
its clinical, pharmacological (including pharmacodynamic and
pharmacokinetic) or adverse effects with the objective of determining safety,
efficacy or tolerance of the drug;
(ii) in respect of cosmetics, the systematic study, including
dermatological study, of a cosmetic including a new cosmetic on human
subjects to generate data for discovering or verifying its adverse effects
with the objective of determining safety, efficacy or tolerance of the
cosmetic;
Amendment
of section 1.
Substitution of
words “Drugs
Control 
Officer” for
word “Inspec-
tor”.
Amendment
of section 2. 2 of 1930.
61 of 1985.
Amendment
of section 3.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45

3
(iii ) in respect of medical devices, the systematic clinical
investigation or study of a medical device, investigational medical device
or a new medical device, in, or on human subjects to assess the safety or
performance of the medical device;’;
(iv) in clause (aaa), after the words “component of cosmetic”, the words “and
includes new cosmetic” shall be inserted;
(v) in clause (b),––
(A) in sub-clause (ii), after the words “destruction of vermin or insects”,
the words “or microbes” shall be inserted;
(B) sub-clause (iv) shall be omitted;
(C) after sub-clause ( iv), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:––
‘(v) any new drug for which permission has been granted by the
Central Licensing Authority under the first proviso to clause ( c) of
sub-section (1) of section 18.
Explanation I.––In this sub-clause, “new drug” means––
 (i) a drug, including bulk drug substance, which has not been
used in the country to any significant extent under the prescribed
conditions, recommended or suggested in the labelling thereof and
has not been recognised as effective and safe by the Central
Licensing Authority for the expected claims and its limited use, if
any;
(ii) a drug approved by the Central Licensing Authority for
certain claims, which is proposed to be marketed with modified or
new claims, namely, indications, dosage, dosage form (including
sustained release dosage form) and route of administration;
(iii ) a fixed dose combination of two or more drugs,
individually approved earlier for certain claims, which are proposed
to be combined for the first time in a fixed ratio, or if the ratio of
ingredients in a marketed combination is proposed to be changed,
with certain claims, namely, indications, dosage, dosage form
(including sustained release dosage form) and route of
administration;
(iv) all vaccines, recombinant Deoxyribonucleic Acid derived
products, Living Modified Organisms, monoclonal anti-bodies, stem
cells, gene therapeutic products and xenografts which are intended
to be used as drugs;
Explanation II.––A new drug shall continue to be a new drug for
such period as may be prescribed except the type of new drug specified in
clause (iv) of Explanation I which shall always remain a new drug;’;
(vi) after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(ba) “Drugs Control Officer” means––
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, a Drugs Control
Officer appointed by the Central Government or a State Government under
section 33G;
(ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, a Drugs Control Officer
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
appointed by the Central Drugs Authority or a State Government under
section 21;
(iii) in relation to any medical device, the Medical Device Officer
appointed  by the Central Drugs Authority  under section 7H;
(bb) “Drugs Controller General of India” means an officer appointed by
the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 4G;
(bc) “Ethics Committee” means the Ethics Committee constituted under
section 4T;’;
(vii) in clause (c), in sub-clause (ii), for the words “Central Government”, the
words “Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted;
(viii) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(d) “Indian Pharmacopoeia” means the official book of standards for
drugs which specifies the standards of identity, purity and strength for the
drugs mentioned therein;
(da) “investigational medical device” means a device, which is an object
of a clinical investigation or research or development involving one or more
subjects to determine the safety or effectiveness of a device;
(db) “investigational new drug” means chemical entity or substance which
is under investigation in clinical trial regarding its safety and efficacy and which
is required to be approved by the Central Drugs Authority;
(dc) “investigator” means a person who is responsible for the conduct of
a clinical trial and responsible for the rights, health, safety and well being of the
study subjects on the study site;’;
(ix) clause (e) shall be omitted;
(x) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:––
‘(f) “manufacture” means––
(i) in  relation  to  any drug (except human blood and its components,
or any cosmetic) includes any process or part of a process for   making,
altering, ornamenting, finishing,  packing, labelling,  breaking up  or
otherwise  treating or adapting any drug or cosmetic with  a view to its
sale, export, stocking or distribution but does not include the compounding
or dispensing of any drug, or the packing of any drug or cosmetic, in the
ordinary course of retail business;
(ii) in relation to human blood and its components includes any
process or part of a process of collection, processing, storage, packing,
labelling and testing for its use, sale, export or distribution for transfusion
in human beings;
(iii) in  relation  to  any medical device, includes any process or part
of process for   making, assembling, altering, ornamenting, finishing,
packing, labelling, or adapting any medical device with  a view to its sale or
stock or export or distribution but does not include assembling or adapting
a device already on the market for an individual patient;’;
(xi) after clause (f), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(fa) “medical device” means––
(i) any instrument, apparatus, appliance, implant, material or other
article, whether used alone or in combination, including the software,
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45

5
intended by its manufacturer to be used specially for human beings or
animals for one or more of the specific purposes of,––
(A) diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or alleviation
of any disease or disorder;
(B) diagnosis, monitoring, treatment, alleviation of, or
assistance for, any injury or handicap;
(C) investigation, replacement or modification or support of
the anatomy or of a physiological process;
(D) supporting or sustaining life;
(E) disinfection of medical devices;
(F) control of conception,
and which does not achieve its primary intended action in or on the human
body or animals by any pharmacological or immunological or metabolic
means, but which may be assisted in its intended function by such means;
(ii) an accessory to such an instrument, apparatus, appliance, material
or other article;
(iii) a device which is reagent, reagent product, calibrator, control
material, kit, instrument, apparatus, equipment or system whether used
alone or in combination thereof intended to be used for examination and
providing information for medical or diagnostic purposes by means of in
vitro examination of specimens derived from the human body or animals;
(iv) any new medical device;
(fb) “Member” means a Member of the Central Drugs Authority and
includes the Chairperson and the Member-Secretary;’;
(xii) in clause (h),  in sub-clause (ii), for the words “Central Government”, the
words “Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted;
(xiii) after clause (i), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(j) “protocol” means a document that states the background, objectives,
rationale, design, methodology (including but not limited to the methods for
dealing with adverse events or withdrawals) and statistical considerations of
the clinical trial and also states the conditions under which the trial shall be
performed and managed;
(k) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Central Drugs
Authority under this Act;
(l) “sponsor” means and includes an investigator, an individual or a
company or an institution responsible for the initiation, financing and management
of a clinical trial;
(m) “State Government” includes the administrator of a Union territory
appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution;
(n) “State Licensing Authority” means an officer designated as such by
the State Government under sub-section (3) of section 7F or sub-section (2) of
section 18;
(o) “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to this Act;’.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
7. After Chapter I of the principal Act, the following Chapters shall be inserted, namely:—
‘CHAPTER  IA
CENTRAL DRUGS AUTHORITY
4A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Authority to be known as the Central Drugs Authority to exercise the
powers conferred on, and perform the functions assigned to it by or under this Act.
(2)  The Central Drugs Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said
name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Central Drugs Authority shall be in the National
Capital Region.
(4) The Central Drugs Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish its offices at such other
places in India as it considers necessary.
4B. (1) The Central Drugs Authority shall consist of the following,
namely:––
(a) Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, Department of Health and Family Welfare–– Chairperson,
ex officio;
(b) Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, Department of Ayurveda, Y oga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and
Homoeopathy–– Member, ex officio;
(c) Secretary, Department of AIDS Control and Director General, National
AIDS Control Organisation, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare –– Member,
ex officio;
(d) Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Commerce and
Industry, Department of Commerce–– Member, ex officio;
(e) Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilisers, Department of Pharmaceuticals–– Member, ex officio;
(f) Secretary, Department of Health Research and Director General, Indian
Council of Medical Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare –– Member,
ex officio;
(g) Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Science and
Technology, Department of Bio-technology–– Member, ex officio;
(h) Director General Health Services, Directorate General of Health
Services, New Delhi––Member, ex officio;
(i) Additional Secretary or Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel in
the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice in charge of the Group
dealing with the work relating to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare––
Member, ex officio;
(j) Additional Secretary or Joint Secretary in charge of the Drugs Quality
Control Division in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare–– Member,
ex officio;
Insertion of
new Chapter
IA and Chapter
IB.
Constitution
of Central
Drugs Autho-
rity.
Composition
of Central
Drugs Autho-
rity.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40

7
(k) four experts having such qualifications and experience to be nominated
by the Central Government in such  manner as may be prescribed–– Member;
(l) four State Licensing Authorities to be nominated by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed–– Member;
(m) Drugs Controller General of India–– Member-Secretary, ex officio.
(2) The Members appointed under clause (k) of sub-section (1) shall hold office
for a period of three years from the date of their nomination, and shall be eligible for
re-nomination;
(3) The Central Drugs Authority shall meet at such time and place and shall
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meeting
and allowances payable to a Member for attending such meetings as may be specified
by regulations.
4C. (1) On and from the date of constitution of the Central Drugs Authority,—
(a) any reference to the Central Drugs Standards Control Organisation in
any law other than this Act or in any contract or other instruction shall be
deemed as a reference to the Central Drugs Authority;
(b) all properties and assets, movable and immovable, of, or belonging to,
the Central Drugs Standards Control Organisation, shall vest in the Central
Drugs Authority;
(c) all rights and liabilities of the Central Drugs Standards Control
Organisation shall be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the
Central Drugs Authority;
(d) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (c), all debts, obligations
and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things
engaged to be done by, with or for, the Central Drugs Standards Control
Organisation immediately before the said date, for or in connection with the
purpose of the said Central Drugs Standards Control Organisation shall be
deemed to have incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the
Central Drugs Authority;
(e) all sums of money due to the Central Drugs Standards Control
Organisation immediately before that date shall be deemed to be due to the
Central Drugs Authority;
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have
been instituted by or against the Central Drugs Standards Control Organisation
immediately before that date may be continued or may be instituted by or against
the Central Drugs Authority;
(g) every employee of the Central Drugs Standards Control Organisation
holding any office under the Central Drugs Standards Control Organisation
immediately before that date shall hold his office in the Central Drugs Authority
by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service as
respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and other terminal
benefits as he would have held such office if the Central Drugs Authority had
not been constituted and shall continue to do so as an employee of the Central
Drugs Authority or until the expiry of the period of six months from that date if
such employee opts not to be the employee of the Central Drugs Authority
within such period:
Provided that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of
such employees shall not be varied to their disadvantage on exercise of their
option to become the employee of the Central Drugs Authority.
Transfer of
assets,
liabilities,
etc., of
Central Drugs
Standards
Control
Organisation
to Central
Drugs
Authority
constituted
under this Act
and other
provisions,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(2) Notwithstanding anything in the Industrial Dispute Act, 1947 or in any other
law for the time being in force, absorption of any employee by the Central Drugs
Authority in its regular service under this section shall not entitle such employee to
any compensation under that Act or any other law and no such claim shall be entertained
by any court, tribunal or other authority.
4D. Any Member having any direct or indirect interest, whether pecuniary or
otherwise, in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Central Drugs
Authority, shall, as soon as possible after the relevant circumstances have come to his
knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such disclosure
shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Authority, and the Member shall not take
any part in any deliberation or decision of the Authority with respect to that matter.
4E. No act or proceeding of the Central Drugs Authority shall be invalidated
merely by reason of––
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Central Drugs
Authority; or
(b) any defect in the nomination of a person as a Member of the Central
Drugs Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the
merits of the case.
4F. A Member of the Central Drugs Authority nominated under clause ( k) of
sub-section (1) of section 4B may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the
Central Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Member shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government
to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months
from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor
enters upon office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
4G . (1) The Central Government shall appoint the Drugs Controller General of
India or other person having such specialised qualifications and experience as may
be prescribed to perform the functions and discharge the duties assigned to the
Drugs Controller General of India by or under this Act.
(2) The salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Drugs Controller
General of India, appointed under sub-section (1) shall be such as may be determined
by the Central Government.
4H. (1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Central Drugs
Authority create, such number of posts as it considers necessary for the efficient
discharge of the functions and exercise of the powers by the Central Drugs Authority
under this Act.
(2)  The manner of appointment of officers and employees of the Central Drugs
Authority, their salaries, allowances and pension and other conditions of service
shall be such as may be determined by the Central Drugs Authority by regulations
with the approval of the Central Government.
4-I. The Central Drugs Authority shall––
(a) specify, by regulations, the guidelines, norms, structures and
requirements for effective functioning of the Central Licensing Authority and
the State Licensing Authorities;
(b) assess periodically the functioning of the Central Licensing Authority
and the State Licensing Authorities;
Member not to
participate in
meetings in
certain cases.
V acancies, etc.,
not to invali-
date proceed-
ings.
Resignation.
Appointment
of Drugs Con-
troller General
of India.
Staff of
Central Drugs
Authority.
Powers and
functions of
Central Drugs
Authority.
14 of 1947.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45

9
(c) have power to issue directions to the Central Licensing Authority and
the State Licensing Authorities to ensure compliance with the guidelines, norms,
structures and requirements specified by it under clause (a);
(d) review, suspend or cancel any permission, licence or certificate issued
by the Central Licensing Authority or the State Licensing Authorities;
(e) specify, by regulations, the fees or charges for issue or renewal of
licences, certificates, approvals and permissions by the Central Licensing
Authority and the State Licensing authorities;
(f) coordinate, mediate and decide upon the disputes arising out of the
implementation of the provisions of the Act and rules and regulations made
thereunder between two or more States Licensing Authorities;
(g) constitute such committees or sub-committees as it considers necessary
for the efficient discharge of its functions and exercise of its powers under this
Act;
(h) recommend to the Central Government the measures as regards the
standards of drugs, cosmetics and medical devices for effective implementation
of the provisions of this Act;
(i) perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
4J. (1) The Drugs Controller General of India shall exercise the powers conferred
upon him under this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(2)  The Drugs Controller General of India shall act as the Central Licensing
Authority and shall have powers to––
(a) issue, renew, suspend or cancel licences or certificates or permission,
as the case may be, for import, export or manufacture of drugs, cosmetics or
medical devices or permission for conducting clinical trials;
(b) recall or direct to recall any drug, cosmetic or medical device;
(c) collect the fees or charges for issue or renewal of licences, certificates,
approvals and permissions issued by the Central Licensing Authority under this
Act;
(d) discharge any other functions as may be assigned to him by the
Central Drugs Authority;
(3) The Drugs Controller General of India may, with the prior approval of the
Central Drugs Authority, delegate such of his powers to the officers of the Central
Drugs Authority as may be considered necessary.
(4) The Drugs Controller General of India shall be the legal representative of the
Central Drugs Authority, and shall be responsible for day-to-day administration of the
Central Drugs Authority.
(5) The Drugs Controller General of India shall have administrative control over
the officers and employees of the Central Drugs Authority.
4K. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, make to the Central Drugs Authority grants of such sums of money
as are required by it.
Powers and
functions of
Drugs Con-
troller General
of India.
Grants by
Central
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
4L. (1) The Central Drugs Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Central Drugs Authority shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him
and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the
Central Drugs Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed
by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Central Drugs Authority
shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit
as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has, in connection with the audit of
the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers
and to inspect any of the offices of the Central Drugs Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Central Drugs Authority as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf,
together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central
Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may be
after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
4M. (1) The Central Drugs Authority shall prepare every year an annual report in
such form and manner and at such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government,
giving summary of its activities during the previous year and copies of the report shall
be forwarded to the Central Government.
(2) A copy of the report forwarded under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
4N. ( 1) The Central Government may, after consultation with or on the
recommendation of the Central Drugs Authority and subject to previous publication,
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the
provisions of this Chapter.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may
provide for all or any of the  following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which the accounts of the Central Drugs
Authority shall be maintained under sub-section (1) of section 4L;
(b) the form and manner in which and the time within which annual report
is to be prepared under sub-section (1) of section 4M.
4-O. (1) The Central Drugs Authority may, with the approval of the Central
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with
this Act and the rules made thereunder.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the  following matters, namely:—
(a) the allowances payable to a Member for attending the meetings of the
Central Drugs Authority under sub-section (3) of section 4B;
(b) the manner of appointment of the officers and employees of the Central
Drugs Authority, their salaries, allowances and pension and other conditions of
service under sub-section (2) of section 4H;
(c) the matters specified under clauses (a) and (e) of section 4-I;
(d) the functions of the Central Drugs Laboratory and the functions of the
Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory under the proviso to sub-section (1) of
section 6.
Accounts and
audits.
Annual report.
Power to make
regulations.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45
50

11
CHAPTER IB
CLINICAL TRIALS
4P .  (1) No person shall initiate or conduct any clinical trial in respect of a new
drug or investigational new drug or medical device or investigational medical device or
cosmetic or bioavailability or bioequivalence study of any drug in human subjects
except under, and in accordance with, the permission granted by the Central Licensing
Authority in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) No person shall initiate or conduct any clinical trial unless it is approved by
the Ethics Committee constituted under section 4T, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) No person shall initiate or conduct any clinical trial before it is registered with
the Central Drugs Authority in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) No permission from the Central Licensing Authority under this Chapter shall
be required to initiate or conduct any bioequivalence or bioavailability studies of
approved drugs by the Government Institutes, Hospitals, autonomous medical or
Pharmacy institutions for academic or research purposes.
4Q. In case of injury or death of a person in course of a clinical trial, whether such
injury or death has been caused due to the clinical trial, shall be decided by the Drugs
Controller General of India or such authority in such manner as may be prescribed.
4R. (1) In case of a person having been injured as a result of his participation in
a clinical trial, he shall be provided by the person conducting the clinical trial, such
medical treatment in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) In case injury or death of a person occurs due to the clinical trial, the person
conducting such clinical trial shall give him, or as the case may be, his legal heir, such
compensation as may be decided by the Drugs Controller General of India or such
authority, in such manner as may be prescribed.
4S. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the Central Licensing
Authority may, in public interest, abbreviate, defer or omit the pre-clinical and clinical
data requirements for approval of clinical trial of drugs indicated in life threatening or
serious diseases or diseases of special relevance to the country.
4T. (1) The Ethics Committee, constituted for the purpose of giving approval to
a clinical trial protocol and other related matters, shall be registered with the Central
Licensing Authority in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The registration of the Ethics Committee shall be valid for a period of five
years and may be renewed in such manner as may be prescribed.
4U. (1) The Ethics Committee shall consist of at least seven members including
three or more persons from medical field, one legal expert, one social scientist and one
person from community having such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed.
(2) The Ethics Committee shall appoint, from amongst its members, a Chairperson
(who is from outside the institution), and a member-convenor.
4V . (1) The Ethics Committee shall give its approval to the clinical trial protocol
and other related documents in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Ethics Committee shall be responsible to safeguard the rights, safety
and well being of all trial participants enrolled in the clinical trial.
(3) The Ethics Committee shall make periodic review of the trial, based on the
study progress reports furnished by the investigators, or monitoring and internal
No clinical
trial without
permission.
Decision.
Medical treat-
ment and
compensation
for injury due
to clinical
trial.
Deferment of
clinical data
requirements
by the Central
Licensing
Authority.
Registration
of Ethics
Committee.
Composition
of Ethics
Committee.
Functions and
responsibili-
ties of Ethics
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
audit reports furnished by the Sponsor, or by visiting the study sites in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(4) The Ethics Committee shall have power to revoke its approval to a clinical
trial, for reasons to be recorded in writing and shall communicate such decision to the
investigator as well as to the Central Licensing Authority.
(5) The Ethics Committee shall perform such other functions and responsibilities
as may be prescribed.
4W. (1) In case the Ethics Committee fails to discharge its functions and
responsibility under this Act, action shall be taken by the Central Licensing Authority
against the Ethics Committee for suspension or cancellation of its registration.
(2) On the suspension or cancellation of the registration of the Ethics Committee
under sub-section (1), the Central Licensing Authority shall review the approval granted
by the Ethics Committee for continuance or otherwise of the clinical trial in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(3) If the registration of the Ethics Committee is cancelled under sub-section (1),
the members of such Committee shall be disqualified for becoming a member of any
other Ethics Committee for a period of five years under this Act.
4X. Any person conducting clinical trial shall allow the Drugs Control Officer or
Medical Device Officer of the Central Drugs Authority or any other officer authorised
by the Central Licensing Authority to enter with or without prior notice into any
premises related to clinical trial to inspect the facilities, any record, data, documents,
books, drugs including investigational new drugs, medical devices including
investigational medical devices and cosmetics and that officer can seek clarifications,
information and records wherever required so as to ensure that the clinical trial is
being conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder.
4Y . Every person, sponsor, clinical research organisation or any other organisation
or investigator conducting a clinical trial or his agent shall, if so required, disclose to
the Drugs Control Officer or the Medical Device Officer or any other officer authorised
by the Central Licensing Authority, the name, address and other particulars of the
persons involved in conducting the clinical trials, including the trial participants.
4Z. Every person, sponsor, clinical  research organisation or any other
organisation or investigator conducting a clinical trial or his agent holding a permission
under this Chapter shall keep and maintain such data, records, registers and other
documents as may be prescribed and shall furnish such information as may be required
by the Central Drugs Authority or any officer authorised by it.
4ZA. Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, conducts clinical
trial with any drug or investigational new drug or any medical device or investigational
medical device in contravention of section 4P and the rules made thereunder, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but
which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees:
Provided that whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, conducts
clinical trial with any drug or investigational new drug or medical device or
investigational medical device in contravention of the provisions of section 4P and the
rules made thereunder, which caused grievous hurt to or death of any trial participant
of clinical trial, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than five years but  which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine which
shall not be less than twenty lakh rupees:
Provided further that the fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the trial
participant or, as the case may be, his legal heirs:
Action against
Ethics Com-
mittee.
Inspection by
Drugs Control
Officer, etc.
Disclosure of
name, address,
etc., of per-
sons involved
in clinical
trials.
Maintenance
of records and
furnishing of
information.
Penalty for
conducting
clinical trial of
any drug or in-
vestigational
new drug or
any medical
device or in-
vestigational
medical device
without 
permission.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45
50

13
Provided also that any person convicted of an offence under this section shall
not be permitted to conduct any clinical trial.
4ZB. Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under section 4ZA, is again
convicted under that section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than five years but which may extend to ten years and shall also be
liable to fine which shall not be less than thirty lakh rupees.
4ZC. Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, conducts
clinical trials with cosmetics in contravention of section 4P and the rules made
thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than two years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh
rupees:
Provided that whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, conducts
clinical trials with any cosmetics in contravention of the provisions of section 4P and
the rules made thereunder, which caused grievous hurt or death of trial participant of
the clinical trial shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than three years but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine
which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees:
Provided further that the fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the trial
participant or, as the case may be, his legal heirs:
Provided also that any person convicted of an offence under this section shall
not be permitted to conduct any clinical trial.
4ZD. Whoever having been convicted of an offence under section 4ZC, is again
convicted under that section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than five years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less
than five lakh rupees.
4ZE. Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, conducts clinical
trials with any drug or investigational new drug or medical device or investigational
medical device or cosmetic in contravention of conditions of permission issued under
section 4P and rules made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than two years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be
less than five lakh rupees:
Provided that whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, conducts
clinical trials with any drug or investigational new drug or medical device or
investigational medical device or cosmetic in contravention of conditions of permission
issued under section 4P and rules made thereunder, which caused resulted in grievous
hurt or death of a subject during the clinical trial shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may be extended to seven
years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees:
Provided further that the fine imposed on and realised from the person convicted
under this section shall be paid, by way of compensation to the legal heirs of the
person who had suffered the grievous hurt or death during such clinical trial referred
to in this clause:
Provided also that whoever, having been convicted of an offence under this
section shall be debarred from conducting any further clinical trial.
4ZF. Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under section 4ZE, is again
convicted of an offence under that section, shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than five years and fine which shall not be less than ten
lakh rupees.
Penalty for
repeat offence.
Penalty for
conducting
clinical trial
of cosmetics
without
permission.
Penalty for
repeat
offence.
Penalty for
violation of
conditions of
permission.
Penalty for
repeat
offence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
4ZG . Whoever responsible to provide compensation for clinical trial related injury
or death under this chapter fails to do so, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to two years and with fine which shall not be less than twice the
amount of the compensation.
4ZH. Whoever initiates or conducts clinical trial of any drug or investigational
new drug or medical device or investigational medical device or cosmetic in
contravention to any provisions under this chapter not covered under section 4P ,
section 4Q, section 4R, section 4S, section 4T, section 4U, section 4W, section 4ZX,
section 4Y or section 4Z or any other rules made under this chapter shall be punishable
with imprisonment which may extend to two years and with fine which shall not be less
than fifty thousand rupees.
4ZI. Where any person has been convicted for contravening any provision of
this Chapter or any rule made thereunder, the stock of the drug or investigational new
drug or medical device or investigational medical device or cosmetic in respect of
which the contravention has been made as well as any implements or machinery,
vehicle, vessel or other conveyances used in or for the purposes of conducting clinical
trials shall be liable to confiscation.
4ZJ. (1) No prosecution under this Chapter shall be instituted, except on a complaint
made by––
(a) a Drugs Control Officer or a Medical Device Officer appointed by the
Central Drugs Authority; or
(b) a gazetted officer of the Central Government authorised by that
Government by an order made in this behalf; or
(c) the person aggrieved; or
(d) any recognised consumer association.
(2) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent any person
from being prosecuted under any other law for any act or omission which constitutes
an offence against this Chapter.
4ZK. (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Central Drugs
Authority, and after previous publication, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to provide for––
(a) the guidelines and requirements for conducting clinical trials;
(b) the forms and fees for the purposes of this Chapter;
(c) the conditions for issue of the permission  under section 4P;
(d) the norms and procedure for approval of any clinical trial by the Ethics
Committee under sub-section (2) to section 4P and sub-section ( 1) of section
4V;
(e) the norms and procedure for registration of any clinical trial under
sub-section (3) of section 4P;
(f) the manner in which the Central Lisensing Authority shall review the
approval granted by the Ethics Committee for continuance of clinical trial under
sub-section (2) of section UW;—
(g) the records, registers or other documents to be kept and maintained
under this Chapter;
(h) the manner in which copies of documents relating to clinical trial are to
be obtained and certified;
Penalty for
failure to pro-
vide compen-
sation.
Penalty for
contravention
of any provi-
sion of this
chapter.
Confiscation
of stock, etc.
Cognizance of
offences.
Powers of
Central
Government
to make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45

15
(i) the conditions subject to which small quantities of drugs or cosmetics
or medical devices may be imported or manufactured for the purpose of conducting
clinical trials;
(j) the powers and duties of Drugs Control Officers or Medical Device
Officers;
(k) the norms and procedures for deciding whether injury or death of a trial
participant has been caused due to  clinical trial, under section 4Q;
(l) the norms and procedures for providing medical treatment to the trial
participants under sub-section (1) of section 4R;
(m) the norms and procedures for providing compensation to the trial
participants or their legal heirs under sub-section (2) of section 4R;
(n) the norms and procedures for registration and renewal of Ethics
Committees under section 4T;
(o) additional functions and responsibilities of the Ethics Committee under
sub-section (5) of section 4V;
(p) the norms and procedures for conducting inspections relating to
conduct of clinical trials under sections 4X and 4Y .
4ZL. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to Ayurvedic, Homeopathy,
Siddha or Unani drugs.’.
8. In Chapter II of the principal Act, for the Chapter heading “THE DRUGS TECHNICAL
ADVISORY BOARD, THE CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY AND THE DRUGS
CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE”, the Chapter heading “TECHNICAL  ADVISORY BOARDS,
CENTRAL DRUGS LABORA TORIES AND CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE” shall be
substituted.
9. In section 5 of the principal Act,––
(a) in sub-section (1),––
(i) for  the words “as soon as may be, constitute”, the words “, by
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute” shall be substituted;
(ii) after the words “to advise the Central Government”, the words “, the
Central Drugs Authority” shall be inserted;
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:––
(i) the Director General of Health Services, ex officio, who shall be
Chairperson;
(ii) the Drugs Controller General of India, ex officio;
(iii) one Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory to be nominated
by the Central Government, ex officio;
(iv) the Director of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar,
ex officio;
(v) two experts to be nominated by the Central Government from
amongst persons who are in charge of drugs control in the States;
Chapter not
to apply to
Ayurvedic,
Homeopathy,
Siddha or
Unani drugs.
Substitution of
new heading
for Chapter II.
Amendment
of section 5.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

16
(vi) one expert, to be elected by the Executive Committee of the
Pharmacy Council of India, from amongst teachers in pharmacy or
pharmaceutical chemistry or pharmacognosy on the staff of an Indian
University or a college affiliated thereto;
(vii) one expert, to be elected by the authority established for regulating
the medical education, from amongst teachers in medicine or therapeutics
on the staff of an Indian University or a college affiliated thereto;
(viii) one person to be nominated by the Central Government from
the pharmaceutical industry;
(ix) one pharmacologist to be elected by the Governing Body of the
Indian Council of Medical Research;
(x) one person to be elected by the Central Council of the Indian
Medical Association;
(xi) two Government Analysts appointed under this Act, to be
nominated by the Central Government;
(xii) the Director of the National Institute of Biologicals, ex officio;
(xiii) the Secretary-cum-Scientific Director of Indian Pharmacopoeia
Commission, ex officio;
(xiv) the Director of a National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education
and Research to be nominated by the Department of Pharmaceuticals;
(xv) one expert to be nominated by the Department of Bio-technology;
(xvi) one expert to be nominated by the Central Government from
the Medical institutes or institutions controlled by the Central Government
or State Governments from amongst persons involved in the conduct of
clinical trials;
(xvii) one person representing recognised consumer associations or
consumer interests to be nominated by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs.”;
(c) in sub-section (3),––
(i) for the words “but shall be eligible for re-nomination and re-election”,
the words “and shall be eligible for re-nomination or, as the case may be, re-
election for not more than two consecutive terms” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the proviso, for the words, brackets and figures “clause ( ix) or
clause (x) or clause (xi) or clause (xvi) of sub-section (2)”, the words, brackets
and figures “clause (v) or clause (vi) or clause (vii) or clause (xi) of sub-section
(2)” shall be substituted;
(d) in sub-section ( 4), after the words “The Board  may”, the words “in
consultation with the Central Drugs Authority and” shall be inserted;
(e) for sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(7) The Central Drugs Authority shall appoint a person to be the Secretary
of the Board and shall provide the Board with such staff as the Central Drugs
Authority considers necessary.”.
10. 
After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“5A. (1) The Central Government shall,  by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute, a Medical Devices Technical Advisory Board to advise the Central
Government, the Central Drugs Authority and State Governments on technical matters
Insertion of
new section
5A.
Constitution
of Medical
Devices
Technical
Advisory
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45

17
pertaining to medical devices, arising out of the administration of this Act and to carry
out other functions assigned to it by or under this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:––
(a) the Director General, Indian Council of Medical Research, who shall be
the Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) the Drugs Controller General  of India, ex officio;
(c) one expert each from the following, having qualifications and experience
in the field of medical devices, to be nominated by––
(i) the Department of Science and Technology;
(ii) the Department of Atomic Energy;
(iii) the Department of Electronic and Information Technology;
(iv) the Central Government from the Government testing laboratories
connected with the testing of medical devices;
(v) the Indian Council of Medical Research;
(vi) the Bureau of Indian Standard;
(vii) the Defence Research and Development Organisation;
(d) one expert from the field of biomedical technology from recognised
technical educational institutions, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(e) one expert from the field of biomaterial or polymer technology from
recognised technical educational institutions, to be nominated by the Central
Government;
(f) one person representing recognised consumer associations to be
nominated by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs;
(g) one pharmacologist to be nominated by the Central Government from
recognised medical or research institute in the field of medical devices;
(h) one expert to be nominated by the Central Government from recognised
medical or research institute from amongst persons involved in conduct of clinical
trials;
(i) one person to be nominated by the Central Government from the medical
device industry.
(3) The nominated members of the Board shall hold office for a period of three
years, and shall be eligible for re-nomination for not more than two consecutive terms:
Provided that the person nominated under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2) shall
hold office for so long as he holds the appointment of the office by virtue of which he
was nominated as a member of the Board.
(4) The Board may, in consultation with the Central Drugs Authority, and subject
to the previous approval of the Central Government, make bye-laws fixing quorum and
regulating its own procedure and the conduct of all business to be transacted by it.
(5) The Board may constitute sub-committees and may appoint to such sub-
committees for such periods not exceeding three years, as it may decide, for the
consideration of particular matters, persons who are not members of the Board.
(6) The functions of the Board may be exercised notwithstanding any vacancy
therein.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

18
(7) The Central Drugs Authority shall appoint a person to be the Secretary of the
Board and shall provide the Board with such staff as the Central Drugs Authority
considers necessary.”.
11. In section 6 of the principal Act,––
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) The Central Drugs Authority may, with the prior approval of the
Central Government, establish a Central Drugs Laboratory under the control of
a Director to be appointed by the Central Drugs Authority, to carry out the
functions entrusted to it by this Act or any rules made thereunder:
Provided that the Central Drugs Authority may, in consultation with the
Central Government, specify by regulations the functions of the Central Drugs
Laboratory in respect of any drug or class of drugs or cosmetic or class of
cosmetics or medical device or class of medical devices to be performed by any
other laboratory and the powers of the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory
shall be exercised by the Director of the laboratory to whom the functions have
been assigned.”;
(1A) The Central Drugs Authority may, by notification, designate any
Central Drugs Laboratory––
(a) for testing of drugs or class of drugs or cosmetics or class of
cosmetics or medical devices or class of medical devices;
(b) as an Appellate Laboratory for testing of drugs or class of drugs
or cosmetics or class of cosmetics or medical devices or class of medical
devices;
(b) in sub-section (2),––
(i) in the opening portion, for the words “after consultation with the Board”,
the words “in consultation with the Central Drugs Authority” shall be
substituted;
(ii) in clause ( d), for the words, figures and letter “under Chapter IV or
Chapter IV A of samples of drugs or cosmetics”, the words, figures and letters
“under Chapter IIA, Chapter III, Chapter IV or Chapter IV A of samples of drugs
or cosmetics or medical devices” shall be substituted.
12. For section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely :––
“7. (1) The Central Government may constitute an advisory committee to be
called “the Drugs, Cosmetics and Medical Devices Consultative Committee” to advise
the Central Government, the Central Drugs Authority, the State Governments, the
Drugs Technical Advisory Board and the Medical Device Technical Advisory Board
on any matter tending to secure uniformity throughout India in the administration of
this Act.
(2) The Drugs, Cosmetics and Medical Devices Consultative Committee shall
consist of the following members, namely:––
(a) the Drugs Controller General of India, who shall be the chairperson,
ex officio;
(b) two representatives of the Central Drugs Authority nominated by it;
(c) the Secretary-cum-Scientific Director of the Indian Pharmacopoeia
Commission;
Amendment
of section 6.
Substitution of
new section
for section 7.
Drugs, Cos-
metics and
Medical De-
vices Consul-
tative Com-
mittee.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45

19
(d) one representative of the Pharmaceuticals Export Promotion Council
nominated by it;
(e) one representative of the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance,
Government of India dealing with the administration of the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985; and
(f) one representative of each State Government who is in-charge of the
matters relating to regulation of drugs, cosmetics and medical devices in that
State.
 (3) The Drugs, Cosmetics and Medical Devices Consultative Committee shall
meet at least twice in a year or when required to do so by the Central Government or, as
the case may be, the Central Drugs Authority and shall have power to regulate its own
procedure.”.
13.  After Chapter II of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘CHAPTER IIA
I
MPORT, MANUFACTURE, SALE, DISTRIBUTION AND EXPORT OF MEDICAL DEVICES
7B. For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression “standard quality” in relation
to medical device, means the medical device which conforms such standards as may
be prescribed.
7C. For the purposes of this Chapter, a medical device shall be deemed to be
misbranded––
(a) if it is so coloured, coated, or polished so as to conceal any damage or
if it is made to appear  of better or greater therapeutic or functional value than it
really is; or
(b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or
(c) if its label or container or anything accompanying the medical device
bears any statement, design or device which makes any false claim.
7D. For the purposes of this Chapter, a medical device shall be deemed to be
adulterated––
(a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of rusted or corroded or filthy or putrid
or decomposed substance; or
(b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary conditions
whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; or
(c) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance or parts which may render
it dangerous to use or injurious to health; or
(d) if any substance or part has been mixed or added thereto or substituted
or removed therefrom so as to reduce its quality or strength or which may render
it dangerous to use or injurious to health; or
(e) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any deleterious
substance which may render it dangerous to use or injurious to health.
7E. For the purposes of this Chapter, a medical device shall be deemed to be
spurious—
 (a) if it is imported, manufactured, sold, distributed or exported under a
name which belongs to another medical device; or
61 of 1985.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IIA.
Standards
quality of
medical
device.
Misbranded
medical
device.
Adulterated
medical
device.
Spurious
medical
device.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

20
(b) if it is an imitation of, or a substitute for, another medical device or
resembles another medical device in a manner likely to deceive or bears upon it
or upon its label or container the name of another medical device unless it is
plainly and conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack
of identity with such other medical device; or
(c) if the label or the container bears the name of an individual or firm or
company purporting to be the manufacturer of the medical device, which individual
or firm or company is fictitious or does not exist; or
(d) if it has been substituted wholly or in part by another medical device  or
substance; or
(e) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly
a product.
7F. (1) No person shall himself or by any other person on his behalf,––
(a) import, or manufacture for sale or for export, or export––
(i) any medical device  which  is  not  of  standard quality;
(ii) any  misbranded  medical device;
(iii) any adulterated medical device;
(iv) any spurious medical device;
(v) any software or part or component or instrument or the list of  the
software or part or ingredient or instrument contained in  it, unless displayed
in the prescribed manner on the label  or container thereof;
(vi) any medical device which by  means of  any statement, design or
accessory accompanying it or by any other means, purports or claims  to
cure  or mitigate  any  such  disease  or ailment, or  to have  any such  other
effect;
(vii) any medical device  containing  any  component  which  may
render  it   unsafe  or   harmful  for  use  under  the directions indicated or
recommended;
(viii) any  medical device  which  has  been imported or  manufactured
in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter or rules made
thereunder;
(b)  import or manufacture for  sale or for export, or export any  medical
device,   except  under,  and  in accordance with the conditions of, a licence or
certificate issued  by the Central Licensing Authority for the purpose of this
Chapter in such manner and on such conditions as may be prescribed:
Provided that nothing contained in clause ( a) shall apply to import or
manufacture of any medical device in small numbers for the purpose of
examination, test, analysis, demonstration or for personal use subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed:
Provided further that the Central Government may, in consultation with
the Central Drugs Authority, by notification in the Official Gazette, permit, subject
to any conditions specified therein, the import or manufacture of any medical
device or class of medical devices not approved in the country or not of standard
quality for sale or for distribution, stocking or exhibiting or offering for sale or
distribution of such medical device under this Act.
Prohibition of
import, manu-
facture and
export of
certain
medical devices.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
(2) No person shall himself or by any other person on his behalf––
(a) sell, or stock or distribute or exhibit or offer for sale any medical device
referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1);
(b) sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for sale or distribute any medical device
which has been imported or manufactured in contravention of any of the
provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder;
(c) sell, or stock  or exhibit or offer for sale or distribute any  medical
device,  except  under,  and  in accordance with the conditions of, a licence
issued by the State licensing authorities for the purposes of this Chapter in such
manner and on such conditions as may be prescribed.
(3) The State Government may, for the purposes of this Chapter by notification,
designate one or more person, having such qualifications and experience, as the State
Licensing Authority, with such powers and functions and on such terms and conditions,
as may be prescribed.
7G . (1) The law for the time being in force relating to customs and to goods, the
import of which is prohibited by the  Customs Act,  1962 or rules made or notifications
issued thereunder or any other law for the time being in force shall, subject to the
provisions of section 7J, section 7K and section 7L of this Act, apply in respect of
medical device, the  import of  which is prohibited under this Chapter, and officers of
Customs and  officers empowered under that Act or law to perform the duties  imposed
thereby  on a Customs Collector and other officers of Customs, shall have the same
powers in respect of such medical device as they have for the time being in respect of
such goods as aforesaid.
(2) Without  prejudice to  the provisions  of sub-section (1), the Commissioner of
Customs or  any officer of the Government authorised by the Central Government in
this behalf, may detain any imported package which he  suspects to  contain any
medical device, the import of which is prohibited under this Chapter or any other law
for the time being in force and shall forthwith report such detention to  the Drugs
Controller General of India and, if necessary, forward the package  or sample  of any
suspected medical device  found therein to the Laboratory prescribed for the purpose:
Provided that in the event of that package or sample of that medical device
found in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any rule made
thereunder, the same shall not be allowed to be imported from that or any other port of
entry in the country.
7H. (1) The Central Drugs Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint such persons, as it thinks fit, having such qualification and experience as may
be prescribed, to be the Medical Device Officers for such areas as may be assigned to
them by the Central Drugs Authority.
 (2) The  powers which  may be  exercised by  a Medical Device Officer and the
duties which may be performed by him,  the medical devices or classes of medical
devices  in relation  to which and the conditions, limitations  or restrictions subject to
which, such powers and duties  may be  exercised or  performed shall  be such  as may
be  prescribed.
 (3) No person who has any financial interest in the import, export, manufacture
or sale of medical devices shall be appointed to be a Medical Device Officer under this
section.
(4) Every Medical Device Officer shall be deemed to be a public servant within
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code and shall be officially subordinate
to such authority having the prescribed qualifications, as the Central Drugs Authority
may specify in this behalf.
Application of
law relating to
sea customs
and powers of
Customs
Officers .
Medical
Device
Officers and
their duties
and powers.
45 of 1860.
52  of 1962.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

22
7-I. Without prejudice to any  other  provisions  contained  in  this  Chapter,  if
the  Central Government is  satisfied that  the use  of any  medical device is likely to
involve any risk to human beings or animals or that any medical device  does not have
the functional value claimed or purported to be claimed for it or which is not safe or
effective for use or for which there is no functional  justification and  that in  the public
interest it is necessary or  expedient so  to  do,  then,  it  may,  by notification in  the
Official  Gazette, regulate, restrict or prohibit the import or manufacture, sale or
distribution of such medical device.
7J.  Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, imports or manufactures
for sale or for export or for distribution or sells or exports or stocks or exhibits or offer
for sale,––
(a) any medical device deemed to be adulterated under section 7D or
spurious under section 7E and which when used by any person for or in the
diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, or prevention of any disease or disorder is
likely to cause his death or is likely to cause such bodily harm which  amount to
grievous hurt within the meaning of section 320 of the Indian Penal Code, solely
on account of such medical device being spurious or not of standard quality, as
the case may be, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and
shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees or three
times value of the medical device confiscated, whichever is more:
Provided that the fine imposed under this clause shall be paid to the
person who had used the adulterated or spurious medical device:
Provided further that where the use of adulterated or spurious medical
device referred to in this clause has caused the death of a person who used such
medical device, the fine imposed shall be paid to his legal heir;
(b) any medical device––
(i)  deemed to  be adulterated  under section 7D or misbranded under
section 7C, but not being a medical device referred to in clause (a); or
(ii) without a  valid licence as required under clause (b) of sub-section
(1) for clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 7F,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
three years but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees or three times the value of the
medical device confiscated, whichever is more:
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons, to be
recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less
than three years and of fine of less than one lakh rupees;
(c) any medical device deemed to be spurious under section 7E, but not
being a medical device referred to in clause ( a) shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be
less than five lakh rupees or three times the value of the medical device
confiscated, whichever is more:
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons, to be
recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less
than seven years but not less than three years and of fine of less than one lakh
rupees;
Power of
Central
Government
to  regulate,
restrict  or
prohibit
import or
manufacture,
etc., of medical
device in public
interest .
Offences for
import, manu-
facture, sale,
etc., of
medical device
in contraven-
tion of this
Chapter .
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

23
(d) any medical device, other than a medical device referred to in clause (a)
or clause ( b) or clause ( c), in contravention of any other provisions of this
Chapter or any rule made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to two years
and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
7K. Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf imports or
manufactures or sells or exports or distributes any medical device in contravention of
the provisions of any notification issued under section 7-I, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years and shall also be liable
to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
7L. (1)  Whoever having been convicted of an offence,––
(a) under clause (b) of section 7J, is again convicted of an offence under
that clause shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than seven years but which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable
to fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees:
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be
recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less
than seven years and of fine of less than one lakh rupees;
(b) under clause (c) of section 7J, is again convicted of an offence under
that clause shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also
be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees;
(c) under clause (d) of section 7J, is again convicted of an offence under
that clause shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than two years but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to
fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever having been convicted of an offence under section 7K  is again
convicted of an offence under that clause shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to five years and
shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees.
7M. ( 1) Where any person has been convicted under this Chapter for
contravening any provision of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder, the stock of
the medical device in respect of which the contravention has been made shall be liable
to confiscation and if such contravention is in respect of—
(a) import or manufacture of any medical device deemed to be misbranded
under section 7C or adulterated under section 7D or spurious under section 7E;
or
(b) import or manufacture for sale or for export or for distribution, sale,
export or stocking or exhibiting or offering for sale or for export, or distribution of
any medical device without a valid licence as required under clause ( b) of
sub-section (1) or  clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 7F,
any implements or machinery used in such import or manufacture, sale, export or distribution
and any receptacles, packages or coverings in which such medical device is contained and
the animals, vehicles, vessels or other conveyances used in carrying such medical device
shall also be liable to confiscation.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1) where the
court is satisfied, on the application of a Medical Device Officer or otherwise and after
such inquiry as may be necessary that the medical device is not of standard quality or
Penalty for
import, manu-
facture, etc.,
of medical
device in
contravention
of section 7-I.
Penalty for re-
peat offences .
Confiscation .
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

24
is a misbranded, adulterated or spurious medical device, such medical device shall be
liable to confiscation.
7N. The Central Government may after consultation with or on the
recommendation of the Central Drugs Authority and subject to previous publication,
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the
provisions of this Chapter which may––
(a) provide for classification of medical devices into different classes based
on the degree of risk associated with their use or application;
(b) prescribe standardds for different classes of medical devices and the
organisations or bodies for developing such standards;
(c) prescribe procedures for assessment of conformity to the standards
and quality assurance;
(d) provide for use of standards as prescribed from time to time for
manufacturing or developing new medical device;
(e) prescribe conditions for import or manufacture of custom made devices
and devices for clinical investigations;
(f) prescribe procedures for reporting adverse events, post marketing
surveillance and recall of medical devices;
(g) prescribe requirements for approval of laboratories, institutions or
bodies for carrying out conformity assessment of medical devices;
(h) prescribe procedures for overseas inspections;
(i) prescribe the qualifications of Medical Device Officer and Government
Analysts for medical devices;
(j) prescribe the methods of test or analysis to be employed in determining
whether a medical device is of standard quality;
(k) prescribe the forms of licences or the certificates, as the case may be,
for import, manufacture for sale, for distribution or for export or for sale, of
medical devices, the form of application for such licences or certificates, as the
case may be, the conditions subject to which such licences or certificates, as the
case may be, may be issued, the authority empowered to issue the same, the
qualification of such authority and the fees payable therefor and provide for the
suspension or cancellation of such licences in any case where any provision of
this Chapter or the rules made thereunder is contravened or any of the conditions
subject to which they are issued is not complied with;
(l) prescribe the records, registers or other documents to be kept and
maintained;
(m) prescribe the fees for the inspection including overseas inspection
(for the purposes of grant or renewal of licence) of premises, wherein any medical
device is being or is proposed to be manufactured;
(n) prescribe the manner in which copies are to be certified;
(o) specify the diseases or ailments or conditions which a medical device
may not purport or claim to prevent, cure or mitigate and such other effects
which a medical device may not purport or claim to have;
(p) prescribe the conditions subject to which small quantities of medical
device may be imported or manufactured for the purpose of examination, test,
analysis, demonstration or for personal use;
Powers of
Central
Government
to make rules. 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

25
(q) require the date of manufacture and the date of validity or expiry to be
clearly or truly stated on the label or container of any specified medical device or
class of medical device, and prohibit the sale, import, export, stocking or exhibition
for sale or for export, or distribution of the said medical device or class of medical
device after the expiry of a specified period from the date of manufacture or after
the expiry of the date of validity or expiry as applicable;
(r) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing in packages,
and other containers of medical device, including the use of packing material
which comes into direct contact with the medical device and prohibit the sale,
import, stocking or exhibition for sale or for export, or distribution of medical
device packed in contravention of such conditions;
(s) regulate the mode of labelling of packed medical device, and prescribe
the matter which shall or shall not be included in such labels;
(t) prescribe the powers and duties of Medical Device Officers and the
qualifications of the authority to which such Medical Device Officers shall be
subordinate and specify the medical device or classes of medical device in
relation to which and the conditions, limitations or restrictions subject to which,
such powers and duties may be exercised or performed;
(u) prescribe the forms of report to be given by the prescribed laboratory,
and  the manner  of application  for test  or analysis  and  the  fees  payable
therefor;
(v) provide for the exemption, conditionally or otherwise, from all or any of
the provisions of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder, of any specified
medical device or class of medical device;
(w)  specify the places at  which medical device may be imported, and
prohibit their import at any other place;
(x)  regulate the submission by importers, and the securing of samples of
such medical device, as may be specified, for examination, test or  analysis by
the prescribed laboratory, and  specify  the fees, if any, payable for such
examination, test or analysis;
(y)  specify the  evidence  to  be  supplied,  whether  by accompanying
documents  or otherwise, of the quality of medical device sought  to  be  imported,
the procedure for officers of  Customs in dealing with such evidence, and the
manner of storage at places of import of medical device detained pending
admission;
(z) provide for  the exemption, conditionally or otherwise, from all  or any
of the provisions of this Chapter and the rules  made thereunder of medical
device imported for the purpose only of transport through, and export from,
India;
(za)  require  that  the  accepted  scientific  name  of  any specified software
or part or instrument shall be  displayed in  the  prescribed  manner on  the label
or wrapper of any imported, medical device containing such part or ingredient or
instrument;
(zb) prescribe procedures for assigning unique identification number to
medical devices.
(zc) specify the offences against this Chapter or any rule made thereunder
in relation to which an order of confiscation may be made under section 7M;
(zd) sum which may be specified by the Central Government under
section 32-B’.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

26
14. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the word “Board”, the words
“Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted.
15. After section 9D of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:–
“9E. For the purposes of this Chapter, a cosmetic shall be deemed to be
adulterated,––
(a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed
substance; or
(b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary conditions
whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may have been
rendered injurious to health; or
(c) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous or
deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health; or
(d) if it bears or contains, for purposes of colouring only, a colour other
than one which is prescribed; or
(e) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance which may render it injurious
to health; or
(f) if any substance has been mixed therewith so as to reduce its quality or
strength.”.
16. In section 10 of the principal Act,––
(i) after clause (bb), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(bba) any adulterated cosmetic;”;
(ii) in the second proviso, for the word “Board”, the words “Central Drugs
Authority” shall be substituted.
17. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:––
“Provided that in the event of that package or sample of that drug or cosmetic
found in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any rule made
thereunder, the same shall not be allowed to be imported from that or any other port of
entry in the country.”.
18. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word “Board”, wherever
it occurs, the words “Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted.
19. For section 13 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:––
“13. Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, imports,––
(a) any drug deemed to be adulterated under section 9A or spurious under
section 9B and which when used by any person for or in the diagnosis, treatment,
mitigation, or prevention of any disease or disorder is likely to cause his death or
is likely to cause such bodily harm which amount to grievous hurt within the
meaning of section 320 of the Indian Penal Code, solely on account of such drug
being adulterated or spurious or not of standard quality, as the case may be,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
Amendment
of section 8.
Insertion of
new section
9E.
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 11.
Amendment
of section 12.
Substitution of
new section
for section 13.
Penalty for im-
port of drugs or
cosmetics in
contravention
of this Chapter.
45 of 1860.
Adulterated
Cosmetics.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

27
years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to
fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees or three times value of the drugs
confiscated, whichever is more:
Provided that the fine imposed under this clause shall be paid to the
person who had used the adulterated or spurious drugs:
Provided further that where the use of adulterated or spurious drugs referred
to in this clause has caused the death of a person who used such drugs, the fine
imposed shall be paid to his legal heir;
(b) any drug—
(i) deemed to be adulterated under section 9A, but not being a drug
referred to in clause (a); or
(ii) without a valid licence as required under clause (c) of section 10,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three
years  but which may extend to five  years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not
be less than one lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever
is more:
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons, to be recorded
in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three  years
and of fine of less than one lakh rupees;
(c) any drug deemed to be spurious under section 9B, but not being a drug
referred to in clause (a) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life
and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees or
three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more:
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons, to be
recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less
than seven years but not less than three years and of fine of less than one lakh
rupees;
(d) any drug, other than a drug referred to in clause ( a) or clause (b) or
clause (c), in contravention of any other provisions of this Chapter or any rule
made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than one year but which may extend to two years and shall also be
liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees:
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons, to be
recorded in the judgment impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less
than one year;
(e) any cosmetic deemed to be adulterated under section 9E or spurious
under section 9D and which when used by any person is likely to cause his
death or is likely to cause such bodily harm which amount to grievous hurt
within the meaning of section 320 of the Indian Penal Code, solely on account of
such cosmetics being adulterated or spurious or not of standard quality, as the
case may be, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also
be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees or three times value
of the cosmetics confiscated, whichever is more:
Provided that the fine imposed under this clause shall be paid to the
person who had used the adulterated or spurious cosmetic:
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

28
Provided further that where the use of adulterated or spurious cosmetic
referred to in this clause has caused the death of a person who used such
cosmetic, the fine imposed shall be paid to his legal heir;
(f) any cosmetic,
(i) deemed to be spurious under section 9D or adulterated under
section 9E but not being a cosmetic referred to in clause (e);
(ii) without a valid licence as required under clause (c) of section 10,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years
and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees;
(g) any cosmetic other than a cosmetic referred to in clause (e) or clause (f),
the import of which is prohibited under section 10, or any rule made under this
Chapter, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than one year and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than twenty
thousand rupees;
(h) any cosmetic in contravention of the provisions of any notification
issued under section 10A, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than two years and shall also be liable to fine which shall
not be less than fifty thousand rupees.
13A. Whoever having been convicted of an offence––
(a) under clause (b) of section 13 is again convicted of an offence under
that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than seven years but which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable
to fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees:
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be
recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less
than seven years and of fine of less than one lakh rupees;
(b) under clause (c) of section 13 is again convicted of an offence under
that clause shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also
be liable to fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees;
(c) under clause (d) of section 13 is again convicted of an offence under
that clause shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than two years but which may extend to four years and shall also be liable to
fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees.
(d) under clause ( f) or clause ( g) or  clause ( h) of section 13 is again
convicted under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three years, and shall also be liable to fine which
shall not be less than one lakh rupees.”.
20. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), for the word “Board”, the
words “Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted.
21. For section 18 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“18. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (3), no person shall himself
or by any other person on his behalf––
(a) manufacture for sale or for export or for distribution, or sell, or stock or
exhibit or offer for sale or distribute––
Penalty for re-
peat offences.
Amendment
of section 16.
Substitution of
new section
for section 18.
Prohibition of
manufacture
and sale of cer-
tain drugs and
cosmetics.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

29
(i) any drug which is not of a standard quality, or is misbranded,
adulterated or spurious;
(ii) any cosmetic which is not of a standard quality, or is misbranded,
adulterated or spurious;
(iii) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is displayed in
the prescribed manner on the label or container thereof the true formula or
list of active ingredients contained in it together with the quantities thereof;
(iv) any drug which by means of any statement, design or device
accompanying it or by any other means, purports or claims to prevent,
cure or mitigate any such disease or ailment, or to have any such other
effect as may be prescribed;
(v) any cosmetic containing any ingredient which may render it
unsafe or harmful for use under the directions indicated or recommended;
(vi) any drug or cosmetic in contravention of any of the provisions
of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder;
(b) sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute any drug or
cosmetic which has been imported or manufactured in contravention of any of
the provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder;
(c) manufacture for sale or for export or for distribution, or sell, or stock or
exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute any drug or cosmetic, except under, and in
accordance with the conditions of a licence issued for such purposes under this
Chapter:
Provided that no licence for manufacture of any new drug shall be issued
except in accordance with the prior permission granted by the Central Licensing
Authority, in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided further that the State Licensing Authority shall, before issuing
any licence for manufacture of any new drug, ensure that the permission from
the Central Licensing Authority is obtained:
Provided also that nothing in this section shall apply to the manufacture,
subject to prescribed conditions, of small quantities of any drug for the purpose
of examination, test or analysis:
Provided also that the Central Government may, after consultation with
the Central Drugs Authority, by notification in the Official Gazette, permit, subject
to any condition specified in the notification, the manufacture for sale, or for
distribution, sale, stocking or exhibiting or offering for sale or distribution of any
drug or class of drugs not being of standard quality.
(2) The State Government may for the purposes of this Chapter by
notification in the Official Gazette, designate one or more person, having such
qualifications and experience, as the State Licensing Authority, with such powers
and functions and on such terms and conditions, as may be prescribed.
(3) On and from the commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics
(Amendment) Act, 2013, the Central Licensing Authority shall have power to
issue a licence or a certificate, as the case may be, for the manufacture for sale or
for export of drugs specified in the Third Schedule to this Act:
Provided that no licence for manufacture of any drug specified under the
Third Schedule shall be issued by the State Licensing Authorities.
(4) The Central Government, after consultation with the Central Drugs
Authority and after giving by notification in the Official Gazette not less than
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

30
three months’ notice of its intention so to do, may by a like notification add to or
otherwise amend the Third Schedule for the purposes of this Chapter, and
thereupon the Third Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
22.  In section 18A of the principal Act,––
(a) for the words “drug or cosmetic”, at both the places where they occur, the
words “drug or cosmetic or medical device” shall be substituted;
(b) after the word ‘‘Inspector’’, the words “or Medical Device Officer” shall be
inserted.
23. In section 18B of the principal Act, for the words, brackets and figures “clause (c)
of section 18”, the words, brackets, figures and letters “clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) or
clause (c) of sub-section ( 2) of section 7F or clause ( c) of section ( 10) or clause ( c) of
sub-section (1) of section 18” shall be substituted.
24. After section 18C of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:––
“18D. No drug or cosmetic or medical device shall be exported except in
accordance with the conditions of a permission or licence or certificate, as the case
may be, issued by the Central Licensing Authority, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
 18E. Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, exports any drug,
cosmetic or medical device in contravention of the provisions of section 18D shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and
shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees or three times
value of the drug, cosmetic or medical device exported or confiscated, whichever is
more.
18F. Whoever having been convicted of an offence under section 18E is again
convicted of an offence under that section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than two years and with fine which shall not be less than
five lakh rupees or three times value of the drug, cosmetic or medical device exported
or confiscated, whichever is more.”.
25. In section 19 of the principal Act,––
(a) for the words “drug or cosmetic”, wherever they occur, the words “drug or
cosmetic or medical device” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words, “this Chapter”, the words, figures and letter “Chapter IIA or
Chapter III or Chapter IV” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (2),––
(i) in the opening portion, for the words, figures and  “section 18 a drug
shall not be deemed to be misbranded or adulterated or spurious or to be below
standard quality nor shall a cosmetic be deemed to be misbranded or to be below
standard quality”, the words, figure and letter “section 7F, a medical device shall
not be deemed to be misbranded or adulterated or spurious or not of standard
quality, or for the purposes of section 18 a drug shall not be deemed to be
misbranded or adulterated or spurious or to be below standard quality or shall a
cosmetic be deemed to be misbranded or adulterated  or spurious or to be below
standard quality” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (a), after the word “consumption”, the words “or use” shall
be inserted;
(d) in sub-section (3), in the opening portion, for the word and figures “section
18”, the words, figures and letter “section 7F or section 18” shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 18A.
Amendment
of section
18B.
Insertion of
new sections
18D, 18E and
18F.
Prohibition of
export of
certain drugs,
cosmetics and
medical
devices.
Penalty for
export of
drugs and
cosmetics in
contravention
of section
18D.
Penalty for re-
peat offences.
Amendment
of section 19.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

31
26.  In section 20 of the principal Act,––
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “such drugs or classes of drugs or such
cosmetics or classes of cosmetics”, the words “such drugs or classes of drugs or such
cosmetics or classes of cosmetics or such medical devices or classes of medical
devices” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2),––
(i) for the words “Central Government”, the words “Central Drugs
Authority” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “such drugs or classes of drugs or such cosmetics or
classes of cosmetics”, the words “such drugs or classes of drugs or such
cosmetics or classes of cosmetics or such medical devices or classes of medical
devices” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (3), for the words “Central Government”, the words “Central
Drugs Authority” shall be substituted;
(d) in sub-section ( 4), for the words “import, manufacture or sale of drugs or
cosmetics”, the words “import, export, manufacture or  sale of drugs or cosmetics or
medical devices” shall be substituted.
27.  In section 21 of the principal Act,––
(a)  in sub-section (1), for the words “Central Government or” at both the places
where they occur, the words “Central Drugs Authority or” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words “import, manufacture or  sale”, the words
“import, export, manufacture or  sale” shall be substituted;
(c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
“(5) Any person appointed as the Inspector under this section, before the
commencement of the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Act, 2013, shall, after
such commencement, be deemed to have been appointed as the Drugs Control
Officer for the purposes of this section and shall continue to discharge his
functions as the Drugs Control Officer unless his appointment is terminated or
withdrawn.”.
28.  In section 22 of the principal Act,––
(a) for the word “Inspector”, wherever it occurs, the words “a Drugs Control
Officer or a Medical Device Officer” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “drug or cosmetic”, wherever they occur, the words “drug or
cosmetic or medical device” shall be substituted;
(c) for the words “this Chapter”, wherever they  occur except in clause (cca) of
sub-section (1), the words, figures; and letter “Chapter IIA or Chapter IV” shall be
substituted;
(d) in sub-section (1),––
(A) in clause ( a), for sub-clause ( ii), the following sub-clause shall be
substituted, namely:––
“(ii) any premises wherein any drug or cosmetic or medical device is
being sold, or exported, or stocked or exhibited or offered for sale, or
export, or distributed;”;
(B) in clause ( b), for sub-clause ( i), the following sub-clause shall be
substituted, namely:––
“(i) which is being imported or manufactured or sold or exported or
is stocked or exhibited or offered for sale, or for export, or is being
distributed;”;
Amendment
of section 20.
Amendment
of section 21.
Amendment
of section 22.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

32
(C) in clause (cca), for the words “manufacture for sale or for distribution,
stocking, exhibition for sale, offer  for sale or distribution”, the words “manufacture
for sale, or for export or for distribution, stocking, exhibition for sale or for export,
offer for sale or for export or for distribution” shall be substituted;
(D) in clause (d), for the words ‘‘exercise such other powers’’, the words
‘‘exercise such other powers and perform such functions’’ shall be substituted;
(E) after clause (d), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:––
“Provided that in case the stocks of the drugs or cosmetics or medical
devices, and the records, registers, documents or any other material objects
connected or related thereto are seized, he shall, as soon as may be,  inform
the Judicial  Magistrate and  take his  orders  as  to  the  custody  thereof.”;
(e) in sub-section (3), for the words “may extend to three years, or with fine,”, the
words “shall not be less than three years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not
be less than fifty thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
29. For section 23 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“23. The Drugs Control Officer or the Medical Device Officer shall take sample of
drugs or cosmetics or medical devices, as the case may be, for test and examination
under Chapter IIA or Chapter IV , as the case may be, in such manner as may be
prescribed.”.
30. For section 24 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“24. Every person for the time being in charge of any premises whereon any drug
or cosmetic or medical device is being manufactured or is kept for sale or distribution
shall, on being required by any Drugs Control Officer or, as the case may be, the
Medical Device Officer so to do, be legally bound to disclose to the Drugs Control
Officer or, as the case may be, the Medical Device Officer, the place where the drug or
cosmetic or medical device is being manufactured or is kept, as the case may be.”.
31. For section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“25. The Government Analyst shall submit report in relation to samples of drugs
or cosmetics or medical devices and action shall be taken thereon, in such manner as
may be prescribed.”.
32. In section 26 of the principal Act, for the words “drug or cosmetic”, the words
“drug or cosmetic or medical device” shall be substituted;
33. For section 26A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“26A. Without prejudice to any other provisions contained in Chapter IIA and
Chapter IV, if the Central Government is satisfied, that the use of any drug or cosmetic
or medical device is likely to involve any risk to human beings or animals or that any
drug or medical device does not have the therapeutic value claimed or purported to be
claimed for it or contains ingredients and in such quantity for which there is no
therapeutic justification and that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to
do, then, that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, regulate, restrict
or prohibit the manufacture, sale or distribution of such drug or cosmetic or medical
device.”.
Substitution of
new section
for section 23.
Procedure of
Drugs Control
Officers and
Medical De-
vice Officers .
Substitution of
new section
for section 24.
Persons bound
to disclose
place where
medical device
or drugs or cos-
metics are
manufactured
or kept.
Substitution of
new section
for section 25.
Reports of
Government
Analysts .
Amendment
of section 26.
Substitution of
new section
for section
26A.
Powers of
Central Gov-
ernment to
prohibit manu-
facture, etc., of
drug, cosmetic
and medical
device in pub-
lic interest.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

33
34. In section 26B of the principal Act, for the word “drug”, wherever it occurs, the
words “drug or medical device” shall be substituted.
 35. In section 27 of the principal Act,––
(i) in the opening portion, for the words “manufactures for sale or for distribution,
or sells, or stocks or exhibits or offers for sale or distributes”, the words “manufactures
for sale or for export or for distribution, or sells, or exports, or  stocks or exhibits or
offers for sale or for export or distributes” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (a), in the second proviso,––
(a) for the word “relative”, the words “legal heir” shall be substituted;
(b) the “Explanation” shall be omitted.
36. In section 27A of the principal Act, for the words “manufactures for sale or for
distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhibits or offers for sale”, the words “manufactures for
sale or for export or for distribution, or sells, or exports, or stocks or exhibits or offers for sale
or for export” shall be substituted.
37. In section 28 of the principal Act, for the words “may extend to one year or with fine
which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or with both”, the words “shall not be
less than three years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than three lakh
rupees” shall be substituted.
38. In section 28A of the principal Act, for the words “may extend to one year or with
fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or with both”, the words “shall not
be less than three years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than three lakh
rupees” shall be substituted.
39. In section 28B of the principal Act, for the words “may extend to three years and
shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five thousand rupees”, the words “shall not
be less than three years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh
rupees” shall be substituted.
40. In section 29 of the principal Act,––
(a) for the words “drug or cosmetic”, the words “drug or cosmetic or medical
device” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “which may extend to five thousand rupees”, the words “which
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
41. In section 30 of the principal Act,––
(a) in sub-section (1A), for the words “may extend to two years or with a fine
which may extend to two thousand rupees”, the words “shall not be less than three
years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees” shall
be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “may extend to two years, or with fine which
shall not be less than ten thousand rupees or with both”, the words “shall not be less
than two years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees” shall be substituted;
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
“(3) Whoever having been convicted of an offence under section 28A or
section 28B is again convicted of an offence under that section shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which
may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less
than five lakh rupees.”.
Amendment
of section
26B.
Amendment
of section 27.
Amendment
of section
27A.
Amendment
of section 28.
Amendment
of section
28A.
Amendment
of section
28B.
Amendment
of section 29.
Amendment
of section 30.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

34
42.  In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),––
(a) in clause (ii),—
(A) for the words “manufacture for sale, or for distribution, sale, or stocking
or  exhibiting  or   offering   for   sale, or distribution”, the words “manufacture for
sale or for export or for distribution, sale, export, or stocking or  exhibiting  or
offering   for   sale or for export or for distribution” shall be substituted;
(B) for the words, brackets, letter and figures “clause (c) of section 18”, the
word and figures “section 18” shall be substituted.
(b) in the opening portion, after clause (ii), for the words “manufacture, sale or
distribution” the words “manufacture, sale, export or distribution” shall be substituted.
43. In section 31A of the principal Act,––
(a) for the words and figures “this Chapter except those contained in section
31”, the words, figures and letters “Chapter IB, Chapter IIA and Chapter IV except
those contained in section 4ZI, section 7M and section 31” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “manufacture, sale or distribution”, at both the places where
they occur, the words “manufacture, sale, export or distribution” shall be substituted.
44. In section 32 of the principal Act,––
(a) for the words “this Chapter”, wherever they occur, the words, figures and
letter “Chapter IIA or Chapter IV” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (1), for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(a) a Drugs Control Officer or a Medical Device Officer; or”.
45. In section 33 of the principal Act,––
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the word “Board”, wherever it occurs, the words
“Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2),––
(i) in clause (e), for the words “manufacture for sale or for distribution, for
the sale and for the distribution”, the words “manufacture for sale or for export
or for distribution for the sale, for the export and for the distribution” shall be
substituted;
(ii) in clause (h), for the words “sale, stocking or exhibition for sale, or
distribution”, the words “sale, export, stocking or exhibition for sale, or export,
or distribution” shall be substituted;
(iii) in clause (i), for the words “sale, stocking or exhibition for sale, or
distribution”, the words “sale, export, stocking or exhibition for sale, or export,
or distribution” shall be substituted;
(iv) in clause (k), for the words “manufacture,  sale or  stocking  or exhibition
for sale, or distribution”, the words “manufacture, sale, export or  stocking  or
exhibition for sale, or for export or distribution” shall be substituted.
46. In section 33P of the principal Act, for the words “any State Government”, the
words “any State Government or the Central Drugs Authority” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 31.
Amendment
of section
31A.
Amendment
of section 32.
Amendment
of section 33.
Amendment
of section 33P.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

35
47. After section 33P of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:––
“33Q. The Central Drugs Authority may suspend or cancel any permission,
licence or certificate issued by the Central Licensing Authority or the State Licensing
Authority, in the public interest and for the reasons to be recorded in writing or if the
permission, licence or certificate, as the case may be, is found not to have been issued
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made
thereunder, in the manner as may be prescribed.
33R. (1) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of any State Licensing
Authority or the Central Licensing Authority, may prefer an appeal to the Central
Drugs Authority within such period and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Central Drugs
Authority, may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within such period and in
such manner as may be prescribed.”.
48. In section 34A of the principal Act,––
(a) for the words, figures and letter “Chapter IV or  Chapter IV A”, at both the
places where they occur, the words, figures and letters “Chapter IB, Chapter IIA,
Chapter III, Chapter IV or  Chapter IV A” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “manufacture, sale  or distribution  of drugs”, the words “clinical
trial, import, manufacture, sale, export or distribution of drugs, cosmetics or medical
devices” shall be substituted.
49. In section 34AA of the principal Act,––
(i) in clause (c), for the words “any drug or cosmetic”, the words “any drug or
cosmetic or medical device” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause ( d) for the words “one thousand rupees”, the words “one lakh
rupees” shall be substituted.
50. After section 34AA of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:––
“34AAA. Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf imports,
manufactures, stocks, sells, distributes or exports, or intends to do so, any drug or
cosmetic or medical device and submits misleading or wrong information or refuses to
provide correct information in that regard as required by the licensing authority under
this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
three years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees.”.
51. After section 35 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:––
“35A. Any person convicted for an offence under this Act shall be liable to bear
the cost of storage of any article related to such offence, seized under this Act.
Insertion of
new sections
33Q and 33R.
Power of
Central Drugs
Authority to
suspend or
cancel
permission,
licence or
certificate
granted under
this Act.
Appeals.
Amendment
of section
34A.
Amendment
of section
34AA.
Insertion of
new section
34AAA.
Penalty for
submission of
misleading or
wrong infor-
mation or re-
fusal to furnish
information.
Insertion of
new sections
35A and 35B.
Liability to
bear storage
cost of seized
article, drugs,
etc..
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

36
35B. The seized spurious or misbranded or adulterated or not of standard quality
drugs, cosmetics and medical devices, having been proved so and after their use as
evidence in the case before the court is over, shall be destroyed by the official authority
in custody of these products in the manner as may be prescribed and  the convicted
person shall be liable to bear the cost of destruction of seized articles.”.
52. For section 38 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“38. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation
should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or regulation.”.
53. After the Second Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be
inserted, namely:––
“THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 18(3)]
CATEGORIES OF DRUGS WHICH THE CENTRAL LICENSING AUTHORITY IS
EMPOWERED TO ISSUE LICENCE:
1. Sera;
2. Solution of serum proteins intended for injection;
3. V accines; and includes DNA vaccines and vaccines containing living genetically
engineered organisms;
4. Toxins;
5. Antigens and anti-toxins;
6. Anti-biotics (betalactums and cephalosporins);
7. Parenteral preparations meant for parenteral administration;
8. Hormones and preparations containing hormones;
9. r-DNA derived drugs;
10. RNA interference based products;
11. Monoclonal anti-bodies;
12. Cellular products and stem cells;
13. Gene therapeutic products;
14. Xenografts;
15. Cytotoxic substances (anti-Cancer drugs);
16. Blood products;
17. Modified Living Organisms.”.
Mandatory de-
struction of
seized spurious
or adulterated
or not of stan-
dard quality
drugs, cosme-
tics and medi-
cal devices.
Substitution of
new section
for section 38.
Rules and regu-
lations to be
laid before Par-
liament.
Insertion of
new Schedule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 is a consumer protection law, which is concerned
with the standards and quality of drugs and cosmetics and regulates their import, manufacture,
sale and distribution in the country.
2. In January, 2003, the Central Government constituted an Expert Committee under
the Chairmanship of Dr. R.A. Mashelker, Director General of the Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR) to undertake a comprehensive examination of drug regulatory
issues, including the menace of spurious drugs and to suggest measures to improve the
drug administration in the country. The Committee noted that the problems in the drug
regulatory system in the country are primarily due to inadequate or weak drug control
infrastructure at the State and Central level and therefore, recommended centralised licensing
of manufacture of drugs. The Committee further recommended for a strong, well equipped,
empowered, independent and professionally managed Central Drugs Standard Control
Organisation (CDSCO) which may be given the status of Central Drug Administration reporting
directly to the Central Government.
3. With a view to give effect to the recommendations of the Mashelkar Committee, the
Central Government introduced the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2007  in the
Rajya Sabha on 21st August, 2007, which, inter alia, provided for centralised licensing of
manufacture of drugs, regulatory provisions for clinical trials and export of drugs and
cosmetics, creation of strong, well equipped, empowered, self managed and independent
Central Drugs Authority in place of the existing central drugs regulatory body i.e. the CDSCO
and do away with the Drugs Technical Advisory Board.
4. The said Bill was referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Health and Family Welfare for examination and Report. The Committee in its
30th Report made several recommendations, including for creation of a separate Chapter for
regulating medical devices. The provisions relating to regulation of clinical trials and exports
in the Bill also needed to be made more comprehensive and therefore, the Central Government
decided to withdraw the Bill of 2007 and introduce a  new Bill, namely, the Drugs and
Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2013 excluding the provisions relating to AYUSH drugs for
which a separate Bill will be brought before Parliament.
5.  The new Bill contains, inter alia, a revised approach to the centralised licensing, in
respect of seventeen categories of very critical drugs included in the proposed Third Schedule
to the Act, a separate Chapter containing regulatory provisions for Medical Devices, more
comprehensive provisions for regulating clinical trials and exports and a revised composition
of the Central Drugs Authority consisting of, inter alia, Secretaries of seven Ministries and
Departments of the Central Government, four State Drugs Controllers and four experts, with
the Drugs Controller General (India) as its Member-Secretary. The Drugs Technical Advisory
Board has been retained.
6.  In the Bill certain other amendments are also proposed which are consequential in
nature. The Bill also seeks to harmonise different provisions of the Act.
7.  The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions of the Bill.
8.   The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; GHULAM NABI AZAD
The  16th  August, 2013
37

Notes on clauses
Clause 1.—This clause provides for the short title and commencement of the proposed
legislation.
Clause 2.—This clause seeks to amend the long title and preamble of the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act, 1940 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). It is proposed to insert “Medical
Device” with “Drugs and Cosmetics” in the long title and “regulation of safety, efficacy,
quality, etc. of medical devices, export of drugs and clinical trials” in the preamble.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend sub-section ( 1) of section 1 of the Act, to
substitute the words “and Cosmetics” the words “Cosmetics and Medical devices” in the
Short title.
Clause 4.—This clause seeks to substitute the word “Inspector” with  the words
“Drugs Control Officer” throughout the Act.
Clause 5.—This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Act so as to substitute the
“Dangerous Drugs Act,1930” with “the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act,
1985”.
Clause  6.—This clause seeks to amend section 3 of the Act relating to definitions,
to define “bioavailability study”, “bioequivalence study”, “Medical Device Technical
Advisory Board”, “Central Drugs Authority”, “Central Drugs Laboratory”, “Central
Licensing Authority”, “Chairperson”, “clinical trial”,  “New Drug”, “Drugs Control
Officer”, “Medical Device Officer”, “Drugs Controller General of India”, “Ethics
Committee”, “Indian Pharmacopoeia”, “investigational medical device”, “investigational
new drug”, “Investigator”, “manufacture”, “medical device” “member”, “protocol”,
“regulations”, “sponsor”, “State Government”, “State Licensing Authority”, “Schedule”
and to amend the definitions of  “cosmetic” to insert “ new cosmetics”, “drugs” to insert
“or microbes” after the words “destruction of vermin or insects”, to omit the provisions
of “medical device” and to insert the provisions relating to “new drug”,  to substitute
“manufacture”  to take care of “exports”, “human blood and its components” and “medical
devices”, to substitute the words “Central Government” with the words “Central Drugs
Authority” etc.
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to insert new Chapters, CHAPTER IA titled “CENTRAL
DRUGS AUTHORITY” containing proposed new sections 4A to 4-O and CHAPTER IB with
chapter heading “CLINICAL TRIALS” containing proposed new sections 4P to 4ZL.
The proposed new section 4A provides for the constitution of the Central Drugs
Authority, which shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and common seal,
its location of head office and empowers the Central Drugs Authority to establish its offices
in other places in India.
The proposed new section 4B provides for composition of the Central Drugs Authority,
terms of office of its Members and conduct of its meetings.
The proposed new section 4C  provides for the reference of Central Drugs Authority
vis-a-vis the Central Drugs Standards Control Organisation; ownership of property, assets,
etc.; rights and liabilities to be transferred; debts, obligations and liabilities incurred and
contracts entered, by, with or for before the date of constitution of the Central Drugs Authority
shall be deemed to have been vested, transferred, incurred, and  entered in or  by the
Central Drugs Authority; money due shall be deemed to be due and   suits and legal
proceedings in the name of Central Drugs Standards Control Organisation may be continued
or instituted by or against the Central Drugs Authority and the  employees of  the Central
Drugs Standards Control Organisation shall be transferred to the  Central Drugs Authority
with same terms and conditions and their absorption therein.
The proposed new section 4D provides for declaration of conflict of interests by the
Members of Central Drugs Authority.
38

39
The proposed new section 4E provides that any vacancy in, or any defect in the
constitution of the Central Drugs Authority, or any defect in the nomination of a person as a
member, or any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of a case, shall not
invalidate its proceedings.
The proposed new section 4F provides for the manner of resignation of a nominated
Member and further provides that unless permitted to relinquish, to continue in office until
the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of notice of resignation or until a person
duly appointed as his successor or until the expiry of his term of office, which is the earliest.
The proposed new section 4G empowers the Central Government to appoint the Drugs
Controller General of India and to determine his salaries, allowances and pensions.
The proposed new section 4H empowers the Central Government to create posts in the
Central Drugs Authority and to determine the manner of appointment, salaries, allowances,
pensions and other conditions of service of its officers and employees.
The proposed new section 4-I enumerates the powers and functions of the Central
Drugs Authority such as, to specify by regulations the guidelines, norms, etc.; assess
periodically the functioning of the Central and State Licensing Authorities; power to issue
directions to ensure compliance of  guidelines, norms, etc., to review, suspend or cancel
permission, licence or certificate issued by the Central or State Licensing Authority; to
specify the fees, or charges for issue or renewal of licenses; coordinate, mediate and decide
upon the disputes arising out of the implementation of the provisions of the Act, rules, etc.,
recommend to the Central Government the measures as regards the standards of Drugs,
cosmetics, etc.
The proposed new section 4J provides for the powers and functions of the Drugs
Controller General of India. Sub-section (2) of  the aforesaid section provides that the Drugs
Controller General of India shall exercise the powers  such as, to issue, renew, suspend, or
cancel licence for import, export or manufacture of drugs, cosmetics or medical device or for
permission for conduct criminal trials; to recall or direct to recall any drug, cosmetic or
medical device; collect fees or charges for licenses, etc. Sub-section (3) empowers the Drugs
and Controller General of India to delegate his powers with the prior approval of Central
Drugs Authority; Sub-section (4) provides that the Drugs Controller General of India shall
be the legal representative of the Central Drugs Authority and sub-section (5) provides that
the Drugs Controller General of India shall have administrative control over the officers and
employees of the Central Drugs Authority.
The proposed new section 4K provides for financial grants to be made by the
Central Government to the Central Drugs Authority.
The proposed new section 4L  provides for maintenance of proper accounts by the
Central Drugs Authority and the details regarding procedure for auditing of its accounts.
The proposed new section 4M provides for preparation of an annual report by the
Central Drugs Authority, which shall be forwarded to the Central Government and also  be
laid before each House of Parliament.
The Proposed new section 4N lays down the powers of the Central Government to
make rules for giving effect to the provisions as contained in CHAPTER IA.
The Proposed new section 4-O lays down the power of the Central Drugs Authority to
make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder.
The proposed new section 4P prohibits clinical trial without permission. Sub-section
(1) of the  aforesaid section prohibits  the conduct of clinical trials in respect of a new drug
or investigational new drug or medical device or investigational medical device or cosmetic
or bioavailability or bioequivalence study of any drug in human subjects without due
permission from the Central Licensing Authority. Sub-section (2) prohibits conduct of any
clinical trial unless approved by the Ethics Committee. Sub-section (3) prohibits conduct of

40
clinical trial before registration with the Central Drugs Authority. Sub-section (4) provides
that no permission from Central Licensing Authority is  required by the Government Institute,
Hospital, etc., to initiate or conduct any bioequivalence or bioavailability studies of approved
drugs.
The proposed new section 4Q empowers the Drugs Controller General of India or any
other prescribed authority to decide the cause of injury or death of person which may occur
in course of or due to clinical trial, and the manner thereof.
The proposed new section 4R provides for  the person conducting clinical trial to give
medical treatment and compensation in case of an injury or death of a person as a result of his
participation in clinical trial, and the   manner thereof.
The proposed new section 4S empowers the Central Licensing Authority in public
interest to abbreviate, defer or omit the pre-clinical and clinical data requirements for approval
of clinical trial indicated in life threatening or serious diseases or diseases of special relevance
to the country.
The proposed new section 4T provides for the registration of Ethics Committee
constituted for the purpose with the Central Licensing Authority, the period of  its validity
and its renewal.
The proposed new section 4U provides for the composition of the Ethics Committee.
The proposed new section 4V provides for  the  functions and responsibilities of  the
Ethics Committee such as, to give its approval for clinical trial protocol and other related
documents; to safe guard the rights, safety and wellbeing of all trial participants enrolled in
the clinical trial; to make periodic review of the trial, based on the study progress reports; to
revoke its approval to a clinical trial, etc..
The proposed new section 4W empowers  the Central Licensing Authority to suspend
or cancel the registration of Ethics Committee and disqualification of its members on such
cancellation, in case the Ethics Committee fails to discharge its functions and responsibility
under the Act.
The proposed new section 4X empowers the Central Licensing Authority to carry out
inspections of clinical trials and provides that the person conducting clinical trial shall allow
the Drugs Control Officer or Medical Device Officer to enter with or without prior notice in to
any premises related to clinical trial to inspect the facilities, record, data, document books
and can also seeks clarifications, information’s, etc..
The proposed new section 4Y provides for the person, sponsor and organisation
conducting clinical trial to disclose name, address and other particulars of the persons
involved in conducting the clinical trials, including the trial participants.
The proposed new section 4Z provides for the person, sponsor and organisation to
mantain of data, records, registers and other documents and furnishing of information related
to clinical trials to the Central Drugs Authority.
The proposed new section 4ZA provides for penalty for conducting clinical trials in
respect of any drug or investigational new drug or any medical device or investigational
medical device without permission.
The proposed new section 4ZB provides for penalty for repeat offence for conducting
clinical trials in respect of any drug or investigational new drug or any medical device or
investigational medical device without permission.
The proposed new section 4ZC provides for penalty for conducting clinical trial of
cosmetics without permission.
The proposed new section 4ZD provides for penalty for repeat offence for conducting
clinical trial of cosmetics without permission.

41
The proposed new section 4ZE provides for penalty for violation of conditions of
permission for clinical trials in respect of any drug or investigational new drug or any medical
device or investigational medical device or cosmetic. It further provides enhancement of
penalty for resulting grievous hurt or death during clinical trial.
The proposed new section 4ZF provides for penalty for repeat offence for contravention
of conditions of permission for clinical trials in respect of any drug or investigational new
drug or any medical device or investigational medical device or cosmetics.
The proposed new section 4ZG provides for penalty for failure to provide compensation
for clinical trial related injury or death.
The proposed new section 4ZH provides for penalty for contravention to any provisions
under the Chapter IB not covered under section 4P , section 4Q, section 4R, section 4S
section 4T, section 4U, section 4W, section 4X, section 4Y, section 4Z or any rule made under
Chapter IB.
The proposed new section 4ZI provides for confiscation, upon conviction of the
persons contravening any provisions of Chapter IB, of the stock of the drug or investigational
new drug or medical device or investigational medical device or cosmetic in respect of which
the contravention has been made as well as any implements or machinery, vehicle, vessel or
other conveyances used in or for the purposes of conducting clinical trials.
The proposed new section 4ZJ provides that no court shall take cognizance of offence
under Chapter IB pertaining to Clinical Trials except on complaint made by persons mentioned
therein.
The proposed new section 4ZK empowers the Central Government to make rules after
consultation with the Central Drugs Authority, to give effect to the provisions of Chapter IB.
The proposed new section 4ZL excludes the application of provisions of Chapter IB to
Ayurvedic, Homeopathic, Siddha or Unani drugs.
Clause 8.—This clause provides for substitution of  the existing heading of Chapter II
of the Act with the heading “TECHNICAL ADVISORY BOARDS,  CENTRAL DRUGS
LABORATORIES AND CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE”.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to amend section 5 of the Act which provides for
constitution, composition, functions, manner for nomination or election of members of the
Drugs Technical Advisory Board to advise the Central Government and the State Governments
on technical matters.
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to insert a new section 5A so as to provide for
constitution, composition, functions, manner for nomination or election of members Medical
Devices Technical Advisory Board to advise the Central Government, the Central Drugs
Authority and the State Government.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to amend section 6 of the Act with in respect to
establishment and determination of functions  of a Central Drugs Laboratory by the Central
Drugs Authority and the rule making powers of the Central Government in that regard.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to amend section 7 of the  Act for renaming the Drugs
Consultative Committee as the “Drugs, Cosmetics and Medical Device Consultative
Committee”, its composition and provides for the Committee to meet at least twice in a year
and the  power to regulate its own procedure.
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to inserts a new Chapter, CHAPTER IIA, titled “IMPORT,
MANUFACTURE, SALE, DISTRIBUTION AND EXPORT OF MEDICAL DEVICES”
containing proposed new sections 7B to 7N”.
The proposed new section 7B provides for definition  of “standard quality” for in
relation to medical devices.

42
The proposed new section 7C provides for definition of “misbranded medical device”.
The proposed new section 7D provides for definition of ‘adulterated medical device’.
The proposed new section 7E provides for definition of “spurious medical device”.
The proposed new section 7F provides for  prohibition, with certain exemptions of,
(i) import, manufacture for  sale or export of any medical device which is not of standard
quality; misbranded, adulterated, spurious, not displayed on the lable in prescribed manner,
with therapeutic claims, with components which render it unsafe or harmful to use or in
violation of any provision of Chapter IIA or rules made thereunder; import, manufacture for
sale or export of medical devices except under and in accordance with the conditions of a
licence or certificate issued by the Central Licensing Authority; (ii) prohibits sell or stock or
distribute or exhibit  or offer for sale of medical device; sell or stock or exhibit or offer for sale
of medical device which has been imported or manufactured in contravention of any provisions
of the Act; sell, stocking, exhibiting, offering for sale or distribution of medical devices
except under a licence issued by the Licensing Authority. It further provides for the State
Government to designate one or more persons as State Licensing Authority.
The proposed new section 7G provides for the law relating to customs and goods shall
subject to the provisions of sections 7J,7K, and 7L apply in respect of medical device the
import of which is prohibited under Chapter IIA and empowers the  customs officers to
exercise the powers under this Act regarding import of medical device. It further provides for
the Commissioner of Customs or any other officer of the Central Government to detain any
imported package suspected to have contained medical device which is  prohibited for
import and shall report of such detention to the Drugs Controller General of India and if
necessary, forward it  to laboratory and further in the event the package or sample of that
medical device found in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter or rules made
thereunder, the same shall not be allowed to be imported.
The proposed new section 7H provides for the appointment of Medical Device Officers
by the Central Drugs Authority and their powers and duties. It further provides that the
Medical Device Officers so appointed shall be deemed to be public servant.
The proposed new section 7-I  provides for power of the Central Government to
regulate, restrict or prohibit import, manufacture, sale or distribution of any medical device in
public interest which is likely to involve any risk to human beings or animals, etc.
The proposed new section 7J provides for offences of import, manufacture for sale,
stocking, exhibiting, offering for sale of medical device or distribution or export of any
adulterated, spurious or not of standard quality medical device, grievous injury or death
caused thereby, the  penalties therefor and payment of fines to the person or his legal heir
who had used such medical device, causing him grievous hurt or his death.
The proposed new section 7K  provides for penalty for import, manufacture, sell,
export or distribution of any medical device in contravention of provisions of any notification
issued under section 7-I.
The proposed new section 7L provides for penalty for committing repeat offences
specified under sections 7J and 7K.
The proposed new section 7M provides for confiscation of medical device, implements,
machinery, receptacles, packages, coverings, animals, vehicles, vessels or other conveyances
of persons convicted for offences under Chapter IIA or rules made thereunder. It further
provides that the Court may on the application of the Medical Device Office after inquiry
pass an order of confiscation, if the medical device is not  of standard quality or  is misbranded,
adulterated, etc.
The proposed new section 7N lays down the powers of the Central Government to
make rules for giving effect to the provisions as contained in this Chapter.

43
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to amend section 8 of the Act to substitute the word
“Board” with “Central Drugs Authority” in respect of consultation by the Central Government
with the  words Central Drugs Authority, instead of with the Drug Technical Advisory Board,
for amending the Second Schedule of the Act relating to standards of drugs for the purpose
of Chapter III relating to import of drugs and cosmetics.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to  insert new section 9E to provide for definition of
adulterated cosmetics.
Clause 16.—This clause seeks to amend section 10 of the Act for including “adulterated
cosmetics” under prohibited cosmetics, and substituting “Board” with “Central Drugs
Authority” for advising the Central Government on permitting import of not-of-standard
quality drugs.
Clause 17.—This clause seeks to amend section 11 of the Act by inserting a proviso in
sub-section (2) for prohibiting import of drug or cosmetic from that or any other port in the
country, if the package of such drug or cosmetic is found in contravention of provisions of
Chapter III  of the Act.
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to amend sub-section ( 1) of section 12 of the Act to
substitute the word “Board” with the words “Central Drugs Authority” .
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to substitute section 13 of the Act by new sections 13
and 13A.  The proposed new section 13 provides for offences of import of any adulterated,
spurious or not of standard quality drug or cosmetics, grievous injury or death caused
thereby, punishment and penalties therefor and payment of fines to the person or his legal
heir who had used such drugs or cosmetics, causing him grievous hurt or death.
The proposed new section 13A provides for penalty for committing repeat offences
mentioned under section 13 relating to import of  adulterated drugs, cosmetics, etc.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to amend section 16 of the Act to substitute the word
“Board” with the words “Central Drugs Authority”, in respect of consultation by  the Central
Government with  the Central Drugs Authority, instead of with the Drug Technical Advisory
Board, for amending the Second Schedule of the  Act.
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to substitute section 18 of the Act to provide for
prohibition on issuance of licence by the State Government for manufacture for sale, etc., of
new drugs without prior permission of the Central Licensing Authority and putting
responsibility for ensuring thereof on the State Government; designation of persons  as
State Licensing Authorities on prescribed terms and conditions by the State Governments,
and  their powers and functions; power of Central Licensing Authority to issue of licence  or
certificate for manufacture  for sale or for export of drugs included in the Third and prohibition
on issuance of licence for manufacture of  any drugs included in the Third Schedule by the
State Licensing Authorities; power of Central Government to amend the Third Schedule in
consultation with the Central Drugs Authority by notification with the prior publication in
the Official Gazette, etc.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to amend section 18A of the Act to substitute the
words  “drug or cosmetic” with the words  “drug or cosmetic or medical device” relating to
disclosure of name of manufacturer, etc., from whom any person has acquired such products,
and empowering Medical Device Officers also, alongwith Drug Inspectors, to whom such
disclosures are to be made.
Clause 23.—This  clause seeks to amend section 18B of the Act to provide for  including
licensees under Chapter IIA relating to medical devices and Chapter III relating to import of
drugs and cosmetics requiring them to maintain prescribed records, registers and other
documents and information and  to furnish the required information to the appropriate officer
or authority.

44
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to insert new sections 18D, 18E and 18F in the Act.
The proposed new section 18D empowers the Central Licensing Authority to issue
permission or licence or certificate, as the case may be, for export of drugs, cosmetics or
medical devices.
The proposed new section 18E provides for penalty for contravention of provisions of
section 18D relating to export of drugs, cosmetics or medical devices.
The proposed new section 18E  provides for penalty for committing repeat offences
specified under section 18E relating to export of drugs, cosmetics or medical devices.
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to amend section 19 of the Act relating to “Pleas” to
insert provisions for covering matters relating to Chapter IIA, Chapter III, adulterated and
spurious cosmetics under Chapter IV as well as exports under new section 18D.
Clause  26.—This clause seeks to amend section 20 of the Act to provide for
appointment of Government Analysts for medical devices or classes of medical device also,
appointment of Government Analysts in the Central Government by the  Central Drugs
Authority instead of by  the Central Government and bringing financial interests in exports
also within the purview of disqualifications for appointment as Government Analysts.
Clause  27.—This clause seeks to amend section 21 of the Act to provide for
appointment of Drug Inspectors in the Central Government by  the Central Drugs Authority
instead of by  the Central Government, bringing financial interests in exports also within the
purview of disqualifications for appointment as Inspector and  to insert a new sub-section
(5)  to provide that the Inspector appointed before  the commencement of the amendment
Act shall after commencement of such Act  be deemed to have been appointed as Drugs
Control Officer and shall continue to discharge his function as Drugs Control Officer.
Clause 28.—This clause seeks to amend section 22 of the Act to substitute the word
“Inspector” with the words  “Drugs Control Officer and Medical Device Officer”; bringing
Chapter IIA, relating to medical devices, and exports also within the purview of application
of this section; the  procedure for taking custody of materials seized by the Drugs Control
Officer or the Medical Device Officer and  for enhancing the penalty for obstructing him from
performing his duties.
Clause 29.—This clause seeks to substitute section 23 of the Act to provide that the
sample of drugs or cosmetics or medical devices  shall be taken by the Drugs Control Officer
or the Medical Device Officer in the manner as may be specified in rules.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to substitute section 24 of the Act to provide for
disclosure of information relating to manufacture of Medical Devices as well, and to empower
the Medical Device Officer who can  also exercise the powers under the section.
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to substitute section 25 of the Act to provide that the
Government Analyst shall submit report in relation to samples of drugs or cosmetics or
medical devices and the action to be taken thereon, in the manner as may be specified in the
rules.
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to  amend section 26 of the Act  to substitute the words
“drug or cosmetic” with the words “drug or cosmetics or medical device” to enable a purchaser
to submit samples of medical devices also to a Government Analyst for test and analysis and
receive report thereof.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to substitute section 26A of the Act empowering the
Central Government to regulate, restrict or prohibit the manufacture, sale or distribution of
drugs or cosmetic or medical device if  use of such  drug, cosmetic or medical device is likely
to involve any risk to human beings or animals or that any drug or medical device does not
have the therapeutic value claimed, etc.

45
Clause 34.—This clause seeks to amend  section 26B of the Act to substitute the word
“drug”  with the words “drug or medical device” to regulate or restrict the manufacture, sale
or distribution of Medical Devices as well in case of emergency and in public interest.
Clause 35.—This clause seeks to amend section 27 of the Act to bring export of drugs
within the purview of the penalty provided in this section; to enable the “legal heir” instead
of  “relative” of the deceased for receiving the financial claims realised from the convict and
to omit the “explanation” containing the details of the relatives entitled for receiving such
claims.
Clause 36.—This clause seeks to amend section 27A of the Act  so as to provide the
export of cosmetics also within the purview of the penalty provided in the section.
Clause 37.—This clause seeks to amend section 28 of the Act to enhance penalty for
non-disclosure of the name of the manufacturer, place of manufacture, etc., in contravention
of provisions of sections 18A and 24 of the Act.
Clause 38.—This clause seeks to  amend section 28A of the Act to enhance penalty for
not keeping of documents, non-disclosure of information, etc., in contravention of provisions
of sections 18B of the Act.
Clause 39.—This clause seeks to amend section 28B of the Act to enhance penalty in
contravention of provisions of section 26A relating to drugs, cosmetics and medical devices
whose manufacture, sale or distribution has been regulated, restricted or prohibited under
that section.
Clause 40.—This clause seeks to amend section 29 of the Act to include medical
devices  also within the purview of the penalty for use of report of Government Analyst for
advertisement of drug or cosmetic and to enhance the penalty therefor.
Clause 41.—This clause seeks to  amend section 30 of the Act to enhance the penalties
for repeat offences relating to manufacture, sale, etc., of cosmetics in contravention of
provisions of Chapter IV and for use of report of Government Analyst for  the purpose of
advertisement of the product and to insert a new sub-section (3) to provide for penalty for
repeat offence for non-disclosure of the name of the manufacturer, place of manufacture, etc.,
and for not keeping of documents, non-disclosure of information, etc., in contravention of
provisions of sections 28A and 28B of the Act.
Clause 42.—This clause seeks to amend  section 31 of the Act relating to confiscation
so as to  include “exports” within its purview and expanding its purview to the  provisions of
new section 18 pertaining to prohibition on manufacture, sale, distribution, etc., without
licence, which would now include licenses issued by the Central Licensing Authority as well.
Clause 43.—This clause seeks to amend section 31A of the Act to provide for
application of provisions of new Chapter IB relating to clinical trials and new Chapter IIA
relating to import, manufacture, sale, distribution and export of Medical Devices, along with
chapter IV exempting the provisions of sections 4ZI and 7M relating to confiscation.
Clause 44.—This clause seeks to  amend section 32 of the Act relating to cognizance
of offences and to substitute the word “Inspector” with the words “Drugs Control Officer or
Medical Device Officer” and to insert new Chapter IIA within its purview.
Clause 45.—This clause seeks to amend section 33 of the Act relating to power of
Central Government to make rules and  to provide for consulting the “Central Drug Authority”
in place of the “Drug Technical Advisory Board” and for including exports as well within the
purview of these rules.
Clause 46.—This clause seeks to amend section 33P of the Act relating to power of the
Central Government to give directions by including the Central Drugs Authority also within
the purview of these directions.
Clause 47.—This clause seeks to insert new sections 33Q and 33R in the Act.

46
The proposed new section 33Q empowers the Central Drugs Authority to suspend or
cancel any permission, licence or certificate issued by the Central Licensing Authority or the
State Licensing Authority, in the public interest if such permission, licence or certificate is
found not to have been issued in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
The proposed new section 33R provides for preferring appeal to the Central Drugs
Authority against any action or decision of any State Licensing Authority or the Central
Licensing Authority and  to the Central Government against any action or decision of the
Central Drugs Authority.
Clause 48.—This clause seeks to amend section 34A of the Act relating to offences by
Government Department so as to insert the new Chapter IB relating to Clinical Trials, new
Chapter IIA relating to import, manufacture, sale, distribution and export of  Medical Devices
within the purview of this section.
Clause 49.—This clause seeks to amend section 34AA of the Act relating to penalty
for vexatious search or seizure so as to include medical devices within the purview of the
section and to enhance the penalty provided therefor.
Clause 50.—This clause seeks to insert a new section 34AAA to provide for penalty
for submission of misleading or wrong information or refusal to furnish information as required
by the licensing authority.
Clause 51.—This clause seeks to insert new sections 35A and 35B in the Act.
The proposed new section 35A imposes the liability to bear the cost of storage of any
article seized for any offence under this Act on the person convicted for that offence.
The proposed new section 35B provides for destruction of the seized spurious,
misbranded, adulterated or not-of-standard quality drugs, cosmetics and medical devices
after their use in the court as evidence and placing the liability to bear the cost of such
destruction on the convicted person.
Clause 52.—This clause seeks to substitute  section 38 of the Act relating to laying of
rules and regulations made under the Act.
Clause 53.—This clause seeks to insert a new Schedule, namely, “THE THIRD
SCHEDULE”, in the Act relating to Categories of drugs which the Central Licensing Authority
is empowered to issue licence containing seventeen categories of drugs.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill proposes to insert, inter alia, new section 4A relating to
constitution of Central Drugs Authority. Sub-section (4) of the aforesaid section empowers
the Central Drugs Authority to establish its offices. Sub-section ( 3) of the proposed new
section 4B provides for allowances payable to members on account of holding of meetings
of the Central Drugs Authority.  The proposed new sub-section (2) of section 4G provides
for salaries, allowances and pensions of the Drugs Controller General of India. The proposed
new section 4H empowers the Central Drugs Authority to create posts. Sub-section ( 2) of
the aforesaid section 4H provides for salaries, allowances and pensions to the officers and
employees  of the Central Drugs Authority which shall be determined by the Central
Government.
2. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, may involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India and is not likely to involve any other expenditure whether of a
recurring or non-recurring nature.
47

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill proposes to insert new Chapters IA and IB (containing new sections
4A to 4ZL) in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
The proposed new section 4-I provides that the Central drugs Authority shall specify,
by regulations, (i) the guidelines, norms, structures and requirements for effective functioning
of the Central Licensing Authority and the State Licensing Authorities and (ii) the fees or
charges for issue or renewal of licenses, certificates, approvals and permissions by the
Central Licensing Authority and the State Licensing Authorities.
The proposed new section 4N empowers the Central Government to make rules for
giving effect to the provisions of Chapter IA after consultation with, or on the recommendation
of, the Central Drugs Authority and subject to previous publication by notification in the
Official Gazette.
The proposed new section 4-O empowers the Central Drugs Authority to make
regulations consistent with the Act and the rules made thereunder, with the approval of the
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette.
The proposed new section 4ZK empowers the Central Government to make rules for
giving effect to the provisions of Chapter IB after consultation with, the Central Drugs
Authority and after previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette.
2. Clause 10 of the Bill proposes to insert a new section 5A in the Act. Sub-section (4)
of the proposed  new section 5A confers power on the Medical Device Technical Advisory
Board, in consultation with the Central Drugs Authority, and subject to the previous approval
of the Central Government, to make bye-laws fixing quorum and regulating its own procedure
and the conduct of all business to be transacted by it.
3. Clause 11 of the Bill proposes to amend section 6 of the Act. The proposed sub-
section (1) of the aforesaid section provides, inter alia, that the Central Drugs Authority
may, in consultation with the Central Government, specify by regulations the functions of
the Central Drugs Laboratory in respect of any drug or class of drugs or cosmetic or class of
cosmetics or medical device or class of medical devices to be performed by any other
laboratory.
4. Clause 13 of the Bill proposes to insert a new Chapter IIA (containing new sections
7B to 7N) in the Act.  The proposed new section 7N empowers the Central Government to
make rules for giving effect to the provisions of Chapter IIA after consultation with, or on the
recommendation of, the Central Drugs Authority and after previous publication, by notification
in the Official Gazette.
5.The matters in respect of which the rules or regulations may be made under the
aforementioned provisions are matters of procedure or administrative details and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.
48

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940
(23 OF 1940)
* * * * *
AN ACT to regulate the import, manufacture, distribution and sale of drugs and
cosmetics.
WHEREAS it is expedient to regulate the import, manufacture, distribution and sale of
drugs and cosmetics;
* * * * *
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,1940.
* * * * *
2. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 and any other law for the time being in force.
3. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—
* * * * *
(aaa) “cosmetic” means any article intended to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled or
sprayed on, or introduced into, or otherwise applied to, the human body or any part
thereof for cleansing, beautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance,
and includes any article intended for use as a component of cosmetic;
(b) “drug” includes—
* * * * *
(ii) such substances (other than food) intended to affect the structure or
any function of the human body or intended to be used for the destruction of
vermin or insects which cause disease in human beings or animals, as may be
specified from time to time by the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette;
* * * * *
(iv) such devices intended for internal or external use in the diagnosis,
treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease or disorder in human beings or
animals, as may be specified from time to time by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette, after consultation with the Board;
(c) "Government Analyst" means—
* * * * *
(ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, a Government Analyst
appointed by the Central Government or a State Government under section 20;
(e)  “Inspector” means—
* * * * *
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, an Inspector appointed
by the Central Government or a State Government under section 33G; and
(ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, an Inspector appointed by
the Central Government or a State Government under section 21;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
2 of 1930.
49
Application of
other laws not
barred.

50
(f) “manufacture” in relation to any drug or cosmetic includes any process or
part of a process for making, altering, ornamenting, finishing, packing, labelling,
breaking up or otherwise treating or adopting any drug or cosmetic with a view to its
sale or distribution but does not include the compounding or dispensing of any drug,
or the packing of any drug or cosmetic, in the ordinary course of retail business; and
“to manufacture” shall be consrued accordingly;
* * * * *
(h) “patent or proprietary medicine” means,—
* * * * *
(ii) in relation to any other systems of medicine, a drug which is a remedy
or prescription presented in a form ready for internal or external administration
of human beings or animals and which is not included in the edition of the
Indian Pharmacopoeia for the time being or any other Pharmacopoeia authorised
in this behalf by the Central Government after consultation with the Drugs
Technical Advisory Board constituted under section 5;
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
T
HE DRUGS TECHNICAL ADVISORY BOARD, THE CENTRAL DRUGS LABORA TORY AND THE DRUGS
CONSUL TATIVE COMMITTEE
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute a Board (to be
called the Drugs Technical Advisory Board) to advise the Central Government and the State
Governments on technical matters arising out of the administration of this Act and to carry
out the other functions assigned to it by this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(i) the Director General of Health Services, ex officio, who shall be Chairman;
(ii) the Drugs Controller, India, ex officio;
(iii) the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory, Calcutta, ex officio;
(iv) the Director of the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, ex officio;
(v) the Director of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, ex officio;
(vi) the President of the Medical Council of India, ex officio;
(vii) the President of the Pharmacy Council of India, ex officio;
(viii) the Director of the Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, ex officio;
(ix) two persons to be nominated by the Central Government from among
persons who are in charge of drugs control in the States;
(x) one person, to be elected by the Executive Committee of the Pharmacy
Council of India, from among teachers in pharmacy or pharmaceutical chemistry or
pharmacognosy on the staff of an Indian University or a college affiliated thereto;
(xi) one person, to be elected by the Executive Committee of the Medical Council
of India, from among teachers in medicine or therapeutics on the staff of an Indian
University or a college affiliated thereto;
(xii) one person to be nominated by the Central Government from the
pharmaceutical industry;
(xiii) one pharmacologist to be elected by the Governing Body of the Indian
Council of Medical Research;
(xiv) one person to be elected by the Central Council of the Indian Medical
Association;
(xv) one person to be elected by the Council of the Indian Pharmaceutical
Association;
(xvi) two persons holding the appointment of Government Analyst under this
Act, to be nominated by the Central Government.
The Drugs
Technical
Advisory
Board.

51
(3) The nominated and elected members of the Board shall hold office for three years,
but shall be eligible for re-nomination and re-election:
Provided that the person nominated or elected, as the case may be, under clause (ix)
or clause (x)  or clause (xi) or clause (xvi) of sub-section (2) shall hold office for so long as
he holds the appointment of the office by virtue of which he was nominated or elected to the
Board.
(4) The Board may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, make
bye-laws fixing a quorum and regulating its own procedure and the conduct of all business
to be transacted by it.
* * * * *
(7) The Central Government shall appoint a person to be Secretary of the Board and
shall provide the Board with such clerical and other staff as the Central Government considers
necessary.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, establish a Central Drugs
Laboratory under the control of a Director to be appointed by the Central Government, to
carry out the functions entrusted to it by this Act or any rules made under this Chapter:
Provided that, if the Central Government so prescribes, the functions of the Central
Drugs Laboratory in respect of any drug or class of drugs or cosmetic or class of cosmetics
shall be carried out at the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, or at any other prescribed
Laboratory and the functions of the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory in respect of
such drug or class of drugs or such comestic or class of cosmetics shall be exercised by the
Director of that Institute or of that other Laboratory, as the case may be.
(2) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Board, make rules
prescribing—
* * * * *
(d) the procedure for the submission of the said Laboratory under Chapter IV or
Chapter IV A of samples of drugs or cosmetics for analysis or test, the forms of the
Laboratory’s reports thereon and the fees payable in respect of such reports;
* * * * *
7. (1) The Central Government may constitute an advisory committee to be called
“the Drugs Consultative Committee” to advise the Central Government, the State
Governments and the Drugs Technical Advisory Board on any matter tending to secure
uniformity throughout India in the administration of this Act.
(2) The Drugs Consultative Committee shall consist of two representatives of the
Central Government to be nominated by that Government and one representative of each
State Government to be nominated by the State Government concerned.
(3) The Drugs Consultative Committee shall meet when required to do so by the
Central Government and shall have power to regulate its own procedure.
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
I
MPORT OF DRUGS AND COSMETICS
8. (1) * * * * *
(2) The Central Government, after consultation with the Board and after giving by
notification in the Official Gazette not less than three months, notice of its intention so to do,
may by a like notification add to or otherwise amend the Second Schedule for the purposes of
this Chapter, and thereupon the Second Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
* * * * *
The Central
Drugs
Laboratory.
Standards of
quality.
The Drugs
Consultative
Committee.

52
10. From such date as may be fixed by the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette in this behalf, no person shall import—
* * * * *
(ee) any consmetic containing any ingredient which may render it unsafe or
harmful or use under the directions indicated or recommended;
* * * * *
Provided further that the Central Government may, after consultation with the Board,
by notification in the Official Gazette, permit, subject to any condition specified in the
notification, the import of any drug or class of drugs not being of standard quality.
* * * * *
11. (1) * * * * *
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1) the Commissioner of
Customs or any officer of the Government authorised by the Central Government in this
behalf, may detain any imported package which he suspects to contain any drug or cosmetic
the import of which is prohibited under this Chapter and shall forthwith report such detention
to the Drugs Controller, India, and if necessary, forward the package or sample of any
suspected drug or cosmetic found therein to the Central Drugs Laboratory.
* * * * *
12. (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with or on the recommendation
of the Board and after previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central
Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make
rules without such consultation, but in such a case the Board shall be consulted within
six months of the making of the rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration
any suggestions which the Board may make in relation to the amendment of the said rules.
* * * * *
13. (1) Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf imports,—
(a) any drug deemed to be adulterated under section 9A or deemed to be a
spurious drug under section 9B or any spurious cosmetic referred to in section 9D or
any cosmetic of the nature referred to in clause (ee) of section 10 shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and a fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees;
(b) any drug or cosmetic other than a drug or cosmetic referred to in clause (a),
the import of which is prohibited under section 10, or any rule made under this
Chapter, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both;
(c) any drug or cosmetic in contravention of the provisions of any notification
issued under section 10A, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or
with both.
(2) Whoever having been convicted of an offence—
(a) under clause ( a) or clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1), is again convicted of an
offence under that clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or
with both;
(b) under clause (b) of sub-section (1), is again convicted of an offence under
the clause, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
(3) The punishment provided by this section shall be in addition to any penalty to
which the offender may be liable under the provisions of section 11.
* * * * *
Application
of law
relating to
sea customs
and powers of
Customs
Officers.
Prohibition
of import of
certain drugs
or cosmetics.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
Offences.

53
CHAPTER IV
MANUFACTURE, SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF DRUGS AND COSMETICS
16. (1) * * * * *
(2) The Central Government, after consultation with the Board and after giving by
notification in the Official Gazette not less than three months’ notice of its intention so to
do, may by a like notification add to or otherwise amend the Second Schedule for the
purposes of this Chapter, and thereupon the Second Schedule shall be deemed to be amended
accordingly.
* * * * *
18. From such  date as may be fixed by the State Government by notification in the
Official Gazette in this behalf, no person shall himself or by any other person on his behalf—
(a) manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for
sale, or distribute—
(i) any drug which is not of a standard quality, or is misbranded, adulterated
or spurious;
(ii) any cosmetic which is not of a standard quality, or is misbranded,
adulterated or spurious;
(iii) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is displayed in the
prescribed manner on the label or container thereof the true formula or list of
active ingredients contained in it together with the quantities, thereof;
(iv) any drug which by means of any statement design or device
accompanying it or by any other means, purports or claims to prevent, cure or
mitigate any such disease or ailment, or to have any such other effect as may be
prescribed;
(v) any cosmetic containing any ingredient which may render it unsafe or
harmful for use under the directions indicated or recommended;
(vi) any drug or cosmetic in contravention of any of the provisions of this
Chapter or any rule made thereunder;
(b) sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute any drug or cosmetic
which has been imported or manufactured in contravention of any of the provisions
of this Act or any rule made thereunder;
(c) manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for
sale, or distribute any drug or cosmetic, except under, and in accordance with the
conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under this Chapter:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the manufacture, subject to
prescribed conditions, of small quantities of any drug for the purpose of examination, test
or analysis:
Provided further that the Central Government may, after consultation with the Board,
by notification in the Official Gazette, permit, subject to any conditions specified in the
notification, the manufacture for sale or for distribution, sale, stocking or exhibiting or
offering for sale or distribution of any drug or class of drugs not being of standard quality.
18A. Every person, not being the manufacturer of a drug or cosmetic or his agent for
the distribution thereof, shall, if so required, disclose to the Inspector the name, address
and other particulars of the person from whom he acquired the drug or cosmetic.
18B. Every person holding a licence under clause ( c) of section 18 shall keep and
maintain such records, registers and other documents as may be prescribed and shall
furnish to any officer or authority exercising any power or discharging any function under
this Act such information as is required by such officer or authority for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
Standards of
quality.
Prohibition
of
manufacture
and sale of
certain drugs
and
cosmetics.
Maintenance
of records and
furnishing of
information.
Disclosure of
the name of
the
manufacturer,
etc.

54
19. (1) Save as hereinafter provided in this section, it shall be no defence in a
prosecution under this Chapter to prove merely that the accused was ignorant of the
nature, substance or quality of the drug or cosmetic in respect of which the offence has
been committed or of the circumstances of its manufacture or import, or that a purchaser,
having bought only for the purpose of test or analysis, has not been prejudiced by the sale.
(2)  For the purposes of section 18 a drug shall not be deemed to be misbranded or
adulterated or spurious or to be below standard quality nor shall a cosmetic be deemed to
be misbranded or to be below standard quality only by reason of the fact that—
(a) there has been added thereto some innocuous substance or ingredient
because the same is required for the manufacture or preparation of the drug or cosmetic
as an article of commerce in a state fit for carriage or consumption, and not to increase
the bulk, weight or measure of the drug or cosmetic or to conceal its inferior quality or
other defects; or
* * * * *
(3) A person, not being the manufacturer or a drug or cosmetic or his agent for the
distribution thereof, shall not be liable for a contravention of section 18 if he proves—
(a) that he acquired the drug or cosmetic from a duly licensed manufacturer,
distributor or dealer thereof;
(b) that he did not know and could not, with reasonable diligence, have
ascertained that the drug or cosmetic in any way contravened the provisions of that
section; and
(c) that the drug or cosmetic, while in his possession was properly stored and
remained in the same state as when he acquired it.
20. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Government Analysts
for such areas in the State and in respect of such drugs or classes of drugs or such cosmetics
or classes of cosmetics as may be specified in the notifications.
(2) The Central Government may also, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Government Analysts
in respect of such drugs or classes of drugs or such cosmetics or classes of cosmetics as
may be specified in the notification.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), neither
the Central Government nor a State Government shall appoint as a Government Analyst any
official not serving under it without the previous consent of the Government under which
he is serving.
(4) No person who has any financial interest in the import, manufacture or sale of
drugs or cosmetics shall be appointed to be a Government Analyst under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2) of this section.
21. (1) The Central Government or a State Government may by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications,
to be Inspectors for such areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or
the State Government, as the case may be.
* * * * *
(3) No person who has any financial interest in the import, manufacture or sale of
drugs or cosmetics shall be appointed to be an Inspector under this section.
* * * * *
22. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 23 and of any rules made by the Central
Government in this behalf, an Inspector may, within the local limits of the area for which he
is appointed,—
Pleas.
Government
Analysts.
Inspectors.
Powers of
Inspectors.

55
(a) inspect,—
(i) any premises wherein any drug or cosmetic is being manufactured and
the means employed for standardising and testing the drug or cosmetic;
(ii) any premises wherein any drug or cosmetic is being sold, or stocked
or exhibited or offered for sale, or distributed;
(b) take samples of any drug or cosmetic,—
(i) which is being manufactured or being sold or is stocked or exhibited
or offered for sale, or is being distributed;
(ii) from any person who is in the course of conveying, delivering or
preparing to deliver such drug or cosmetic to a purchaser or a consignee;
(c) at all reasonable times, with such assistance, if any, as he considers
necessary,—
(i) search any person, who, he has reason to believe, has secreted about
his person, any drug or cosmetic in respect of which an offence under this
Chapter has been, or is being, committed; or
(ii) enter and search any place in which he has reason to believe that an
offence under this Chapter has been, or is being, committed; or
(iii) stop and search any vehicle, vessel or other conveyance which, he
has reason to believe, is being used for carrying any drug or cosmetic in respect
of which an offence under this Chapter has been, or is being, committed, and
order in writing the person in possession of the drug or cosmetic in respect of which
the offence has been, or is being, committed, not to dispose of any stock of such drug
or cosmetic for a specified period not exceeding twenty days, or, unless the alleged
offence is such that the defect may be removed by the possessor of the drug or
cosmetic, seize the stock of such drug or cosmetic and any substance or article by
means of which the offence has been, or is being, committed or which may be employed
for the commission of such offence;
(cc) examine any record, register, document or any other material object found
with any person, or in any place, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance referred to in
clause (c), and seize the same if he has reason to believe that it may furnish evidence
of the commission of an offence punishable under this Act or the Rules made
thereunder;
* * * * *
(cca) require any person to produce any record, register, or other document
relating to the manufacture for sale or for distribution, stocking, exhibition for sale,
offer for sale or distribution of any drug or cosmetic in respect of which he has reason
to believe that an offence under this Chapter has been, or is being, committed;
(d) exercise such other powers as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes
of this Chapter or any rules made thereunder.
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall, so far as may be,
apply to any search or seizure under this Chapter as they apply to any search or seizure
made under the authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.
(2A) Every record, register or other document seized under clause ( cc) or produced
under clause ( cca) shall, be returned to the person, from whom they were seized or who
produce the same, within a period of twenty days of the date of such seizure or production,
as the case may be, after copies thereof or extracts therefrom certified by that person, in
such manner as may be prescribed, have been taken.
(3) If any person wilfully obstructs an Inspector in the exercise of the powers conferred
upon him by or under this Chapter or refuses to produce any record, register or other
document when so required under clause (cca) of sub-section (1), he shall be punishable
with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
23. (1) Where an Inspector takes any sample of a drug or cosmetic under this Chapter,
he shall tender the fair price thereof and may require a written acknowledgement therefor.
Procedure of
Inspectors.
2 of 1974.

56
(2) Where the price tendered under sub-section (1) is refused or where the Inspector
seizes the stock of any drug or cosmetic under clause ( c) of section 22, he shall tender a
receipt therefor in the prescribed form.
(3) Where an Inspector takes a sample of a drug or cosmetic for the purpose of test or
analysis, he shall intimate such purpose in writing in the prescribed form to the person from
whom he takes it and, in the presence of such person unless he wilfully absents himself,
shall divide the sample into four portions and effectively seal and suitably mark the same
and permit such person to add his own seal and mark to all or any of the portions so sealed
and marked:
Provided that where the sample is taken form permises whereon the drug or cosmetic
is being manufactured, it shall be necessary to divide the sample into three portions only:
Provided further that where the drug or cosmetic is made up in containers of small
volume, instead of dividing a sample as aforesaid, the Inspector may, and if the drug or
cosmetic be such that it is likely to deteriorate or be otherwise damaged by exposure shall,
take three or four, as the case may be, of the said containers after suitably marking the same
and, where necessary, sealing them.
(4) The Inspector shall resotre one portion of a sample so divided or one container, as
the case may be, to the person from whom he takes it, and shall retain the reminder and
dispose of the same as follows:—
(i) one portion or container he shall forthwith send to the Government Analyst
for test or analysis;
(ii) the second, he shall produce to the Court before which proceedings, if any,
are instituted in respect of the drug or cosmetic; and
(iii) the third, where taken, he shall send to the person, if any, whose name,
address and other particulars have been disclosed under section 18A.
(5) Where an Inspector takes any action under clause ( c) of section 22,—
(a) he shall use all despatch in ascertaining whether or not the drug or cosmetic
contravenes any of the provisions of section 18 and, if it is ascertained that the drug
or cosmetic does not so contravene forthwith revoke the order passed under the said
clause or, as the case may be, take such action as may be necessary for the return of
the stock seized;
(b) if he seizes the stock of the drug or cosmetic, he shall as soon as may be,
inform a Judicial Magistrate and take his orders as to the custody thereof;
(c) without prejudice to the institution of any prosecution, if the alleged
contravention be such that the defect may be remedied by the possessor of the drug
or cosmetic, he shall, on being satisfied that the defect has been so remedied, forthwith
revoke his order under the said clause.
(6) Where an Inspector seizes any record, register, document or any other material
object under clause (cc) of sub-section (1) of section 22, he shall, as soon as may be, inform
a Judicial Magistrate and take his orders as to the custody thereof.
24. Every person for the time being in charge of any premises whereon any drug or
cosmetic is being manufactured or is kept for sale or distribution shall, on being required by
any Inspector so to do, be legally bound to disclose to the Inspector the place where the
drug or cosmetic is being manufactured or is kept, as the case may be.
25. (1) The Government Analyst to whom a sample of any drug or cosmetic has been
submitted for test or analysis under sub-section ( 4) of section 23, shall deliver to the
Inspector submitting it a signed report in triplicate in the prescribed form.
(2) The Inspector on receipt thereof shall deliver one copy of the report to the person
from whom the sample was taken and another copy to the person, if any, whose name,
address and other particulars have been disclosed under section 18A, and shall retain the
third copy for use in any prosecution in respect of the sample.
Persons bound
to disclose
place where
drugs or
cosmetics are
manufactured
or kept.
Reports of
Government
Analysts.

57
(3) Any document purporting to be a report signed by a Government Analyst under
this Chapter shall be evidence of the facts stated therein, and such evidence shall be
conclusive unless the person from whom the sample was taken or the person whose name,
address and other particulars have been disclosed under section 18A has, within twenty-
eight days of the receipt of a copy of the report, notified in writing the Inspector or the Court
before which any proceedings in respect of the sample are pending that he intends to
adduce evidence in controversion of the report.
(4) Unless the sample has already been tested or analysed in the Central Drugs
Laboratory, where a person has under sub-section ( 3) notified his intention of adducing
evidence in controversion of a Government Analyst’s report, the Court may, of it own
motion or in its discretion at the request either of the complainant or the accused: cause the
sample of the drug or cosmetic produced before the Magistrate under sub-section ( 4) of
section 23 to be sent for test or analysis to the said Laboratory, which shall make the test or
analysis and report in writing signed by or under the authority of, the Director of the Central
Drugs Laboratory the result thereof, and such report shall be conclusive evidence of the
facts stated therein.
(5) The cost of a test or analysis made by the Central Drugs Laboratory under sub-
section (4) shall be paid by the complainant or accused as the Court shall direct.
26. Any person or any recognised consumer association, whether such person is a
member of that association or not shall, on application in the prescribed manner and on
payment of the prescribed fee, be entitled to submit for test or analysis to a Government
Analyst any drug or cosmetic purchased by him or it and to receive a report of such test or
analysis signed by the Government Analyst.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 32, “recognised consumer
association” means a voluntary consumer association registered under the Companies Act,
1956 or any other law for the time being in force.
26A. Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central
Government is satisfied, that the use of any drug or cosmetic is likely to involve any risk to
human beings or animals or that any drug does not have the therapeutic value claimed or
purported to be claimed for it or contains ingredients and in such quantity for which there
is no therepeutic justification and that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so
to do, then, that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, regulate, restrict or
prohibit the manufacture, sale or distribution of such drug or cosmetic.
26B. Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter,if the Central
Government is satisfied that a drug is essential to meet the requirements of an emergency
arising due to epidemic or natural calamities and that in the public interest, it is necessary or
expedient so to do, then, that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
regulate or restrict the manufacture, sale or distribution of such drug.
27.  Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures for sale or
for distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhibits or offers for sale or distributes,—
(a) any drugs deemed to be adulterated under section 17A or spurious under
section 17B and which when used by any person for or in the diagnosis, treatment,
mitigation, or prevention of any disease or disorder is likely to cause his dealth or is
likely to cause such harm on his body as would amount to grievous hurt within the
meaning of section 320 of the Indian Penal Code, solely on account of such drug
being adulterated or spurious or not of standard quality, as the case may be, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall
not be less than ten lakh rupees or three times value of the durgs confiscated,
whichever is more:
Purchaser of
drug or
cosmetic
enabled to
obtain test or
analysis.
Powers of
Central
Government
to prohibit
manufacture,
etc., of drug
and cosmetic
in public
interest.
Penalty for
manufacture,
sale, etc., of
drugs in
contravention
of this
Chapter.
Power of
Central
Government
to regulate or
restrict,
manufacture,
etc., of drug
in public
interest.
45 of 1860.
1 of 1956.

58
Provided that the fine imposed on and released from, the person convicted under this
clause shall be paid, by way of compensation, to the person who had used the adulterated
or spurious drugs referred to in this clause:
Provided further that where the use of the adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in
this clause has caused the death of a person who used such drugs, the fine imposed on and
realised from, the person convicted under this clause, shall be paid to the relative of the
person who had died due to the use of the adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in this
clause.
Explanation.—For the purposes of the second proviso, the expression ‘‘relative’’
means—
(i) spouse of the deceased person; or
(ii) a minor legitimate son, and unmarried legitimate daughter and a widowed
mother; or
(iii) parent of the minor victim; or
(iv) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the deceased person at the time of
his death, a son or a daughter who has attained the age of eighteen years; or
(v) any person, if wholly or in part, dependent on the earnings of the deceased
person at the time of this death,—
(a) the parent; or
(b) a minor brother or an unmarried sister; or
(c) a widowed daughter-in-law; or
(d) a widowed sister; or
(e) a minor child of a pre-deceased son; or
(f) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no parent of the child
is alive; or
(g) the paternal grandparent if no parent of the member is alive.
* * * * *
27A. Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf manufactures for sale or
for distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhibits or offers for sale—
(i) any cosmetic deemed to be spurious under section 17D or adulterated under
section 17E shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which  may extend to
three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees or three
times to value of the cosmetics confiscated, whichever is more;
(ii) any cosmetic other than a cosmetic referred to in clause (i) in contravention
of any provisions of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may
extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
28. Whoever contravenes the provisons of section 18A or section 24 shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which
shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or with both.
28A. Whoever without reasonable cause or excuse, contravenes the provisions of
section 18B shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year
or with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or with both.
Penalty for
manufacture,
sale, etc., of
cosmetics in
contravention
of this
Chapter.
Penalty for
non-
disclosure of
the name of
the
manufacturer,
etc.
Penalty for
not keeping
documents,
etc., and for
non-
disclosure of
information.

59
28B. Whoever himself or by any other person on his behalf manufactures or sells or
distributes any drug or cosmetic in contravention of the provisons  of any notification
issued under section 26A, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees.
29. Whoever uses any report of a test or analysis made by the Central Drugs
Laboratory or by a Government Analyst, or any extract from such report, for the purpose of
advertising any drug for cosmetic, shall be punishable with fine which may extned to  five
thousand rupees.
30. (1) Whoever having been convected of an offence,—
* * * * *
(1A) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under section 27A is again
convicted under that section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.
(2) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under section 29 is again convicted
of an offence under the same section, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to two years, or with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees or with
both.
31. (1) Where any person has been convicted under this Chapter for contravening
any such provision of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder  as may be specified by rule
made in this behalf, the stock of the drug or cosmetic in respect of which the contravention
has been made shall be liable to confiscation and if such contravention is in respect of—
* * * * *
(ii) manufacture for sale, or for distribution, sale, or stocking or exhibiting or
offering for sale, or distribution of any drug without a valid licence as required under
clause (c) of section 18,
any implements or machinery used in such manufacture, sale or distribution and any
receptacles, packages or converings in which such drug is contained and the animals,
vehicles, vessels or other conveyances used in carrying such drug shall  also be lable to
confiscation.
* * * * *
31A. The provisions of this Chapter except those contained in section 31 shall apply
in relation to the manufacture, sale or distribution of drugs by any department of Government
as they apply in relation to the manufacture, sale or distribution of drugs by any other
person.
32. (1)  No prosecution under this Chapter shall be instituted except by—
(a) an Inspector; or
* * * * *
33. (1) The Central Government may after consultation with, or on the recommendation
of, the Board and after previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central
Government is of opinion that circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make
rules without such consultation, but in such a case the Board shall be consulted within six
months of the making of the rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration
any suggestions which the Board may make in relation to the amendment of the said rules.
Penalty for
manufacture,
etc., for drugs
or cosmetics
in
contravention
of section
26A.
Penalty for
use of
Government
Analyst’s
report for
advertising.
Confiscation.
Application
of provisions
to
Government
departments.
Cognizance
of offences.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
Penalty for
subsequent
offences.

60
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may—
* * * * *
(e) prescribe the forms of licences for the manufacture for sale or for distribution,
for the sale and for the distribution of drugs or any specified drug or class of drugs or
of cosmetics or any specified cosmetic or class of cosmetics, the form of application
for such licences, the conditions subject to which such licences may be issued, the
authority empowered to issue the same the qualifications of such authority and the
fees payable therefor; and provide for the cancellation or suspension of such licences
in any case where any provision of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder is
contravened or any of the conditions subject to which they are issued is not complied
with;
* * * * *
(h) require the date of manufacture and the date of expiry of potency to be
clearly and truly stated on the label or container of any specified drug or class of
drugs, and prohibit the sale, stocking or exhibition for sale, or distribution of the said
drug or class of drugs after the expiry of a specified period from the date of manufacture
or after the expiry of the date of potency;
(i) prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing in bottles, packages,
and other containers of drugs or cosmetics, including the use of packing material
which comes into direct contact with the drugs and prohibit the sale, stocking or
exhibition for sale, or distribution of drugs or cosmetics packed in contravention of
such conditions;
* * * * *
(k) prescribe the maximum proportion of any poisonous substance which may
be added to or contained in any drug, prohibit the manufacture, sale or stocking or
exhibition for sale, or distribution of any drug in which that proportion is exceeded,
and specify substances which shall be deemed to be poisonous for the purposes of
this Chapter and the rules made thereunder.
* * * * *
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
33P. The Central Government may give such directions to any State Government as
may appear to the Central Government to be necessary for carrying into execution in the
State any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder.
* * * * *
34A. Where an offence under Chapter IV or Chapter IV A has been committed by any
department of Government, such authority as is specified by the Central Government to be in
charge of manufacture, sale or distribution of drugs or where no authority is specified, the
head of the department, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any such authority or
person liable to any punishment provided in Chapter IV or Chapter IV A, as the case may be,
if such authority or person proves that the offence was committed without its or his knowledge
or that such authority or person exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
34AA. Any Inspector exercising powers under this Act or the rules made thereunder,
who,—
* * * * *
Power to give
directions.
Offences by
Government
departments.
Penalty for
vexatious
search or
seizure.

61
(c) vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes any drug or cosmetic, or any substance
or article, or any record, register, document or other material object; or
(d) commits, as such Inspector, any other act, to the injury of any person without
having reason to believe that such act is required for the execution of his duty,
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
* * * * *
38. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
* * * * *
Rules to be
laid before
Parliament.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
————
(Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)
GMGIPMRND—2316RS(S3)—26.08.2013.