AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. LVII of 2024 
THE 
PARLIAMENT (PRODUCTIVITY ENHANCEMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for a framework for enhancing the performance of the Parliament by fixing 
minimum number of sittings   for each House of Parliament, extending the hours of a 
sitting, introduction of a short Session of Parliament in addition to the existing  
practice of three Sessions, institution of a mechanism to separately discuss 
opposition business, compensation for the hours unutilized 
due to disruptions and for matters connected 
 therewith and incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—  
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Parliament (Productivity Enhancement) Act,
2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,⸺
(a)“Committee” means the Opposition Business Committee 
constituted under section 7; 
(b)“disruptions” means the act of shouting of slogans or expressing 
violent behaviour or coming to the well of the House which leads to 
substantial delays in transaction of business or adjournment of the 
House; 
(c)“interruption” means interjection by a Member during the speech of 
another Member; 
(d)“Member” means Member of either House of Parliament, as the 
case may be; and 
(e)“opposition business” means the  agenda and debates brought 
forward by the Members of the non-ruling parties. 
5 
10 
CHAPTER II 
SESSIONS OF EACH HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT 15 
Number of 
Sessions in a 
year. 
3. Subject to the provisions contained in article 85 of the Constitution,
there shall be at least four Sessions, including a Short Session, of each
House of   Parliament in a year.
Short Session. 4. (1)  A short session of each House of Parliament in a year shall entail the
following, namely:—
(a) the Session shall be of minimum fifteen days duration;
(b) the Session shall only be devoted to deliberation on at least two
most urgent matters of public importance and no other business
including Government legislative business shall be conducted;
(c) the agenda for the Session may be decided by all political parties
represented in each House of Parliament; 
(d) each political party may submit at least two m atters for intended
discussion in the Short Session to the Business Advisory Committee of
the respective Houses of Parliament in accordance with the rules, as
may be prescribed; and
(e) the Business Advisory Committee of the respective Houses of
Parliament shall decide the final topics for discussion and recommend
allocation of time for such discussions in each House.
20 
25 
30 
CHAPTER III 
SITTINGS OF THE PARLIAMENT 35 
Minimum 
number of 
sittings of each 
House of 
Parliament in a 
year. 
5. Each House of Parliament shall compulsorily sit for not less than one
hundred and twenty days in a year.
Motion for 
extension of a 
sitting. 
6. (1) Except during Private Members’ Business, a Member may move a
motion, without a prior notice, to extend a sitting beyond the scheduled hour
of adjournment for the purpose of considering a specified item of business
subject to the following conditions:
(a) the motion shall relate to the business being considered at that point
of time;
40 

3 
5 
(b) the motion shall be proposed in  the last hour before the  scheduled
hour of adjournment; and
(c) the motion shall not be subject to debate or amendment.
(2) In putting the question on such motion, the Chairman or the Speaker, as
the case may be, shall collect voices both of ‘Ayes’ and ‘Noes’ in such
manner as may be prescribed and the question before the House shall be
determined accordingly.
CHAPTER IV 
OPPOSITION BUSINESS COMMITTEE 
10 
15 
7. (1) The Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, shall, from time to
time, constitute an Opposition Business Committee in each House of 
Parliament consisting of eight Members to be nominated in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) The Committee constituted under sub-section (1) shall hold office until a
new Committee is nominated. 
Constitution of 
the Opposition 
Business 
Committee. 
20 
8. (1) The Chairman of the Committee shall be appointed by the Chairman or
the Speaker, as the case may be, from amongst the members of the 
Committee.   
(2) If the Chairperson of the Committee is for any reason unable to act, the
Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, may appoint another 
Chairperson of the Committee in his or her place.  
(3) If the Chairperson of the Committee is absent from any meeting, the
Committee shall choose another member of the Committee to act as a
Chairperson of the Committee for that meeting.
Chairman of 
the Committee. 
25 9. The quorum of the Committee shall be four. Quorum. 
30 
10. (1) It shall be the function of the Committee to recommend the opposition
business to be taken up in a sitting of the respective House of Parliament, on
Monday during the Session periods other than a Short Session and also the
time that shall   be allocated for such opposition business.
(2) The business recommended by the Committee shall have precedence
over Government business.
Functions of the 
Committee. 
CHAPTER V 
INTERRUPTION OR DISRUPTION OF BUSINESS 
35 
40 
11. A Member must not be interrupted, except by the Chairman or the Speaker
or the Member presiding in the Chair, as the case may be, or another 
Member who is— 
(a) raising a point of order; or
(b) trying to clarify some matter raised by the Member in his or her
speech, but only if the Member speaking is willing to give way and
resume his or her seat and the Member wishing to interrupt is called by
the Chairman or the Speaker or the Member presiding in the Chair, as
the case may be.
Exceptions for 
interruption. 
45 
12. (1) The number of hours lost due to disruptions shall be compensated by
extending the Session of the respective House of Parliament   by as many
hours which were lost on account of adjournment of the sittings  due  to
disruptions.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Chairman or the Speaker, as the
case may be, shall have inherent powers to extend the Session of the
Extension of 
session. 

4 
respective House of Parliament. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Amendment of 
the Rules of 
Procedure. 
13. The Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of States
(Rajya Sabha) and the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the
Lok Sabha may be amended, as deemed necessary, for the implementation
of the provisions of this Act.
5 
Power to make 
rules. 14. The Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

5 
S
TATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
         As the central institution of democracy, the Indian Parliament expresses 
the faith of the people and embodies the will of those in the Government. As 
the representative of India’s diverse population, Parliament has a unique 
responsibility of balancing competing interests and catering to the needs of 
the people through democratic means of deliberations and discussions. The 
Indian Parliament which witnessed its most productive S essions during the 
initial decades suffers from a limited number of sittings, frequent disruptions, 
and high absenteeism in the 21st century. The drastic reduction of Parliament 
productivity has seriously deteriorated the quality of discussion and 
hampered overall efficiency.  
The Parliament is the sole institution that secures the interests of the 
country as a whole. Apart from the regular legislative business, it also 
ensures that the Government is fully accountable to the people through the 
participation of non-ruling parties. However, the current framework does not 
adequately provide the M embers of the opposition parties with means to 
intervene and lead discussions which lead to more delays and disruptions. 
Consequently, both Houses of Parliament are not able to perform the crucial 
function of parliamentary oversight. 
It is im perative  to urgently reform and strengthen the existing system 
which is only possible by extending the number of days the Parliament 
functions. To keep up with the rapidly changing needs of the people, the 
working hours of Parliament should in no situation be reduced due to delays 
or disruptions. Further, a separate mechanism for the opposition parties to put 
forward the most pressing issues of the people could substantially bring down 
the incidences of disorder in both Houses of  Parliament. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above-stated objectives. 
MANOJ KUMAR JHA 

6 
F
INANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for  at least four Sessions including a Short 
Session to be held in Parliament every year instead of the existing practice of 
three Sessions in a year. Thus the Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about R upees One hundred and thirty- five crore per annum is 
likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 

7 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
C
lause 14 empowers the Chairman, Rajya Sabha or the S peaker, Lok 
Sabha, as the case may be, to make rules for carrying out the provisions of 
the Act. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made are of 
procedure and administrative details and as such, it is not practicable to 
provide for them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

R
AJYA SABHA 
______
____ 
A
B
ILL 
to provide for a framework for enhancing the performance of the Parliament by fixing 
minimum number of sittings   for each House of Parliament, extending the hours of a 
sitting, introduction of a short Session of Parliament in addition to the existing  
practice of three Sessions, institution of a mechanism to separately discuss 
opposition business, compensation for the hours unutilized 
due to disruptions and for matters connected 
 therewith and incidental thereto. 
______
____ 
(Shri Manoj Kumar Jha, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS⸺PMB(E)─063─10.02.2025. 