Bill No. LVIII of 2015
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2015
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constituion (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 324 of the Constitution, for clause (6), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(6) The President, or the Governor of a State, shall, when so requested by the Election
Commission, make available to the Election Commission or to a Regional Commissioner such
staff, excluding school teachers, as may be necessary for the discharge of the functions
conferred on the Election Commission by clause (1) ".
Amendment
of article 324.
5
Short title
and
commencement.
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 18TH DECEMBER, 2015

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Althoug holding elections is a sovereign function of the State and is imperative to
upholding the democratic values, the appointment of teachers as election officers has resulted
in absence of teachers from school unfinished courses, poor results and high dropout rates.
Thus, it has contributed to the lowering of the quality of education of government schools.
Article 21A of the Constitution of India provides that the State shall provide free and
compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the
State may, by law, determine. Hence, the right to education is now a fundamental right that is
enforceable by law.
Further, section 27 of the Right of children to free and compulsory education Act, 2009
aims to ensure that the teachers are free from deployment for non-educational purposes, so
as to enable them to spend time on equipping themselves for classroom related activities.
The Supreme Court, in the 2007 judgment of Election Commission of India v. St. Mary's
School and others observed that teachers should not be assigned the duties of revision of
electoral rolls or other works relating to election duties that would adversely affect the
imparting of education by them. Accordingly, teachers were supposed to be assigned election
duties only on Sundays and other holidays.
Moreover, the Ministry of Human Resourse Development has taken note of the above
mentioned judgement and called upon the appropriate government and local bodies to take
note of the guidelines laid down by the Supreme Court while appointing teachers on election
duty.
However, these laws and guidelines have failed to ensure that the Election Commission
does not appoint teachers for election duty during school hours. This has resulted in students
losing several days of class study.
Hence this Bill.
TIRUCHI SIV A
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
****
324. ( 1 ) *****
( 2 ) *****
( 3 ) *****
( 4 ) *****
( 5 ) *****
(6) The President, or the Governor of a State, shall, when so requested by the Election
Commission, make available to the Election Commission or to a Rigional Commissioner such
staff as may be necessary, for the discharge of the functions conferred on the Election
Commission by clause (1).
****
Superintendence,
direction and
control of
elections to
be vested in
an Election
Commission.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri Tiruchi Siva, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3843RS(S3)—18-12-2015.