1
Short title
and
commencement.
THE ANTI-HIJACKING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. LVII of 2010

2
Amendment
of section 3.
2. In section 3 of the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(2) Whoever, either on his own, or in concert with others, attempts to commit
any of the acts referred to in sub-section (1) in relation to any aircraft or abets the
commission of any such act, shall also be deemed to have committed the offence of
hijacking of such aircraft.’’.
3. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘4. Whoever commits the offence of hijacking shall be punished with death or
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.’’.
65 of 1982.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 4.
Punishment
for hijacking.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The hijacking incidents which have taken place in the recent past including the hijacking
of Indian Airlines flight No. IC-814 in 1999  and the hijacking incident in the United States of
America on the 11th September, 2001 have shown that civilian aircrafts were hijacked and
used as missiles for causing mass destruction. Subsequent attempts worldwide to hijack
aircrafts and the threat by the outlawed groups or organisations have necessitated a fresh
and thorough examination of the preparedness of all  concerned to face such exigencies. It
has therefore become necessary to reassess the strengths and weaknesses of the existing
strategies for handling such exigencies.
2. The present law has insufficient penalties to deal with these new situations and is
not deterrent enough to prospective offenders. It is necessary  to make the extant provisions
dealing with hijacking, more comprehensive in order to cover all aspects and kinds of hijacking
by offenders and conspirators and to make the law more stringent by award of death penalty
for such offences.
3. In view of the increasing cases of hijacking and impending threats of hijacking, it is
proposed to amend the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982 to,—
(a) amend section 3 to provide that whoever, either on his own, or in concert with
others, attempts to commit any of the acts referred to in sub-section (1) of said section
3 (which  inter alia include seizure or control of an aircraft in flight by force or threat of
force or by any other form of intimidation, by a person with the intention of committing
the offence of hijacking of such aircraft) shall be deemed to have committed the offence
of hijacking of such aircraft;
(b) amend section 4 to enhance its scope by including death penalty for the
offence of hijacking which at present provides for imprisonment for life and fine.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW DELHI; PRAFUL PATEL
The 1st June, 2010.
3

Hijacking.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ANTI-HIJACKING ACT, 1982
(65 OF 1982)
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
HIJACKING AND CONNECTED OFFENCES
3. (1) * * * * *
(2) Whoever attempts to commit any of the acts referred to in sub-section (1) in
relation to any aircraft, or abets the commission of any such act, shall also be deemed to have
committed the offence of hijacking of such aircraft.
* * * * *
4. Whoever commits the offence of hijacking shall be punished with imprisonment for
life and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * *
Punishment
for hijacking.
4

GMGIPMRND—3978RS (S3)—17.08.2010
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
Bill
further to amend the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982
————
[Shri Praful Patel, Minister of State (Independent Charge) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation]