AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. LVIII of 2025 
THE COMPULSORY SPORTS EDUCATION AND BASIC 
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR SPORTS IN 
SCHOOLS BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to provide for compulsory sports education from primary to senior 
secondary level and provision of requisite basic infrastructure 
for sports in all government and private schools in the  
 country and for matters connected therewith or  
incidental thereto. 
     BE  it  enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of  the Republic of 
 India as follows:— 
  5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Sports Education and Basic
Infrastructure Development for Sports in Schools Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
  Definitions.  2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:— 
(a)  "appropriate Government" means in the case of a St ate, the 
Government of that State and in other cases, the Central Government; 
(b)  "basic infrastructure" means requisite resources s uch as 
playground, sports articles, sports instructor and environment required 
for sports in schools; 
(c) “Fund” means the National Sports Education and 
Infrastructure Development Fund constituted under section 5; 
(d)  “National Policy” means the National Policy on Spo rts 
Education and Infrastructure Development to be form ulated under 
section 3; 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under t his Act; 
and 
(f)  "school" means any Government, Government-aided or  
private school, which imparts education from primar y to senior 
secondary level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
National Policy 
on Sports 
Education and 
Infrastructure 
Development. 
 3. (1) The Central Government shall as soon as may be, aft er the date of 
commencement of this Act, formulate a National Policy on Sports Education 
and Infrastructure Development for providing sports  education and ensuring 
basic infrastructure development for sports in all schools in the country. 
(2) The National Policy referred to in sub-section (1) shall include the 
following  provisions:— 
 (i) promotion and awareness of sports and sports educat ion 
amongst students; 
 (ii)  free and compulsory sports education for all stude nts from 
primary to senior secondary level in all schools across the country; 
 (iii) ensuring the availability of trained sports instruc tors in every 
school; 
 (iv)  adequate financial assistance for basic sports inf rastructure in 
all schools; 
 (v) utilization of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Em ployment 
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) for basic sports infrast ructure 
development in the schools in rural areas; 
 (vi) preparation of an age-appropriate syllabus for spor ts education 
in all schools under expert guidance; 
 (vii) in corporation of sports as a compulsory subject in all schools; 
 (viii) instituting sports scholarships/stipend to students  with 
meritorious performance in sports; 
 (ix) providing academic weightage for achievements in sp orts for 
admissions to institutions of national importance; and 
 (x) reservation or preference to outstanding sports per sons in 
recruitment to posts under the Central and State Government services.  
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
Implementation 
of the National 
Policy by the 
appropriate 
Government. 
 4. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the 
National Policy to be formulated under section 3 in  all schools under its 
territorial jurisdiction. 
 
(2) The appropriate Government shall periodically revie w the progress 
and quality of sports education being imparted in s chools, at such 
intervals and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
 
 
 
45 
 

3 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  5 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 
 5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in th e Official 
Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Natio nal Sports 
Education and Infrastructure Development Fund for c arrying out the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Central and the State Governments shall, by due  appropriation 
made by the Parliament and the State Legislature re spectively, by law 
in this behalf, contribute to the Fund in such rati o as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The Fund shall be utilized exclusively for the purp oses of 
implementation of the provisions of this Act in ali gnment with the 
principles outlined in the National Policy formulated under section 3. 
(4) The Fund shall be administered by such authority of  the appropriate 
Government as may be prescribed.  
 Constitution of 
a National 
Sports 
Education and 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Fund. 
  
15 
 6. If any school fails to comply with the provisions o f this Act, the appropriate 
Government may take such action, including withdraw al of recognition of 
the school, in such manner, as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no recognition shall be so withdrawn without giving an 
opportunity of being heard to such school, in such manner, as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate Government. 
 Effect of non-
compliance. 
 
 20 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 7. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as so on as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days  which may be  comprised in o ne session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry  of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive  sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule  or both the Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule sh all thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as t he case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before the Legisla ture of that State, where it 
consists of one House, or where it consists of two Houses, before both 
Houses of the Legislature . 
 
 Power to make 
rules. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

4 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
  India has one of the largest youth populations in t he world. As this segment 
grows, ensuring their holistic development is imper ative for the nation’s future. 
Sports have long been part of India’s ancient cultu re, offering physical fitness, 
discipline, and community building. Despite India’s  immense potential in sports, 
lack of structured training and infrastructure at t he school level has hindered the 
emergence of world-class talent. 
   This Bill aims to introduce compulsory sports ed ucation, along with basic 
infrastructure, in all Government and private schoo ls across India. By identifying 
and nurturing talent early, India can become a glob al sports powerhouse, while 
promoting physical fitness and healthy lifestyle am ong students. The integration 
of sports into mainstream education also helps in c haracter building and reducing 
social disruptions. 
 Hence, this Bill. 
                                                                                       
DHANANJAY BHIMRAO MAHADIK.  
  
                                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                              
 
 
 
 
 
  

5 
 
                                   FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM  
   Clause 4 of the Bill provides that it shall be dut y of the appropriate 
Government to implement the National Policy on Spor ts Education and 
Infrastructure Development in all schools under its  territorial jurisdiction and also 
to periodically review the progress and quality of sports education in all schools. 
Clause 5 provides for the constitution of a Nationa l Sports Education and 
Infrastructure Development Fund and that the approp riate Government shall 
contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.  
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expe nditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of fifteen 
thousand crore rupees will be involved from the Con solidated Fund of India per 
annum. 
A non-recurring expenditure of one hundred crore ru pees is also likely to be 
involved. 
 
 
  
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
  

6 
 
      MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION  
  Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central and State  Governments, as the 
case may be, to make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Bill.  
As the rules relate to matters of procedural and ad ministrative details only, 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
_____________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for compulsory sports education from primary to senior 
secondary level and provision of requisite basic infrastructure 
for sports in all government and private schools in the  
 country and for matters connected therewith or  
incidental thereto. 
_____________ 
(Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik, M.P.) 
  RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–357–08.12.2025. 