AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. LVIII of 2024 
THE PREVENTION OF CUSTODIAL TORTURE BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide a framework for the prevention of custodial torture inflicted by 
 public servants, punishment and compensation  for custodial crimes, 
 rehabilitation of victims, protection of victims, complainants 
 and  witnesses, and for matters connected therewith 
and incidental thereto. 
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth  Year of the Republic of 
I
ndia as  follows:—  
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Custodial Torture Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,― Definitions. 
(a) "appropriate Government" means in relation to a State, the
Government of that State and in relation to a Union Territory, the Central
Government;

2 
. (b) “public servant”, without prejudice to clause (28) of section 2 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, refers to any person acting in his/her
official capacity under the Central Government or the State Government
or employed in any Government Company as defined in clause (45) of
section 2  of the Companies Act, 2013, or any other institution under the
control of the Central Government or the State Government; and
 
5 
 
 
45 of 2023. 
 
18 of 2013 
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2) The words and expressions used but not defined in this Act shall have
the same meanings respectively as assigned to them in the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023. 
 
10 4
5 of 2023. 
(3) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in any area, shall,
in relation to that area, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law,
if any, in force in that area.
Custodial 
torture. 
3. Whoever, being a public servant or being abetted by a public servant or with
the consent or acquiescence of a public servant, intentionally inflicts
physical or mental suffering on a person detained, held in custody or held in
administrative detention or imprisoned as a result of conviction for an
offence, for the purpose of:-
15 
(a) obtaining information or a confession from him/her or a third
person; or
(b) puni shing for an act he/she or a third person has committed or is
suspected of having committed; or
(c) in timidating  or coercing him/her or a third person for any reason
based on discrimination on the basis of caste, religion, gender, race,
place of residence, language or sexual orientation,
is said to inflict custodial torture. 
         Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any pain, 
hurt or danger caused by any act which is inflicted in accordance with any 
procedure established by law or justified by law. 
Explanation. – For the purpose of this section, “custodial torture”, apart from 
physical and mental suffering, includes, but is not limited to food 
deprivation, submersion of head in water, asphyxiation, use of psychoactive 
drugs, maltreating family members, and inflicting shame upon the victim. 
20 
25 
30 
Burden of 
Proof. 
4. Where custodial torture referred in section 3 is inflicted on a person, the
burden of proof that the torture was not intentionally caused or abetted by, or
was not with the consent or acquiescence, of a public servant, shall shift to
such public servant.
35 
Punishment for 
custodial 
torture. 
5. (1) Where the public servant referred to in section 3 or any person abetted by
or with the consent or acquiescence of such public servant, tortures or
attempts to torture any person, such public servant or person shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three
years but which can extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine which
shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
(2) Where death of any person is caused due to custodial torture referred to
in section 3, the person committing the offence shall be punishable with
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
40 
45 

3 
5 
1
0 
1
5 
20 
6. (1) Any public servant or other person committing custodial torture or
attempting to commit such torture shall also be liable to a fine which shall be
payable as compensation to the affected person.
(2) Notwithstanding the fine imposed under this Act, the appropriate
Government may award such amount of compensation including
interim compensation to the victim of custodial torture as may be
considered necessary for rehabilitation of the victim.
(3) Compensation by the appropriate Government to the victim of
custodial torture for the purpose of his rehabilitation shall be awarded
taking into consideration amongst others, the following factors,
namely:-
(a) the gravity of the physical and mental harm and suffering
inflicted, including death if caused as a result of custodial torture;
(b) lost opportunities, including employment, education and social
benefits;  
( c) material damages and loss of earnings including loss of earning
potential;
(d ) cost required for legal or expert assistance, medicine and
medical services, and psychological and social services; and
( e) the age, family responsibilities and material condition of the
dependents of the victim.
(4) In case of death due to custodial torture, the dependents of the
deceased person shall be entitled to compensation including interim
compensation under this Act, as may be prescribed.
Compensation to 
victims of custodial 
torture. 
25 7. A public servant who abets, consents, acquiesces, or conspires to commit 
custodial torture referred to in section 3 shall be liable to the same 
punishment and compensation referred to in section 5 and section 6. 
Abetment to 
torture. 
30 
35 
8. (1) Whoever, being a public servant or with the consent or acquiescence of a
public servant, sexually abuses a person detained, held in custody or held in 
administrative detention or imprisoned as a result of conviction for an 
offence, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description 
for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) A public servant who consents, acquiesces, or conspires to commit
custodial sexual abuse referred to in sub-section (1), shall be liable to the
same punishment referred to in sub-section (1).
Custodial sexual 
abuse. 
46 of 2023. 
40 
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023, no court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act 
unless the complaint is made within a period of two years from the date on 
which the offence is alleged to have been committed. 
Cognizance of the 
Offence. 
4
5 
10. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the State Government to make
arrangements for the protection of victims of custodial torture and custodial
sexual abuse, complainants and witnesses against all kinds of ill-treatment,
violence, threats of violence, or physical harm or mental trauma, from the
time of submission of the complaint till such time the State Government is
satisfied that such protection is no longer required.
Protection of victims, 
complainants and 
witnesses. 

4 
Effect of the 
provisions. 
11. (1) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being in force.
(2) The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Power to make 
rules. 
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5 
10 
15 

5 
STATEMENT OF OB JECTS AND REASONS 
Article 21 of the Indian Constitution guarantees the right to life and 
personal liberty to each and every person in the country. Custodial violence not 
only takes away the fundamental right to life but also viciously violates human 
dignity. Unfortunately, the existing laws in India do not adequately address 
custodial crimes.  
India is a signatory to the United Nation Convention against Torture and 
other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment since 
14th October 1997.  However, India is yet to ratify the same. Therefore, enabling 
legislation against torture is necessary for the ratification of the Convention. A 
legislation against custodial torture in consonance with the definition of torture 
provided under the Convention and related Indian legal provisions will ensure a 
right against custodial torture for all persons in India.  
The Supreme Court in the case of D.K. Basu v. State of West Bengal (1997) 
held that the expression “life or personal liberty” in Article 21 of the Constitution 
of India includes a guarantee against torture and assault even by the State and its 
functionaries to a person who is taken into custody. The Law Commission of 
India has also recommended ratification of the UN Convention against Torture 
and tougher laws for custodial torture.  
In 2010, th e  Lok Sabha passed the Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010 which 
subsequently lapsed in Rajya Sabha. However, the Select Committee of Rajya 
Sabha in its report on the 2010 Bill flagged certain gaps in the Bill and suggested 
stricter provisions to prevent custodial torture. Taking a cue from the Committee 
Report, the current bill criminalises custodial torture, death and sexual abuse, 
and prescribes punishments for these offences. In addition to this, the Bill also 
provides a legal framework for compensation, rehabilitation, and protection of 
victims of custodial violence.  
 The Bill seeks to achieve the above-stated objectives. 
MANOJ KUMAR JHA.

6 
M
EMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 12 empowers the Central Government, as the case may be, to make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of the Bill.  The matters in respect of which 
the rules and regulations may be made are of procedure and administrative 
details and as such, it is not practicable to provide for them in the proposed Bill 
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

RAJYA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
to provide a framework for the prevention of custodial torture inflicted by 
 public servants, punishment and compensation  for custodial crimes, 
 rehabilitation of victims, protection of victims, complainants 
 and  witnesses, and for matters connected therewith  
and incidental thereto. 
_______ 
(Shri Manoj K
umar Jha, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS⸺PMB(E)─065─10.02.2025 