AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LVI of 2000

THE FISHERMEN (PROTECTION AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2000
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and welfare of fishermen in the country by establishing a
Welfare Fund for their benefit and for extending adequate life insurance cover,
medical care, financial assistance for fishing nets, boats and other
necessities, unemployment allowance during lean periods, free
education including vocational education to their children and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

Beg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty- first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Fishermen (Protection and Welfare) Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “accident” means an accident caused during the course of fishing includ-
ing drowning;

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Long term
national

policy for
fisherman.

Establishment
of Fishermen
Welfare Fund.

Administrators.

Utilisation of
Welfare fund.

Fixation of
the

compensation.

2
(6) “administrator” means an administrator appointed under section 5;

(c) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;

ad (४) “fisherman” means a person who earns his livelihood by catching fish from
the figherits ahd whose only source of income is the money he earns from selling such
fish;

(e) “partial disablement” means such disablement which has reduced the work-

ing capacity of a fisherman temporarily which he was capable of having before the
accident;

() “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(g) “total disablement” includes any disablement which incapacitates a fisher-
man for all work which he was capable of performing prior to the accident;

(h) “welfare Fund” means the Fishermen Welfare Fund established under

Section 4.

3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year from the
commencement of this Act, formulate, in consultation with the Governments of the States
having substantial population of fishermen, a long term national policy for the welfare of
traditional fishermen and their families and protect their fishing rights against the onslaught
of big fishing companies including the multinationals.

4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a Fisermen Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act.

(2) The initial corpus fund of the welfare Fund shall be five hundred crore rupees
of which four hundred crore rupees shall be provided by the Central Government
after due appropriation made by Parliament in this behalf and one hundred crore
rupees shall be provided by the State Governments in proportion to their fishermen
population relevant for the purposes of this Act;

(3) After the establishment of the Welfare Fund, moneys to the Fund shall be
provided by the Central and State Governments in such proportion as may be agreed
to from year to year and moneys received by way of donations from persons or body
corporates shall also form the corpus fund of the Welfare Fund.

5. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
such number of Administrators as it may deem necessary, who shall entertain the claims for
payment of compensation and other facilities under this Act.

6. The Welfare Fund established under section 4 shall be utilised for;

(a) adequate life insurance cover to the fishermen and their families;
(b) free medical care to the fishermen and their family members;

(0 financial assistance to the fishermen for the purchase or repair of fishing
nets, boats and other necessary equipments for fishing;

(d) financial assistance during illness and financial crisis during lean periods;

(e) free education including technical and vocational education to the children
of fishermen;

(f) financial assistance for marriage in the family of fishermen.

7. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the amount of compensation payable to a
fisherman sustaining injury resulting in his death or total or partial disablement or in case of
his drowning or sweeping away by the water currents or in his disappearance ina storm or
cyclone, shall be such as may be specified by the Central Government from time to time by
notification in the Official Gazette.

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45


10

15

20

3

8. In case of death of a fisherman the compensation so fixed under section 7 shall be
paid to the spouse of the deceased or to his legal heir or to the children, as the case may be,
and in case the deceased being unmarried the compensation shall be paid to his parent or
parents, as the case may be.

9. Every claimant for payment of compensation under this Act shall apply to the
Administrator in prescribed format giving such details as may be prescribed.

10. Every claim for compensation under this Act shall be finalised by the Administra-
tor and payment made within thirty days of filing of the claim.

11. The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of educational insti-
tutions including vocational training institutions and health care centres in and around the
areas inhibited by fishermen.

12. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide adequate and hygenic
marketing facilities to the fishermen for their catch.

13. The appropriate Government shall protect the fishing rights of the traditional
fishermen by preventing national companies and Multinational Companies from fishing
in the fisheries within the jurisdiction of traditional fishermen as may be determined by the
Central Government from time to time.

14. The Central Government, through the Coast Guard and Navy, shall prevent the
trespassing by fishermen of other Countries into the fisheries in Indian Waters.

15. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

‘Compensation
in case of
death.

Form of
claim.

Finalisation
of claim.

Appropriate
Government
to provide
health and
educational
facilities.
Marketing
facilities.

Protection
from body
corporates
and = multi-
nationals.
Central
Government
to prevent
faerie by

fishermen.

Power to
make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

There are millions of fishermen and their families spread over Southern, Eastern and
‘Western parts of the Country. Their main occupation and means of livelihood is catching fish
and selling it in the market and they are doing this for generations. In Andhra Pradesh alone
there are lakhs of such families who survive on fishing. However, the fisherman and their
families live in abject poverty nearly hand to mouth whereas the middleman, wholesalers
and retail traders of fish etc. flourish at their cost as the sea food is becoming popular not
only in the country but worldwide. Sea products are very much in demand but the status of
fishermen has remained the same. Many of the fishermen are carried away by water currents
particularly during storms and cyclones and they lose their lives. Similarly they get drowned
during fishing or receive injuries leading to partial or total disablement. But there is nobody
to look after them except their hapless poor families. In fact the disablement or death of a
fisherman ruins his family who remain at the mercy of fate alone.

Since the poor fishermen are a part and parcel of our society and ours being a welfare
state it is necessary that the fishermen too are provided with adequate insurance against
accident, health care, financial assistance in case of need, educational facilities for their
wards etc. They are also to be protected from the onslaught of big companies and multina-
tionals. Sometimes fishermen from neighbouring countries tresspass into our water and
carry the catch which need to be stopped. In fact the nation has to give maximum security
and facilities to the fishermen of the country.

Hence this Bill.

DR. DASARI NARAYANA RAO


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of fishermen welfare fund. Clause
5 provides for the appointment of Administrators, clause J1 provides that appropriate
Government shall provide health and educational facilities to fishermen. The Bill, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
two hundred crore rupees may involve as recurring expenditure every year.

A non recurring expenditure of about ten crore rupees may also involve.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 15 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purpose of the Bill. The rules will related to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the protection and welfare of fishermen in the country by establishing a
Welfare Fund for their benefit and for extending adequate life insurance cover, medical
care, financial assistance for fishing nets, 0055 and other necessities, unemployment
allowance during lean period, free education including vocational education to their
children and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

(Dr. Dasari Narayana Rao, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4517RS—7.11.2000