Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In article 145 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause (1), after sub-clause (a), the following sub-clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(aa) rules as to the fixation of time limit for oral arguments in various
categories of cases coming before it for oral arguments keeping in view the
nature and facts of the cases;”
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH AUGUST, 2006
Amendment of
article 145.
Bill No. LVIII of 2006
5
10

2
SERVER 4 \ BILL 2004 \ RS \ 2586RS
Amendment
of article 227.
“(aaa) rules providing for written arguments to supplement the oral arguments,
as and when desired, in various categories of cases coming before it for oral arguments
keeping in view the nature and facts of the cases.’’
(ii) after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The time-limit fixed by the Supreme Court by rules for oral arguments shall
not be extended except in exceptional circumstance for reasons to be recorded in
writing by the Chief Justice of India.”
3. In article 227 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause ( 2), after sub-clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(bb) fix the time limit for oral arguments in various categories of cases coming
before it and in various tribunals/district courts under its jurisdiction for oral arguments
keeping in view the nature and facts of the cases;”
“(bbb) permit written arguments to supplement the oral arguments in various
categories of cases coming before it and in various tribunals/district courts under its
jurisdiction for oral arguments keeping in view the nature and facts of the cases as and
when desired.”
(ii) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2A) The time-limit fixed by the High Court for oral arguments shall not be
extended except in exceptional circumstance for reasons to be recorded in writing by
the Chief Justice of High Court.”
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There is a popular saying in our country that “God please save us from the affairs of
court, hospital and police’’. Why the people are afraid of with the affairs of the courts when
the judiciary of our country is recognized and respected throughout the world for its
independence and effectiveness? No other judicial system in the world is as independent as
is ours. Along with this well respected judiciary, there are a few facts which needs to be
looked at, i.e., around forty thousand cases are pending in the Supreme Court, more than
forty lakh cases are pending in twenty-one High Courts and over 2.5 crore cases are pending
in subordinate courts. Although there are many reasons of this pendency but one of the
foremost reasons is the unlimited and unending oral arguments in the courts. No doubt, the
oral arguments are important aspect of legal system the world over but in our country, it has
assumed alarming proportions. Many a time, these arguments are irrelevant and  unnecessary.
Generally, the tool of oral arguments is used to buy time or rather waste the time of the
otherwise overburdened courts. Lawyers go on quoting various judgments during oral
arguments that may not be relevant to the given case, which ultimately leads to the harassment
of the other party in view of the prolong hearing. At times, the judges can object to lengthy
and irrelevant oral arguments but generally judges do not object to such arguments due to
lack of time limit for a particular case.
There has to be a time limit on oral arguments in each case which can be fixed by the
courts depending upon the nature and facts of the case. In many countries, there are
provisions for limiting the oral arguments in court cases.
The importance of the issue was considered  in our draft Constitution, and a provision
was proposed for time limit on oral arguments, but somehow that  didn't find its place in the
Constitution. The need to curtail the argument time has been expressed time and again. If a
time limit is fixed by courts it will save a lot of time of courts and will provide an expeditious
and inexpensive justice to the people at large.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
KALRAJ  MISHRA
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kalraj Mishra, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2586RS(S4)—25-08-2006.