AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. [शा of 2004

THE RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
A

BILL

Further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India 85
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2004. Short title and

ses ‘commencement.
(2) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
5 inthe Official Gazette, appoint.

24 of 1989. 2. In section 2 of the Railways Act, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),— Amendment
of section 2.
(a) after clause (7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) “Authority” means the Rail Land Development Authority constituted
under section 4A.’; |
1०

(6) after clause (32), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(324) “railway land” means any railway land other than falling under
railway track;’.

)33333.833५७४७५५३५५७५७३७५७५३५५७५५५५५७३५०)७५०५०५३+०३५५५५५५३५७५५.५४५५५५५३५५७+३५७७५३७५५५००»-५+-+-



Insertion of
new Chapter
MA.

Establishment
of Railway
Land
Development
Authority.

Composition
of Authority.

Terms and
conditions of
appointment of
Vice-Chairman
and other
Members.

Functions of
Authority,

Powers of
Authority to
enter into
agreements
and execute
contracts.

Procedure of
transaction of
business of
Authority.

2

3. After Chapter II of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
“CHAPTER ILA
Rait Lanp DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY

4A. The Central Government may, by notification, establish an authoritytobe 5
called the Rail Land Development ‘Authority to exercise the powers and discharge the
functions conferred on it by or under this Act.

4B. (1) The Authority shall consist ofa Chairman, Vice-Chairman and not more
than four members including experts from out side the railway administration.

(2) The Member Engineering, Railway Board shall be the Chairman, ex officioof Jo
the Authority,

(3) The Vice-Chairman and the other members shall be appointed by the Central
Government and shall be chosen from amongst persons who are or have been working
in the Civil Engineering, Finance and Traffic disciplines of a railway administration and
having adequate experience in the relevant discipline as the Central Government may (5
consider necessary,

4९. The terms and conditions of appointment of the Vice-Chairman and the
other Members of, the Authority, other than the Chairman, and the manner of filling
casual vacancies among them shall be such as may be prescribed.

4D. (/) The Authority shall discharge such functions and exercise such powers 20
of the Central Government or a railway administration in relation to the development of
railway land and as are specifically assigned to it by the Central Government.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
the Central Government may assign to the Authority all or: any of the following functions,
namely:— 2

(i) to prepare scheme or schemes for use of railway land in conformity with
the provisions of this Act;

(ii) to develop railway land for commercial use as may be entrusted by the
Central Government or a railway administration for the Purpose of generating
Tevenue by non-tariff measures; go

(iii) to develop and provide consultancy, construction or management
services and undertake operation in India in relation to the development of rail
land and property;

(iv) to carry out any other work or function as may be entrusted to it by
the Central Government, or a railway administration, by order in writing. Is

4E. Subject to such directions as may be given to it by the Central Government,
the Authority shall be empowered to enter into agreements on behalf of the Central
Government and execute contracts, हु

47. The Authority shall have power to regulate, by means of regulations made by
it, its own procedure (including quorum at its meetings) and the conduct ofall business ५०
to be transacted by it, the constitution of ‘Committees and Sub-Committees of | Members
and the delegation to them any of the powers (excluding the power to make regulations
under this Chapter) and to perform duties of the Authority,



3 3

a 4G. (1) For the purpose of enabling it efficiently to discharge its functions Appointment

f under this Act, the Central Government shall provide the Authority with such officers of officers
and other employees, and the Authority shall, subject to the rules as may be made by Sages of

the Central Government in this behalf, appoint, whether on deputation or otherwise, Authority.

s such number of officers and other employees as it may deem necessary.

(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
ofservice of; the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the Authority,
shall be such as may be prescribed.

i 4H. The salaries and allowances payable to the Vice-Chairman and other _ Salaries,

a lo Members of the Authority and the administrative expenses including the salaries, *!/owances,
‘i a) etc., to be

हि हि allowances and pensions payable to the officers and other employees of the Authority defrayed out

a shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India. of

Consolidated
Fund of India.
4-1. (1) The Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, Power of
make regulations, consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder for carrying Authority to

A is Cl make
out the provisions of this Chapter. regulations.

(2) Every regulation made by the Authority under this Chapter shall be laid, 85
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
4 modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be
‘ made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be ofno

effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
FE be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.”.

E 2s 4. In section 11 of the principal Act, after clause (d), the following clause shall be Amendment

4 inserted, namely:— of section 11.

“(da) developing any railway land for commercial use;”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

As per the Ninth Plan document, the Railways can supplement their financial resources
through non-tariff measures like commercial utilisation of land and the air space above such
land. The Railways within the existing set up took up the commercial utilisation of land but
the desired success could not be achieved, Further, development of property being a
specialized field requires expertise, marketing acumen, innovative strategies and full time
attention. It is, therefore, considered necessary to set up a separate authority to be called
the Rail Land Development Authority under the Railways Act, 1989 which could exclusively
deal with commercial development of railway land and the air space above such land. The
Rail Land Development Authority is proposed to be set up by suitably amending the Railways
Act, 1989, by inserting a new Chapter IIA therein. The Authority shall, inter alia,

(a) prepare scheme or schemes for use of railway land in conformity with the
provisions of the Act;

(b) develop railway land for commercial use as may be entrusted to it by the
Central Government or a railway administration for the purpose of generating revenue
by non-tariff measures;

(c) develop and provide consultancy, constructions and management services

and undertake operations in India in relation to development of land and property;
and

(d) undertake beautification of station surroundings and provide modern
amenities to rail users, etc. through the commercial development route.

It is also proposed to amend séction 11 of the Railways Act, 1989 so as to include
commercial utilisation of railway land as part of the work of the Railways.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New De.u; LALU PRASAD.
The16th December, 2004.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter IIA in the Railways Act, 1989. The said
chapter seeks to incorporate new sections 4A to 4-1 in the Act. The proposed new section 4A
provides for the establishment of a authority to be called the Rail Land Development Authority.
The Authority shall consist of a Chairman, Vice-chairman and not more than four members
including an expert from outside the Railway Board. The Member Engineering Railway Board
shall be the Chairman, ex-officio of the Authority. The terms and conditions of appointment
of the Vice-chairman and other members shall be determined by rules.

Proposed new section 4G provides that the Central Government shall provide the
Authority with officers and other employees and the salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of, such officers and other employees of the
Authority shall be determined by rules. .

Proposed new section 4G provides that the salaries and allowances payable to the
Vice-chairman and other members of the Authority and the administrative expenses including
the salary and allowances payable to the officers and other employees of the Authority
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.

2. The recurring expenditure is estimated to be Rs. 75 lakhs per annum approximately.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for insertion

ofa new Chapter IIA (containing sections 4A.
to 4-1) relating to Railway Land Development.

‘Authority in the Railways Act, 1989,

Proposed new section 4C empowers the Central Govern:
down the terms and conditions of appointment of t

of the Authority, other than the Chairman,
them.

iment to make rules for laying
16 Vice-Chairman and the other members
and the manner of. filling casual vacancies among

Sub-section (1) of Proposed new section 4G empowers the Central Government to
make rules regulating the appointment of officers and other employees of the Railway Land
Development Authority. Sub-section (2) of the said section 4G empowers the Central
Government to make rules laying down the salaries and allowances payable to and the other
terms and conditions of service of the officers and other: employees appointed by the Authority.

Proposed section 4-1 empowers the Authority to make, with the Previous approval of
the Central Government, Tegulations, consistent with the Provisions of the Act and the rules
made thereunder for carrying out the provisions of new Chapter IIA.

The rules are required to be laid before Parliament und
Act, 1989. The regulations are required to be laid before Parli
Proposed section 4-I,

ler section 199 of the Railways
iament under sub-section (2) of

"legislative power is, therefore, ofa normal character.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE Ratways AcT 1989
(24 oF 1989)

* * * * *

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

* * * * *
CHAPTERIV
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF WORKS

11. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
but subject to the provisions of this Act and the provisions of any law for the acquisition of
land for a public purpose or for companies, and subject also, in the case of a non-Government
railway, to the provisions of any contract between the non-Government railway and the
Central Government, a railway administration may, for the purposes of constructing or
maintaining a railway—

* * - * * *

a

Definitions.

Power of
railway
administrations
to execute all
necessary
works.



RAJYA SABHA

BILL

further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.

(Shri Lalu Prasad, Minister of Railways)

MGIPMRND—3699RS(S-1)—17.12.2004.