AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. LX of 2024 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
  BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:—  
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Insertion of new 
article 21B. 
Right to free 
legal aid. 
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be
inserted, namely:—
“21-B.  The State shall ensure free legal aid to all citizens, who
are in need of it, in such manner as the State may, by law, determine,
and ensure that no citizen is denied the right by reason of economic,
social, religious, educational or other grounds.”
5 
Substitution of 
article 39A. 
3. In Part IV of the Constitution, for article 39A, the following new article
shall be substituted, namely:—
Equal justice to 
all citizens. 
“39-A.  The State shall secure that the operation of the legal system
promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity and ensure that
opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen.”
10 

3 
   STATEMENT OF O BJECTS AND REASONS 
The guarantee to free legal aid is a very important factor for ensuring equality 
and liberty of an individual.  As a developing nation, it is important that all individuals 
in the nation get equal access to justice and no citizen is discriminated against on the 
basis of economic, social, religious, educational or other grounds such as physical 
disabilities.  
Article 21 of the Constitution secures the Right to Life and Personal Liberty as 
a Fundamental Right.  Several  Court Judgements have emphasized that free legal 
services are an inalienable element of reasonable, fair and just procedure and that the 
right to free legal services is implicit in Article 21.  Article  39-A as a Directive 
Principle of State Policy under Part IV of the Constitution provides that the State shall 
secure equal justice and free legal aid to all citizens.  This has led courts to hold that 
the State is constitutionally bound to provide legal aid not only at the stage of trial but 
also when they are first produced before the Magistrate or remanded at any time.  
However, it is f elt that despite these constitutional provisions, we will be able to 
ensure and secure equal justice without denial of any opportunity to all citizens of the 
country irrespective of their background and standing in society, only by making the 
right to free legal aid, an enforceable and justiciable right. A monitored and ensured 
mechanism by the State can ensure the achievement of the purpose. 
The B ill,  therefore, proposes to make the right to free legal aid as a 
fundamental right for every citizen of the country.  The proposed legislation, hence, 
is required to ensure equality before law and equal justice to all which is essential for 
a fruitful life.  
   The Bill seeks to achieve this objective. 
V. SIVADASAN

4 
FINANCIAL M EMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making the right to free legal aid a fundamental 
right. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure of recurring nature 
from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this juncture, it is difficult to 
estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved.  No non-recurring expenditure 
is likely to be involved. 

5 
ANNEXURE 
   EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
 * *         * *      *   
 39A. The State shall secure that the operation of the legal system 
promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular, 
provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other 
way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to 
any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities. 
 * *   *  *    * 
Equal justice 
and free legal 
aid. 

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
B
ILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS–PMB(E)—051–10.02.2025. 