THE RIGHT TO PRIV ACY BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of right to privacy of persons including those who are in
public life so as to protect them from being blackmailed or harassed or their image
and reputation being tarnished in order to spoil their public life and for the prevention
of misuse of digital technology for such purposes and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Privacy Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2011
Bill No. LX of 2010

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "digital recording" means recording made by a process of converting sound
into a series of electrical pulses and to create text, data, picture which may be still or
moving or any other audio visual representation of signal or any combination thereof
which is capable of being created, processed, stored, retrieved or communicated
electronically and which may be created, observed, delivered, broadcasted or accessed
in any manner; and
(b) "persons in public life" includes the representatives of the people in Parliament,
State Legislatures, local self Government bodies and office bearers of recognised
political parties.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
every person, including persons in public life shall have the right to privacy which shall be
exclusive, unhindered and there shall be no unwarranted infringement thereof by any other
person, agency, media or any one:
Provided that sub-section (1) of section 3 shall not apply in cases of corruption and
misuse of official position by person in public life.
4. No person shall use a cellular phone with an in built camera, if it does not produce a
sound of at least sixty-five decibles and flash a light when used to take a picture of any object
or person, as the case may be.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
person shall make digital recording or take photographs or make videography in any manner
whatsoever of,—
(a) any part or whole of a human body which is unclothed or partially clothed
without the consent of the person concerned; or
(b) any part or whole of a human body at any public place without the consent
of the person concerned; and
(c) the personal and intimate relationship of any couple in a home, hotel, resort
or any place within the four walls by hidden digital other cameras and such other
instruments.
with the intent of blackmail or of making commercial gains from it or otherwise.
6. Whoever contravenes or causes to be contravened the provisions of,—
(i) section 3 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than four years but may extend to seven years and also with a fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees;
(ii) section 4 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees;
(iii) section 5 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years and also a fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 every
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Right to
privacy.
Cellular phone
with in built
camera should
produce sound
and to have
flash light.
No person to
make digital
recording, etc.
without
consent.
Penalty.
Offence to be
cognizable.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Every person has the right to privacy exclusively meant for him to enjoy unless it does
not violate any provisions of law for the time being in force. But these days this right has
become the subject matter of hot debate throughout the country particularly after the recent
Multi-Media Messaging Service (MMS) episodes which have thrown up some important
questions about the lacunae in our existing laws and threats of digital technology.
Comercialization of sex and easy availability of internet has opened new vistas in pornography.
Advancement of technology has made photography by cell phone cameras and videography
by small equipment which could be hidden easily which are now employed with impunity to
secretly capture private images and intimate moments of women or couples or friends and,
thereafter, used to embarrass or blackmail the suspecting victims. It is the duty of the State to
prevent the misuse of new advancements in technology and protect the right of privacy of
its citizens by providing deterrent punishment for the violaters.
Hence, this Bill.
RAJEEV CHANDRASEKHAR
3

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of the Bill. It will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of legislative
power is of normal character.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of right to privacy of persons including those who are in
public life so as to protect them from being blackmailed or harassed or their image
and reputation being tarnished in order to spoil their public life and for the
prevention of misuse of digital technology for such purposes and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—6706RS(S3)—28.02.2011.