AS INTRODUCED IN THE RasyA SABHA

ill No. LX of 2000

THE FARMERS AFFECTED BY NATURAL CALAMITIES (ADEQUATE
COMPENSATION AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL, 2000

A

BILL

to provide for the protection of distressed farmers affected by natural calamities such as
drought, floods, hailstorm, cyclones etc. who lose crops, livestock, dwelling units,
household items including food items etc. due to such calamity by providing adequate
compensation by the state and to prevent their exploitation by money lenders and
unscrupulous elements and for making it mandatory for the public, private, co-
operative sector Banks and other financial institutions to provide easy loan to such
distressed farmers so as to save them from hunger and taking the extreme step of
committing suicide and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (7) This Act may be called the farmers affected by Natural Calamities (Adequate Short title,

Compensation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2000. Extent and
Commence-
(2) It extends to the whole of India. ment.

(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this act, unless the context otherwise requires:— Definitions.

(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a state the Government of
that state and in other cases the central Government;


Establishment
of a Natural

Appointment
of Commis-
sioners.

Compensation
to farmers
affected by
Natural
‘Calamities.

Fixation of
Compensa-
tion.

Special Assist-
ance package.

Loans to farm-
ers affected by
natural calami-
ties by banks
and financial
institutions.

2
(b) “Commissioner means a Commissioner appointed under section 4;

(c) "fund" means Farmers Natural Calamity Assistance Fund established under
section 3;

(4) “natural Calamity" includes droughts, floods, earthquakes, cyclones
hailstorms etc.; as may be notified in a manner to be provided in Rules framed under
the Act.

(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, establish the Farmers
Natural Calamity Assistance Fund for the purposes of this Act.

(2) The initial amount of the fund established under Sub-section (/) shall be one
thousand crore rupees of which eight hundred crore rupees shall be provided by the
Central Government, after due appropriation made by parliament in this behalf and
two hundred crore rupees shall be provided by the State Governments in proposition
to their agricultural population relevant for the purposes of this Act.

(3) After the initial stage of the Fund moneys shall be provided to the fund by the
Central and State Governments in such proportion and in such manner as may be
prescribed from time to time.

(4) The Fund shall also comprise moneys received from the general public, body
corporate and financial institution, domestic as well as foreign, as donations, gifts etc.

4. The Appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a
Commissioner for every district affected by natural calamity of the country, who shall entertain
the claims for payment of compensation from the affected farmers under this Act.

5. Every farmer who is affected by natural calamity by way of losing his crop, livestock,
movable or immovable property shall be entitled to and receive adequate compensation out
of the fund in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

6. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the amount of compensation payable to a
farmer affected by natural calamity shall be such as may be specified by the Central
Government from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette:

Provided that while specifying the compensation the Central Government shall
take into account the total loss suffered by a farmer due to the natural calamity.

7. (1) Every Claimant for payment of compensation under this Act shall apply to the
commissioner appointed under Section 4 in prescribed form giving such relevant information
as may be prescribed.

(2) Every claim for compensation under this Act shall be finalised and the payment
made within thirty days of filing of the claim.

8. The appropriate Government shall formulate special assistance package for the
children, infirm persons and old citizens vulnerable to the aftermath of natural calamity and
implement it in such manner as may be prescribed.

9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law and for the time being in
force, it shall be obligatory for all the Public, Private and Cooperative sector Banks and
Financial Institutions to provide easy loans with nominal or without interest to the farmers
affected by natural calamity to withstand its severity.

(2) The Banks and Financial Institutions shall also not recover the earlier loan given
to the farmer affected by natural calamity for at least a year after the calamity and the farmer
shall not be denied fresh loan on this ground.

20

25

30

35

45


3

10. Itshall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide quality seeds, manure
fertilizers etc. to every farmers who lost his crop due to natural calamity in such manner as
may be prescribed,

11, The State Governments shall cooperate in implementing the provision of this Act
and the Central Government shall place necessary funds at the disposal of the State
Government for the purpose.

12. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.

13. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.

Duty of Gov-
‘emment to pro-
vide seeds etc.

Co-operation
of the State
Governments.

Savings.

Power to Make
Rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Ours is a very vast Country and natural Calamities do occur in one part or the other
very frequently. For instance Andhra Pradesh sometimes is devastated by Cyclones and this
time floods have overtaken the State. Drought has become a perpetual phenomena in many
parts of the State and last year as many as 22 districts were reeling under droyght. Similarly
Assam is flooded every year, Coastal areas in the Country face Cyclones, Orissa is devastated
by cyclones as well as severe drought every year. Half of Bihar is flooded and other half is
drought prone, Madhya Pradesh Chhathisgarh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, parts of Maharashtra,
Uttar Pradesh face the wrath of drought consistently. Many parts face earthquake, Hailstorm,
cloudbursts and other natural calamities. However the farming community mostly bear the
brunt of such natural calamities as more than 70 percent of our population lives in villages
and depends on agriculture. The crop is damaged by almost all the natural calamities. With
this the hopes of the farmer and his family are dashed. Thereafter he is hounded by the
moneylenders and others to get back their money which the farmer had taken as loan with
the hope that he will repay it after reaping the harvest. Even Banks do not spare the poor
farmer. Many a times apart from losing the crop the farmer also loses his livestock, household
items and even his dwelling unit and thus becomes homeless. Many unfortunate even lose
their lives. Unable to face the harsh realities of life many of them take the extreme step of
committing suicide which is a blot on our democracy. Such suicides have taken place many
a times in Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh etc. and even in Punjab.

Ours is a welfare State and it is the duty of the State to protect the interests of our
farmers who grow food for the entire nation and come to their rescue at times of distress.
The Government should give them adequate compensation so as to enable them to face the
effects of calamity. Banks and financial institutions should come forward to give them soft
loans so that they are not exploited by moneylenders. The farmers must feel that the nation
is behind them.

Hence this Bill.

DR. DASARI NARAYANA RAO


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 provides for the establishment of Farmers Natural Calamity Assistance Fund.
Clause 4 provides for the appointment of Commisioners. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five
hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.

A sum of rupees Ten Crores may also involve as non recurring expenditure,


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the protection of distressed farmers affected by natural calamities such as
drought, floods, hailstorm, cyclones etc. who lose crops, livestock, dwelling units,
household items including food items etc. due to such calamity by providing
adequate compensation by the state and to prevent their exploitation by money
lenders and unscrupulous elements and for making it mandatory for the public,
private, co-operative sector Banks and other financial institutions to provide easy
loan to such distressed farmers so as to save them from hunger and taking the
extreme step of committing suicide and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.

(Dr. Dasari Narayana Rao, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4519RS—8.11.2000.