1
 THE ADVOCATES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
 further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. In section 2 of  the  Advocates Act, 1961, (hereinafter referred to as the pricipal Act)
in sub-section (1):—
(i) for clause (a) the following clause, shall be substituted, namely:—
"(a) "advocate" means and advocate entered in any roll under the
provisions of this Act and includes an advocate carrying on practice in law with
Short title and
Commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
Bill No. LX of  2019
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
25 of 1961.
10

2
a law firm, by whatever name called, and a foreign lawyer registered under any
law in a country outside India and recognised by the Bar Council of India in such
manner as may be prescribed—
(aa) "practicing advocate" means an advocate with twelve or more
recorded hearings and name in five or more vakalatnamas in a year;
(ab) "young practicing advocate" means an advocate under the age
of thirty years who is practicing for a period of less than three years from
the date of registration;".
(ii) after clause (n), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
(o) "Advocates' Social Security Fund" means the fund maintained by the
Central Government under section 44C to be specifically used for the purposes
mentioned in Section 44A."
3. After section 44 of the principle Act, the following new sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"CHAPTER - V A
S
OCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS
44A. (1) The Cental Government shall, in consultation with the Bar Council of India,
formulate and notify, from time to time, suitable welfare schemes for practicing lawyers on
matters relating to—
(a) life and disability cover;
(b) health and maternity benefits;
(c) stipend for young practicing lawyers;
(d) group health insurance cover;
(e) compensation in case of death; and
(f) any other benefits as may be determined by the Central Government.
(2) The State Government may, in consultation with the State Bar Council formulate
and notify, from time to time, suitable welfare schemes for practicing advocates, including
schemes relating to—
(a) housing; and
(b) capacity building of practicing lawyers.
44B. (1) The scheme notified by the Central Government in consultation with the Bar
Council of India may be—
(i) wholly funded by the Central Government; or
(ii) partly funded by the Central Government and partly funded through
contributions collected from the beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers as may
be prescribed in the scheme by the Central Government:
Provided that the contribution from the beneficiaries under clause (ii)  shall not
exceed 30 per cent of the total cost of the scheme; or
(iii) partly funded by the Central Government and partly funded through the
Advocates' Social Security Fund:
Provided that any expenditure made from the Advocates' Social Security Fund towards
any scheme shall be made only after due consultation with the Bar Council of India.
(2) Every scheme notified by the Central Government in cunsultation with the Bar
Council of India shall provide for all matters that are necessary for the efficient implementation
of the scheme including but not limited to,—
5
Insertion of
new Sections
44A, 44B,
44C, 44D and
44E.
10
Welfare
Schemes.
Fund of
Schemes.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(i) scope of the scheme;
(ii) beneficiaries of the scheme;
(iii) resources of the scheme; and
(iv) any other relevant matter.".
44C. (1) The Central Government shall consitute a fund to be called the "Advocates'
Social Security Fund" which shall be managed by the Central Government in consultation
with the Bar Council of India.
(2) There shall be credited to the fund, a compulsory contribution called the social
security contribution from practicing advocates with income after tax exceeding
rupees one crore,  which shall be at least one per cent of the net income after tax or such
higher percentage as may be prescribed by the Central Government from time to time.
(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund—
(a) any voluntary donation or contribution made to the Fund by the Bar Council
of India, any State Bar Association, any State Advocates' Association or other
association or institution, or any advocate or other person;
(b) any grants which may be made by the Central Government or a State
Government to the Fund;
(c) all sums collected by way of sale of welfare stamps under section 46B.
44D. (1) The Central Government, may, in consultation of the Bar Council of India, by
notification, make rules for carrying out of the provisions sections 44A, 44B and 44C.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and the manner in which the annual statement of accounts and
annual report shall be prepared;
(b) the amount of social security contribution as a percentage of the net income
after tax of advocates with income more than rupees one crore; and
(c) the value and design of welfare stamps to be printed and distributed under
section 46B.
44E. (1) The State Government may, in consultation with the State Bar Council, by
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 44A.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may, provide for all or any of the following matters, namely,—
(a) the form and the manner in which the annual statement of accounts and
annual report shall be prepared;
(b) recognising and earmarking the land for group housing schemes for practicing
advocates; and
(c) entering into Memorandum of Understanding with institutions and
organisations for capacity building of practicing advocates.
4. After section 46A of the principle Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"46B. (1) The Central Government shall cause the printing of welfare stamps to
be affixed on every Vakalatnama, Power of Attorney, Agreements for litigation,
Affidavits, documents relating to consultation and other similar instruments, called by
Advocates
Social
Security Fund.
Power to
make rules.
Power of
State
Government
to make rules.
Insertion of
new section
46B.
Printing of
Welfare
Stamps.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
whatever name, but involving service of advocates (2) the sale proceeds of welfare
stamps shall be credited to the Advacates Social Security fund.
(2) The instruments referred at sub-section ( 1) shall be treated as deficient
unless they are affixed with the welfare stamps.
5. In section 49 of the pricipal Act, in sub-section(1),—
(i) after the words "State Bar Council", wherever they occur, the words "and the
Supreme Court Bar Association" shall be inserted.
(ii) after clause (i), the following clauses shall be inserted namely:—
"(ia) the manner in which the State Bar Council may exercise supervision
and control over Bar Associations except the Supreme Court Bar Association,
Association of law firms and foreign lawyers, situated within its territorial
jurisdiction and the manner in which the directions issued or orders passed by
the State Bar Council may be enforced;
(ib) to carry out welfare schemes and social security measures for
practicing advocates as notified by the Central Government’’.
Amendment
of Section 49.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The first resolve which our Preamble to the Constitution makes is that of justice. It is
not a mere coincidence that it is first in the order. All other resolves are part of or can be
accomplished only if Justice is secured first Justice is the bare minimum and the basis of the
formation of our country as our freedom struggle based upon fight against injustice.
Considering the importance of justice, all aspects related to it must be cared for and
strengthened.
One of the most crucial components of the justice delivery system in India is its human
resource element which is the Advocate. Their role cannot be overstated in the whole process.
They act as a bridge between the aggrieved and the adjudication institution. They also play
an important role in shaping our society, not to forget their role in assisting courts to arrive
at several judgments protecting the environment.
Desipte the importance attached to the profession, these are no concrete measures in
place to ensure their social security. Other limbs in the administration of justice that is the
judges and the Government employees are much ahead in this aspect. The Central Government
till now did not have any specific responsibility towards the lawyers, and as most of the
social security measures such as insurance and banking fell under list I of the seventh
schedule, the need to fix specific responsibility arose.
Hence this Bill.
V .  VIJAYASAI  REDDY
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ADVOCATES ACT, 1961
(25 OF 1961)
* * * * *
2. Definitions.— * * * * *
(a) "advocate" means an advocate entered in any roll under the provisions of
this Act;
* * * * *
49. General power of the Bar Council of India to make rules.—(1) The Bar Council of
India may make rules for discharging its functions under this Act, and, in particular, such
rules may prescribe—
(a) the conditions subject to which an advocate may be entitled to vote at an
election to the State Bar Council including the qualifications or disqualifications of
voters, and the manner in which an electoral roll of voters may be prepared and revised
by a State Bar Council;
* * * * *
2[(i) general principles for guidance of State Bar Councils and the manner in which
directions issued or orders made by the Bar Council of India may be enforced;]
* * * * *
6

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill intends to formulate and notify welfare schemes for the practising
lawyers by inserting a new section 44A to Advocates Act, 1961. Similarly, the clause also
proposes to constitute the Advocates' Social Security Fund to be managed by the Central
Government by inserting a new section 44C to the Act. It has been provided that Central
Government may provide grants for crediting to the fund. Therefore, the Bill, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not possible at this
stage as to the exact amount which is likely to be incurred towards recurring and
non-recurring expenditure for the purpose.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
8

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
  further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961.
————
(Shri V . Vijayasai Reddy, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4334RS(S3)—11-12-2019.