AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA  SABHA
ON THE 28TH JULY, 2006
THE  RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT (ADMINISTRATION)  BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the administration of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat by constituting a
Commission to look after recruitment and conditions of services of the officers and staff
of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat and for matter connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rajya Sabha Secretariat  (Administration) Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Chairman" means Chairman of the Rajya Sabha;
(b) "Commission" means the Rajya Sabha Secretariat commission constituted
under section 3 of this act;
(c) "Deputy Chairman" means the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha;
(d) "House" means the Rajya Sabha;
(e) "Leader of the House" means the Leader of the Rajya Sabha or a member of
the Council of Ministers, who, being a member of  the House is nominated by the
Leader of the House for purposes of this Act;
Bill No. LX  of 2006
Short title
and
commencement.
Definitions.

2
(f) “Leader of the Opposition” means a member of the House who is recognized
so by the Chairman as such or if there is no such leader, the leader of the party in the
Opposition having the largest number of members in the House;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) “Secretary-General” means the Secretary-General of the Rajya Sabha.
3. (1) There shall be constituted a Commission to be known as the Rajya Sabha
Secretariat Commission by the House in such mannner as may be prescribed to perform
the functions conferred on it under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of the following members:—
(i) The Chairman;
(ii) The Deputy Chairman;
(iii) The Leader of the House or his nominee;
(iv) The Leader of the Opposition or his nominee;
(v) Five members of the House to be elected by the House by the system of
proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote.
(vi) The Secretary-General as Member-Secretary.
4. (1) The Chairman shall be the ex-officio Chairman of the Commission.
(2) While the office of the Chairman is vacant, the Deputy Chairman shall function as
the Chairman of the Commission and, if for any reason, the Chairman is unable to act as the
Chairman of the Commission, the Deputy Chairman shall act as the Chairman of the
Commission.
5. (1) The Chairman and the Leader of the House or his nominee shall continue to be
the members of the Commission until immediately before the assumption of the office by the
respective successors of the Chairman and the Leader of the House.
(2) A member of the Commission other than the Leader of the House or his nominee
shall cease to be a member of the Commission if—
(i) he ceases to be a member of the House; or
(ii) another person is nominated or appointed in the post by virtue of which he
becomes the member of the Commission.
6. (1) There shall be a Secretary-General who shall be appointed by the President of
the India on the recommendation of the Commission.
(2) The Secretary-General shall be appointed from amongst the persons who have
distinguished themselves and made their contribution in the service of Parliament in various
capacities in the secretariat for not less than twenty years.
(3) The Secretary-General shall be the head of the secretariat of the Rajya Sabha.
(4) The office of the Secretary-General shall become vacant,
(i) on his resignation in writing addressed to the President;
(ii) on his attaining the age of superannuation as may be fixed by the
Commission;
(iii) on his removal by the President upon an address by the Rajya Sabha in a
like manner as the Judge of the Supreme Court.
7. Except as provided in section 6 with regard to the appointment of the Secretary-
General, the Commission shall appoint all staff in the secretariat and over and above the
functions provided elsewhere in this Act, the functions of the Commission shall be—
Constitute of
Rajya Sabha
Commission.
Chairman of
the Commis-
sion.
Term of
members of
the
Commission.
Appointment
of Secretary-
General.
Vacation of
office by
Secretary-
General.
Function of
Commission.

3
(i) to frame rules regulating the recruitment, appointment, promotion and other
service conditions of the Secretary-General and other officers and staff of the
secretariat;
(ii) to function as appellate authority against the orders of the Chairman of
Secretary-General as the case may be, submitted by the officers and staff of the
secretariat;
(iii) to determine the number of staff of the secretariat, their scales of pay, and
remuneration;
(iv) to ensure that the classification, grading, salaries, allowances, and other
conditions of service, including pension and other benefits of the personnel are kept
in conformity with personnel in other comparable services in the Commonwealth coun-
tries having parliamentary or presidential form of Government and also consistent
with the service requirements of the House;
(v) to prepare an estimate for each financial year of the expenses of the services
of the House and of any other expenses incurred for the service of the House and lay
them before the House;
(vi) to exercise all powers necessary to implement the provisions of clause (1) of
article 98 of the Constitution towards the constitution of a separate, independent and
autonomous Secretariat of the House.
(vii) to give recognition to various staff associations in such a manner as may
be prescribed.
8. The financial matter of the Secretariat shall be dealt with by a Finance Committee
which shall consist of the Chairman, four members of the Rajya Sabha to be elected by the
House in such manner as may be prescribed and two officers of the Secretariat to be
nominated by the Chairman.
9. (1) The Commission may delegate any of its functions to the Chairman or the
Secretary-General.
(2) Anything done by or in relation to a person to whom functions are delegated under
sub-section (1) shall have the same effect as if it has been done by or in relation to the
Commission.
(3) Any delegation made under this section or any amendment or revocation of such
a delegation shall be mentioned in the annual report of the Commission.
(4) Notwithstanding any delegation made under this section, the Commission shall
retain the ultimate responsibility for considering any representation made in relation to
matters affecting the interests in connection with the employment of staff in the service of
the House by staff associations which are recognized by the Commission in respect of such
staff and for the conduct of consultations and negotiations about such matters with those
staff associations.
10. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be invalid on
the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy.
11. The Commission shall, as soon as possible, after the end of each financial year
prepare and present to the House its annual report giving a full account of its activities
during the preceding financial year.
12. All persons employed in the service of the House immediately before the com-
mencement of this Act, shall be treated for all purposes as if their appointment had been
made by the Commission unless the Commission decides otherwise.
Constitution
of Finance
Committee.
Delegation
of functions
by the
Commission.
Act or
proceeding
not to be
invalidate by
vacancies.
Annual
reports of
Commission.
Effect of con-
stitute of
Commission
on present
employees.

4
13. (1) The Commission may make rules to regulate its procedure and conduct of its
business.
(2) The Commission may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to regulate
recruitment and conditions of service of the officers and staff of the secretariat.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be laid
before the House while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be com-
prised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the
session, immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid the House
agrees in making any modification in the rule or that the rule should not be made, the rule
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be.
14.  All rules, regulations and orders made or deemed to have been made under article
98 of the Constitution being in force immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall
be deemed to have been made by the Commission and shall continue to be valid and opera-
tive unless modified or revoked by the Commission, so however that anything contained
therein being inconsistent with any provision of this Act, shall be of no effect and be void to
the extent of such inconsistency.
15. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Commission
may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
Power of
Commission
to make rules.
Transitional
provisions.
Power to
remove
difficulty.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 98 of the Constitution provides for a separate Secretariat for each House of
Parliament. It further provides that the Parliament may, by law, regulate the recruitment and
the conditions of service of persons appointed to these separate secretariats. Till such time,
Parliament regulates these issues, these powers have been given to President to make rules
on them. Even after 56 years of the enactment of the Constitution, no law has been framed by
Parliament to regulate recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to these
two secretariats. Therefore, the enactment of such a law is long overdue.
The concept of an independent secretariat for legislature is an essence of Parliament
democracy. Under the democratic set up adopted in our country, the three wings, i.e., execu-
tive, legislature and judiciary have been envisaged to be separate and independent of each
other. This can be realized if the secretariats serving these wings are made independent so
that they can discharge their duties in all fairness without any fear or favour. The
significance of this conceptualization of a secretariat independent of the executive was fully
realized in the 1920s under the leadership and guidance of Pandit Motilal Nehru, Lala Lajpat
Rai and the President of the Constituent Assembly, Shri Vithalbhai Patel.
Therefore, the unique position of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat demands a special
sense of dedication and impartiality in discharge of duties from its officers and staff. It also
requires a broad-based institutional arrangement for running the House in an effective
manner. It is necessary to empower the Chairman for watching and safeguarding the
interests of the secretariat staff in the service of the House and its members. Envisaging this,
the Bill provides for the establishment of a House Commission to look after the whole gamut
of administration of the Rajya Sabha and matters connected therewith.
VIJAY J. DARDA
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to set up a Rajya Sabha Commission. Its members, other than
the ex-officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, who is the Vice-President of India, are the mem-
bers of the House who would be discharging their duties in relation of the Commission as
members. Clause 8 seeks to set up a Financial Committee to look after the financial affairs of
the Secretariat. The expenditure to be incurred on the payment of members TA/DA as a result
of setting up of the Rajya Sabha Commission would be a marginal one and it is estimated that
an expenditure of Rupees ten crore may be involved. There will not be any non-recurring
expenditure.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 13 of the Bill provides for rule-making power to the Commission. The matters in
respect of which such rules may be made are matters of procedure and administrative details
only. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

MGIPMRND—1784RS(S-1)—28.07.2006.
RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the administration of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat by constituting a Commis-
sion to look after recruitment and conditions of services of the officers and staff of the
Rajya Sabha Secretariat and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vijay J. Darda, M.P .)