10

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAIYA SABHA

Bill_No. LX of 2001

THE RESERVATION OF SEATS IN EDUCATIONAL AND TECHNICAL
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS (FOR CHILDREN OF PEOPLE
LIVING BELOW POVERTY LINE) BILL, 2001
A
BILL
to provide for the reservation of seats in all the educational and technical educational

institutions to the children whose parents are living below poverty line and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (/) This Act may be called the Reservation of Seats in Educational and Technical
Educational Institutions (for the Children of People Living Below Poverty Line) Act, 2001.

(2) It shall come into force at once.

(3) It shall apply to all educational institutions which are maintained by the Central
Government or a State Government or receiving grant-in-aid from either Government or
recognized by the Central or State Government or University established by an Act of
Parliament or a State Legislature or deemed University.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
State and in other cases, the Central Government.

(b) “persons living below poverty line” means all such persons who according
to norms fixed by the Central Government from time to time are living below poverty
line.

1
Short title
commencement
and applica-
tion.

Definitions


Reservation of

Power to make

2

3. There shall be reserved twenty-five per cent of seats in all classes of educational
and technical educational institutions including higher technical educational institutions
for the children of persons living below poverty line.

4. The benefits specified under this Act shall be available to only one child of a
family living below the poverty line.

5. All expenses on implementation of this Act shall be borne by the appropriate
Governments which shall make provisions in their annual budget of the expenses to be
incurred in this regard.

6. The Central Government may, by netification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It is true that after fifty years of our Independence, the poverty line has been reduced
from fifty percent to twenty seven percent at present. But still the twenty seven children are
deprived of education. These children cannot dream of getting education in institutions
like schools, colleges and technical institutions because of poverty. Their parents cannot
provide education and these children cannot dream of getting higher technical education
like diploma, degrees in respect of engineering, doctors, etc. It becomes necessary that the
Government should provide opportunity to the children of these parents who cannot afford
higher and technical education to their children.

Hence this Bill.

RUMANDALA RAMCHANDRAIAH


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the Central, State and Union Territory Government
shall bear the entire expenditure on the eudcation and training of people living below
poverty line in the country. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, will involve a
recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be incurred.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation
of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the reservation of seats in all the Educational and Technical Educational
Institutions to the children where parents are living below poverty line and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.

(Shri Rumandala Ramchandraiah, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3174RS—1-11-2001,