(i)
THE HIGHER EDUCATION AND RESEARCH BILL, 2011
________
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
________
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1 . Short title, extent and commencement.
2 . Application of Act.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
N
ATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HIGHER EDUCA TION AND RESEARCH
4 . Establishment of National Commission for Higher Education and Research.
5. Composition of Commission.
6 . Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Commission.
7. Selection Committee.
8 . Resignation and removal of Chairperson and Members.
9 . Term of office of Chairperson and Members.
10. Declaration of interest.
11. Restriction on re-employment.
12. General superintendence, direction and management of affairs.
13. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in certain
circumstances.
14. Salaries and allowances of Chairperson and Members.
15. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission.
CHAPTER III
P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF COMMISSION
16. Commission to promote higher education and research.
17. Commission to determine, co-ordinate, maintain and specify standards of higher
education and research.
18. Advise, monitor and cause to be undertaken policy research.
19. Establishment of inter-university centres.
20. Maintenance of directory of academics for leadership positions.
21. Commission to prepare statements on vision of higher education.
22. Officers and other staff of Commission.
23. Power of Commission to delegate.
24. Review of performance of Commission.
25. Power of Central Government to frame national policy.
Bill No.  LX  of   2011
TO BE  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

(ii)
CHAPTER IV
GENERAL COUNCIL
CLAUSES
26. Establishment of General Council.
27. Powers and functions of the General Council.
CHAPTER  V
C
OLLEGIUM OF SCHOLARS
28. Establishment of Collegium of Scholars.
29. Tenure and resignation of Fellow.
30. Functions of Collegium.
31. Directory of Academics for Leadership positions.
32. Meetings of Collegium.
33. Chair and  Co-Chair of Collegium.
34. Funds and administrative support to Collegium.
CHAPTER VI
E
NROLMENT OF STUDENTS
35. Enrolment of students.
36. Notification of declaration by Commission.
37. Revocation of permission to enrol students.
38. Appeal to National Educational Tribunal.
 39. Duties and obligations of university in maintenance of standards of academic
quality.
40. Revocation of permission to enrol students in the health educational institution
or health institution or their  affiliation to University without prior consent of
regulatory authority in health education.
41. University to be public authority under Right to Information Act, 2005.
42. Right to confer degrees.
CHAPTER  VII
B
OARD FOR   RESEARCH PROMOTION AND INNOV ATION
43. Board for Research Promotion and Innovation.
44. Terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and certain Members of Board
and administrative arrangements for discharge of functions by Board.
45. Powers and functions of Board.
CHAPTER  VIII
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCIAL SERVICES CORPORATION
46. Establishment of Higher Education Financial Services Corporation.
47. Duties and functions of Corporation.
48. Accounts and audit.
49. Furnishing of returns and information by Corporation.

(iii)
CHAPTER  IX
QUALIFICATIONS ADVISORY COUNCILS IN VOCATIONAL EDUCA TION
CLAUSES
50. Qualifications Advisory Councils in V ocational Education.
51. Duties and functions of qualifications Advisory Council.
 CHAPTER  X
J
OINT MECHANISM
52. Joint Mechanism.
CHAPTER  XI
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
53. Grants by Central Government.
54. Fund of National Commission for Higher Education and Research.
55. Furnishing of Statement of estimated expenditure for development of higher
education and research.
56. Accounts and audit.
57. Laying of annual accounts of Commission, General Council, etc.
 CHAPTER XII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
58. Furnishing of returns and information to Central Government by Commission.
59. Furnishing of returns and information by university and institutions to Commission.
60. Act to have overriding effect.
61. Power of Central Government to amend Schedule.
62. Power of Central Government to make rules.
63. Power of Commission to make regulations.
64. Laying of rules, regulations and notifications.
65. Power of Central Government to supersede Commission, General Council, etc.
66. Declaration of interest.
67. Restriction of re-employment.
68. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in certain
circumstances.
69. Restriction on holding office for more than two terms.
70. Resignation of Chairperson or a member of General Council, Board or Corporation.
71. Removal and suspension of Chairperson or a member of General Council, Board or
Corporation.
72. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of General Council, Board or
Corporation.
73. Power to appoint committees.
74. Reference of disputes to Central Government.

(iv)
75. Appeal against decisions of Commission.
76. Protection of action taken in good faith.
77. Members, etc., to be public servants.
78. Power of the Commission, Board, Committee or General Council to call for
information or conduct investigation, etc.
79. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
80. Commission, General Council, Board or Corporation, to furnish information to
Central Government.
81. Review.
82. Power to remove difficulties.
83. Repeal and savings.
84. Transitory provisions.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE  SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.
C
LAUSES

1
THE HIGHER EDUCATION AND RESEARCH BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to promote autonomy of higher educational institutions and  universities for free pursuit
of knowledge and innovation and to provide for comprehensive and integrated
growth of higher education and research keeping in view the global standards of
educational and research practices and for that purpose to establish the National
Commission for Higher Education and Research to facilitate determination, co-
ordination, maintenance and continued enhancement of standards of higher
education and research including university education, vocational, technical,
professional and medical education other than agricultural education and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Higher Education and Research Act, 2011.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It  shall  come  into force on such date  as  the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint:
Provided that different  dates may  be  appointed  for  different provisions of this Act,
and  any  reference  in  any provision  to the commencement of  this  Act  shall  be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
TO BE  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No.  LX  of   2011
5
10

2
Application of
Act.
2. This Act shall apply to all the higher educational institutions and universities other
than those institutions engaged mainly in agricultural education and research.
3.   In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “academic quality” means the quality of teaching, learning and research
contributing to enhancement of knowledge and includes physical infrastructure, faculty
and other human resources, course curricula, admission and evaluation procedures,
management practices, governance structures and leadership, of the higher educational
institution or university;
(b) “accreditation” with its grammatical variations means the process of quality
control in higher education, whereby, as a result of evaluation or assessment or by
any method specified under the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for
Higher Educational Institutions Act, 2011, a higher educational institution or university
or any programme conducted therein is recognised as conforming to parameters of
academic quality and benchmarking of such academic quality determined by the
Commission under this Act;
(c) “accreditation agency” means an agency registered under section 23 of the
National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Act,
2011;
(d) “affiliation” together with its grammatical variations, includes, in relation to
a college or higher educational institution,—
(i) recognition of such college or higher educational  institution by a
university; or
(ii) association of such college or higher educational  institution with a
university; or
(iii) admission of such college or higher educational  institution to the
privileges of a university;
(e) “appropriate statutory regulatory body” means the Medical Council of India
established under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, the Dental Council of India
established under the Dentists Act, 1948, the Pharmacy Council of India established
under the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Nursing Council of India established under the
Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Paramedical Council of India or any other
corresponding statutory regulatory body by whatever name called regulating the
health educational institutions or health institutions under any law for the time being
in force;
(f) “articles of association” means such articles of association of the Corporation
as may be approved and notified by the Central Government for the purposes of this
Act;
(g) “Board” means the Board of Research Promotion and Innovation established
under sub-section (1) of section 43;
(h) “Central Educational Institution” means—
(i) a university established or incorporated by or under a Central Act; or
(ii) an institution of national importance set up by an Act of Parliament;
or
(iii) an institution, declared as an institution deemed to be University
under the Universities Grants Commission Act, 1956 and maintained by or
receiving aid from the Central Government; or
Definitions.
102 0f 1956.
16 of 1948.
8 of 1948.
48 of 1947.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(iv) an institution maintained by, or receiving aid from, the Central
Government, whether directly or indirectly; and affiliated to the university
referred to in sub-clause (i) or to an institution referred to in sub-clause (ii), or
a constituent unit of an institution referred to in sub-clause ( iii); or
(v) an higher educational institution set up by the Central Government
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860;
(i) “Central University” means a university, or constituent units thereto, promoted
and maintained by the Central Government, either directly or indirectly, and established
or incorporated by or under a Central Act;
(j) “Chair” means the Chair of the  Collegium;
(k) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the National Commission for Higher
Education and Research appointed under section 5;
(l) “college” means any institution, whether known as such or by any other
name, which provides for a course of study for obtaining any qualification from a
university and which, in accordance with the rules and regulations of such university,
is recognised as competent to provide for such course of study and present students
undergoing such course of study for the examination, conducted by or on behalf of
the university, for the award of such qualification;
(m) “Collegium” means the Collegium established under section 28;
(n) “Commission” means the National Commission of Higher Education and
Research established under section 4;
(o) “Corporation” means the Higher Education Financial Services Corporation
established under sub-section ( 1) of section 46;
(p) “degree” means an award, granted by a university or higher educational
institution empowered by or under a law to do so, certifying that the recipient has
successfully completed a course of study;
(q) “diploma” means such award, not being a degree, granted by a higher
educational institution certifying that the recipient has successfully completed a
course of study of not less than nine months duration;
(r) “distance education systems” means the distance education systems as
defined in clause (e) of section (2) of the Indira Gandhi National Open University Act,
1985;
(s) “Fellow” means a member of the Collegium and includes the Chair and Co-
Chair;
(t) “higher education” means such education, imparted by means of conducting
regular classes or through distance education systems, beyond twelve years of
schooling leading to the award of a degree or diploma; and includes research associated
with such education;
(u) “higher educational institution” means an institution of learning including a
university, an institution deemed to be university, a college, an institute, an institution
of national importance declared as such by an Act of Parliament, or a constituent unit
of such institution, a polytechnic or other institutions in vocational education, which
is imparting by means of conducting regular classes or through distance education
systems, higher education or research therein;
(v) “Institution deemed to be University” means an institution declared as
such, by notification, by the Central Government, before the commencement of this
Act;
50 of 1985.
21of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(w) “Institution of national importance” means an institution declared as such
by a Central Act;
(x) “Overseas citizen of India” means such person registered as an overseas
citizen of India under section 7A of the Indian Citizenship Act, 1955;
(y) “Member” means a  Member of the National Commission for Higher Education
and Research and includes the Chairperson;
(z) “National Commission for Human Resources for Health” means the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health established  under the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health Act, 2011;
(za) “National Educational Tribunal” means the National Educational Tribunal
established under the Educational Tribunals Act, 2011;
(zb)  “National Research Professor” means the person appointed by the Central
Government under the National Research Professorship Scheme;
(zc) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notify” with its cognate meanings and grammatical variations shall be
construed accordingly;
(zd) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government
under this Act;
(ze) “programme” means a course or programme of study leading to the award
of a degree or a diploma in  higher educational institution;
(zf) “prospectus” includes any publication, whether in print or otherwise, issued
for providing fair and transparent information, relating to a higher educational
institution, to the general public (including to those seeking admission in such
institution) by the management of such institution or any authority or person authorised
by such institution to do so;
(zg) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Commission under this
Act;
(zh) “university” means a university established or incorporated by or under a
Central Act or a State Act and includes an institution deemed to be university;
(zi) “Vice-Chancellor” means the chief executive of a university or the head of a
Central Educational Institution, not being a college;
(zj) “vocational education” means such higher education, leading to the award
of a diploma through a programme of study of not more than two years duration
seeking to impart skills for a specific trade or vocation.
CHAPTER II
N
ATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HIGHER EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
4.  (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a Commission to be
called the “National Commission for Higher Education and Research”.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by
the said name, sue or be sued.
Establishment
of National
Commission
for Higher
Education and
Research.
56 of 1955.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(3) The headquarters of the Commission shall be in the National Capital Region, and
it may establish offices in such other locations as it may deem fit.
5. The Commission shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) three whole-time members; and
(c) three part-time members,
to be appointed, by the President, on the recommendations of the Selection Committee
constituted under section 7;
(d) the Chairperson or a Member  of the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare shall be a
Member,  ex officio.
6.  (1) The Chairperson and the whole-time members shall be a person of eminence
and standing in the field of academics and research possessing leadership abilities, proven
capacity for institution building and governance of institutions of higher learning, and
having not less than twenty-five years experience in the profession, out of which at least
ten years shall preferably be in a leadership role, in the area of academics and research.
(2) The other part time Members shall be persons of eminence and standing in the
field of education and research with high academic credentials and proven contribution to
economic and social development with experience of governance of institutions of higher
learning and engagement with policies in the field of higher education, and having not less
than twenty years experience in the profession, out of which at least five years shall preferably
be in a leadership role, in the area of academics and research.
(3) No person, who is not a citizen of India, shall be eligible to be appointed as the
Chairperson or a Member.
7. ( 1) The Central Government shall constitute a Selection Committee consisting
of,—
(a) the Prime Minister, who shall be the  Chairperson of the Selection Committee;
(b) the Speaker of Lok  Sabha;
(c) the Leader of Opposition in Lok  Sabha;
(d) the Minister in charge of Higher Education in the Government of India; and
(e) the Minister in charge of Medical Education in the Government of India.
Explanation.—For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that
where the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha has not been recognised as such, the
Leader of the single largest group in opposition to the Government in the Lok Sabha shall
be deemed to be the Leader of Opposition.
(2) The Selection Committee shall make its recommendations from the panel of three
names, submitted by the Collegium under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 30, for
each vacancy.
(3) Before recommending any person for appointment as a Chairperson or a Member
of the Commission, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that such person does not
have any financial or other conflict of interest, which is likely to affect prejudicially his
functions as Chairperson or Member, as the case may be.
Composition
of
Commission.
Qualifications
for
appointment
of
Chairperson
and Members
of
Commission.
Selection
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(4) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the Commission shall be invalid
merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 1) to ( 4), the Selection Committee
may regulate its own procedure for assessing the suitability of the person from the
panel of names referred to in sub-section ( 2) to be recommended to the President for
appointment.
(6) The Central Government shall initiate the process of appointment in respect of any
vacancy due to arise in the office of the Chairperson or of other Members of the Commission,
six months prior to the date of arising of such vacancy:
Provided that in case a vacancy arises in the Selection Committee for the reason of
death or removal, or resignation from office, such vacancy shall be filled expeditiously,
within a period of six months from the date on which the vacancy has arisen.
(7) Every appointment under this section shall take effect from the date on which it is
notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette.
(8) The Chairperson or other Member shall, before entering office make and subscribe
before the President or some other person appointed by the President in that behalf, an oath
of affirmation, in such form as may be prescribed.
8. (1) The Chairperson or any Member, other than the Member referred to in clause (d)
of section 5 may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the President resign from
office.
(2) T
he President may remove from office the Chairperson or any Member, other than
the Member referred to in clause (d) of section 5, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has engaged, at any time during his term of office, in any paid employment
outside the duties of his office; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson
or other Member; or
(d)  is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(e) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the President,
involves moral turpitude;  or
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
the exercise of his functions as such Chairperson or other Member; or
(g) has failed to attend three consecutive meetings of the Commission; or
(h) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest; or
(i) has been guilty of proved misconduct; or
(j) has been guilty of proved conflict of interest in the discharge of functions; or
(k) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (2), the Chairperson or a Member shall
not be removed from his office on the grounds specified in clause ( h) or clause ( i) or
clause (j) of sub-section (2), except by an order made by the President after an inquiry made
in this behalf by the Chairperson of the National Educational Tribunal, in which such
Chairperson or such Member has been informed of the charges against him and given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
Resignation
and removal
of
Chairperson
and Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(4) In the event of inquiry instituted under sub-section (3), the President may suspend
such Chairperson or other Member against whom an inquiry has been instituted for a
period not exceeding six months if he considers necessary in public interest.
(5) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the inquiry
referred to in sub-section (3).
9.  (1) A person appointed as Chairperson and other Members, other than the Member
referred to in clause (d) of section 5, shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on
which he enters upon his office:
Provided that the Chairperson and whole-time Members shall cease to hold office on
attaining the age of seventy years.
(2) The Commission shall request the Central Government to initiate the process of
appointment in respect of any vacancy due to arise on the post of Chairperson or other
Members on completion of tenure before a period of six months from the date of arising of
such vacancy:
Provided that the process of appointment shall be completed before such vacancy
arises.
(3)  Where a vacancy has arisen on account of any reason other than completion of
tenure, the process of appointment in respect of such vacancy to the post of Chairperson
or other Members shall be completed within a period of six months from the date such
vacancy had arisen.
10. (1) The Chairperson or the other Members shall, immediately after entering upon
office and every year thereafter, make a declaration on the extent of his interest, whether
direct or indirect and whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any institution engaged in research
or any higher educational institution or in any other professional or financial activity which
comes under the purview of the Commission and the same shall be displayed on the website
of the Commission.
(2) The Chairperson or any other Member having any direct or indirect interest,
whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of
the Commission, shall, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting; and shall not take
any part in any deliberation or decision of the Commission with respect to that matter.
11. The Chairperson or other Member on ceasing to hold office, other than the Member
referred to in clause (c) and clause (d) of section 5, shall be ineligible, for a period of five
years from the date on which they cease to hold office, for further employment in, or, in
matters related to, any higher educational institution or university under the Central
Government or a State Government or any private higher educational institution or any
accreditation agency.
12. Subject to other provisions of this Act, the general superintendence, direction
and control of the administration of the Commission shall vest in the Chairperson.
13.  (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
by reason of death, resignation or otherwise, the President may, by  notification, authorise
one of the other whole-time Members, to act as the Chairperson until the appointment of a
person to fill such vacancy.
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on
leave or otherwise, such one of the other whole-time Members, as the President may, by
notification, authorise in this behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until
the date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
Term of
office of
Chairperson
and Members.
Declaration of
Interest.
Restriction on
reemployment.
General
superintendence,
direction and
management
of affairs.
Member to act
as Chairperson
or to
discharge his
functions in
certain
circumstances.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
14.  (1) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the status and other terms and
conditions of service of, the Chairperson of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Members referred to in clause ( c) and clause ( d) of section 5, shall receive
such sitting fee and other allowances as may be prescribed.
15. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Commission; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as Member of the
Commission; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the merits
of the case.
CHAPTER III
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF COMMISSION
16.  (1) The Commission shall , in consultation with the General Council and other
bodies concerned, take all such steps as it may think fit for the promotion and coordination
of higher education and research.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the measures
referred to in sub-section ( 1), may, inter alia, provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) to promote autonomy within higher educational institutions and
universities;
(b) to promote accountability framework in regulatory systems of higher
education sector;
(c) to promote development of a curriculum framework with specific reference
to new or emerging or inter-disciplinary fields of knowledge;
(d) to promote, through the development of a flexible academic framework, the
exercise of choice by students for self-development, entrepreneurship, acquisition of
skills and pursuit of learning;
(e) to promote joint and cross-disciplinary programmes between and amongst
the universities and other higher educational institutions;
(f) to promote synergy of research in universities and higher educational
institutions, with research in other agencies or laboratories;
(g) to promote coordination between universities and higher educational
institutions and industry towards innovation for mutual benefit and for the well-
being of society;
(h)  to encourage universities to formulate a Code of Good Practices in
leadership, governance and management and to develop a Framework Code to guide
universities in formulating such Code of Good Practices;
(i) take such other measures for the promotion of higher education and research
in higher educational institutions and universities  for the achievement of the goals in
sub-section ( 1);
(j) develop measures to relate higher education and research to the world of
work and needs of society;
Salaries and
allowances of
Chairperson
and Members.
V acancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Commission.
Commission
to promote
higher
education and
research.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
(k) encourage universities for enabling colleges to innovate in higher education
and research to evolve into universities or institutions with  an authorisation to
award degrees by itself;
(l) take measures to enhance access and inclusion in higher education to remove
imbalances in higher education;
(m) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to imply that the measures
taken by the Commission shall be obligatory for higher educational institutions and
universities to adopt, but such measures shall serve to act as reference for higher educational
institutions and universities to advance quality, access and inclusion in higher education
and research therein, and for the achievement of the goals in sub-section ( 1).
17.  (1) The Commission shall, with the prior approval of the  General Council and
subject to the provisions of this Act, make regulations, to determine, coordinate and specify
standards of higher education and research.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the regulations
referred to in sub-section (1), may, inter alia, provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) Specify the requirements for the award of any degree or diploma in any field
of knowledge of higher education and research and specify parameters for equivalence
between academic qualifications;
(b) specify norms and standards of academic quality for accreditation and
benchmarking of higher educational institutions and universities;
(c) specify norms and processes for establishment and winding up of a higher
educational institutions and university;
(d) specify norms and processes for permitting, a university or an higher
educational institution empowered, by or under any law, to award any degree, to
enroll students in any course or programme of study for the first time;
(e)  specify norms of academic quality for a university to affiliate colleges;
(f) regulate the entry and operation of foreign educational institutions in
accordance with any law providing for such regulation for the time being in force;
(g) specify norms and mechanisms for transparent, efficient and accountable
governance in universities and other higher educational institutions;
(h) specify and coordinate standards for leadership positions for appointment
as Vice-Chancellor of a university or the head of a Central Educational Institution not
being a college;
(i) specify norms to measure the productivity of research programmes;
(j) specify norms and principles for allocation of grants, for the maintenance
and development or research or for any other general or specific purpose, of any
class of higher educational institutions and universities;
(k) specify a framework for enabling mobility of students emerging from
vocational education into general higher education;
(l) specify mechanisms for social audit of the processes in the Commission and
obtain public feedback on its performance and achievements to foster accountability;
Commission
to determine,
coordinate,
maintain and
specify
standards of
higher
education and
research.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
(m) discharge such other functions in relation to the determination, coordination
and maintenance of standards in higher education and research as the Central
Government may,  subject to the provisions of this Act, prescribe.
(3) The Commission shall, in the exercise of powers and functions under this section,
create an enabling environment for universities to emerge as autonomous, self-regulatory
bodies.
(4) Nothing contained in this Act shall prevent the National Board for Health Education
constituted under the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Act, 2011 to
approve and notify minimum norms and standards of maintenance of academic quality for
accreditation and benchmarking of education in recognised health educational institutions
imparting approved courses in the discipline of health throughout the period of accreditation.
18.  (1) The Commission shall advise, when called upon to do so or otherwise, the
Central Government or any State Government or any professional body, on policies relating
to higher education and research in any field of knowledge therein.
(2) The Commission shall cause to be undertaken research concerning policy in
higher education to identify future directions and processes in higher education; or to
assess future knowledge manpower requirements in different fields of knowledge for meeting
the needs of the economy; or research to develop a vision on future trends in knowledge;
or in such other matters of policy as the Commission may deem fit.
(3) The Commission shall monitor, through a national database, all matters concerning
academic quality, sources of funding, access and inclusion in higher education and research.
(4)  The Commission shall advise and facilitate a body or institution, seeking such
advice or facilitation, in regard to a proposal for the establishment of a university in
accordance with the norms and standards specified by it or for development of an
accountability framework towards achievement of the objectives and purposes of the body
or institution.
19. (1) The Commission may, on the recommendations of the Board and with the prior
approval of the Central Government, establish, in such manner as may be specified by
regulations, inter-university centres for providing research facilities and thrust to new and
emerging areas of knowledge, common facilities for research for a group of universities or
for the universities in general and provide for their maintenance by allocating and disbursing
such grants as the Commission may deem necessary.
(2) The inter-university centres established before the commencement of this Act
shall be deemed to have been established under this Act:
Provided that the Commission shall, in consultation with the Central Government, in
respect of an inter-university centre, established before the commencement of this Act,
whose objectives are not in conformity with the provisions specified in sub-section ( 1),
decide on the continuance of such Centre as an inter-university centre under this Act.
20. (1) The Commission shall maintain the directory of academics for leadership
positions consisting of persons fulfilling standards for leadership positions for appointment
as Vice-Chancellor or head of a Central Educational Institution not being a college, prepared
by the Collegium from time to time under sub-section (2) of section 31.
(2) The Commission shall, when called upon to do so by the Central Government or
Central Educational Institution not being a college, as the case may be, recommend a panel
of three names from the directory of academics for leadership positions for appointment to
the post of Vice-Chancellor of such Central University or Central Educational Institution.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section or in section 31, the Chancellor,
State Government or the Governing Body, by whatever name called, of a university, other
Advise,
monitor and
cause to be
undertaken
policy
research.
Establishment
of inter-
university
centres.
Maintenance
of directory
of academics
for leadership
positions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
than a Central Educational Institution, may appoint a person as Vice Chancellor subject to
such person satisfying the standards for leadership positions, specified by the Commission
under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 17.
21. (1) The Commission shall prepare annually an evidence based statement on the
status of higher education and research and its relation to global trends, and assessment of
its performance along with a report on the activities of the Commission.
(2) The statement and report referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be provided to the
General Council for observations and recommendations and to the Collegium for assessment
of the performance of the Commission and recommendations thereto.
(3) The Commission shall present to the President, the statement and the report,
along with the assessment and recommendations received under sub-section ( 2).
(4) The Commission shall, in respect of every State and Union territory, before the
expiry of five years from the date of commencement of this Act and at an interval of every
five years thereafter, and such other times as it deems fit, prepare a report on the status of
higher education and research in such State or Union territory and its relation to national
trends.
(5) The Commission shall present to the Governor of the State or the administrator of
an Union territory, as the case may be, such report prepared under sub-section ( 4) on the
status of higher education and research in a State or Union territory and its relation to
national trends.
(6) The Commission shall present to the President, before the expiry of five years from
the date of commencement of this Act and at an interval of every five years thereafter, a
statement on the vision of higher education and research in the forthcoming decade; an
analysis of the performance of higher education sector and implementation of policies in
the past five years, and shall make in such statement, recommendations as to the measures
that ought to be taken for renovation and rejuvenation of higher education and research,
including the following, namely:—
(a) vision, policy and strategy for emerging fields of knowledge and norms for
developing requirements of such fields of knowledge;
(b) development of qualifications framework to reflect the vision of higher
education and research;
(c) norms and mechanisms for evaluating cost and price of higher education
and  research:
Provided that before the report is presented to the President, the Commission shall
provide such report to the General Council and to the Collegium for offering comments or
suggestions (including an assessment of the performance of the Commission and
recommendations to be taken on measures to enhance such performance) on the report, or
any part of  it thereof; and such comments or suggestions received thereon shall be appended
to the report presented to the President.
(7) The President shall cause to be laid before both Houses of Parliament, such
reports prepared by the Commission under sub-section (3) and sub-section (6), along with
an explanatory memorandum on the action taken, or proposed to be taken, thereon in
respect of each recommendation made by the Commission or the General Council or the
Collegium.
(8) The Governor of every State shall cause to be laid before the Legislative Assembly
of such State, the report prepared by the Commission under sub-section (5) concerning the
state of higher education and research in such State, along with an explanatory memorandum
on the action taken, or proposed to be taken, thereon in respect of each recommendation
made by the Commission.
Commission
to prepare
statements on
vision of
higher
education.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
22. (1) The Commission may, for the efficient performance of its functions under this
Act, appoint, in such manner and with such qualifications, officers and employees, as may
be specified by regulations.
(2) The number of, the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, officers and employees of the Commission, shall be such as may be
specified by regulations.
(3) The Commission may appoint, in such manner for such temporary period and on
such terms and conditions as may be specified by regulations, such other academic,
management, accounting, technical and scientific experts as it may consider necessary for
the efficient performance of its functions.
(4) Every appointment under sub-section (3), including the qualifications of the person
so appointed and the manner, the terms and conditions and the period of such appointment,
shall be disclosed on the website of the Commission.
23.  (1) The Commission may, by regulations made, by notification in the Official
Gazette under this Act, delegate to its Chairperson or any of its officers, its power of general
superintendence and direction over the business transacted by, or in, the Commission,
including the powers with regard to the expenditure incurred in connection with the
maintenance of the officers and internal administration of the Commission.
(2) No regulation shall be made under this section except with the previous approval
of the Central Government.
24. (1) The President shall, within five years from the commencement of this Act and
thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year, constitute a Committee to evaluate and review
the performance of the Commission in the said period, consisting of persons of international
eminence and standing, to be appointed by the President on the basis of a panel of names
to be proposed by the Collegium.
(2) The Committee referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall evaluate and review the
performance of the Commission and make recommendations to the President as to—
(a) the extent of fulfilment of the goals and objectives of the Commission stated
in the Preamble to this Act, as demonstrated by the state of higher education and
research;
(b) the interaction between the Commission, the General Council and the
Collegium;
(c) future directions of the Commission along with corrective measures, if any;
(d) promote effective institutional academic linkages, inter-institutional linkages
and public-private partnerships in higher education;
(e) such other matters as may be referred to the Committee by the President.
(3) The President shall cause to be laid before both Houses of Parliament, the report
of the Committee constituted under sub-section (1) along with an explanatory memorandum
on the action taken, or proposed to be taken, thereon in respect of each recommendation of
the Committee.
25.  (1) The Central Government shall, at such times as  it thinks fit, prepare in
consultation with the State Governments and the Commission, a national policy for the
development of higher education and research, which shall guide the Commission in the
exercise of its powers and functions under this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall inform the Commission of all the decisions taken by
it on matters of policy concerning higher education and research.
Officers and
other staff of
Commission.
Power of
Commission
to delegate.
Review of
performance
of
Commission.
Power of
Central
Government
to frame
national
policy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
CHAPTER IV
GENERAL COUNCIL
26. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish, a General Council,
consisting of the following, namely:—
(a) the Chairperson of the Commission, who shall chair the meetings of the
Council;
(b) all Members of the Commission;
(c) the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of a State Higher Education Council, as
may be determined by such Council, to represent each State and Union territory:
Provided that where a State Higher Education Council has not been constituted in a
State or Union territory, the State Government concerned shall nominate a Vice Chancellor
of a university located in such State or Union territory:
Provided further that where no university is located in a Union territory, the
administration of such Union territory shall nominate a senior academic to represent such
Union territory.
Explanation.—In respect of a Union territory, the provisions of this clause shall
have the effect as if for the words “State Government”, the words “Central Government”
had been substituted;
(d) the head of each professional body listed in the First Schedule;
(e) the head of each research Council listed in the Second Schedule;
(f) one person, by rotation, from amongst Vice Chancellors of Central
Universities;
(g) one person, by rotation, from amongst Directors of Indian Institutes of
Technology;
(h) one person, by rotation, from amongst Directors of Indian Institutes of
Management;
(i) one person, by rotation, from amongst the Vice Chancellors of National Law
Universities;
(j) one person, by rotation, from amongst heads of institutions of national
importance in medical education;
(k) one person to be nominated by the Central Government, from amongst
academics in higher education and research from each of the following sectoral areas,
namely:—-
(i)  agriculture and allied areas;
(ii)  environment and forestry;
(iii)  medicine, pharmaceuticals and allied areas;
(iv)  industrial training;
(v)  economics and finance;
(vi ) sports;
Establishment
of General
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

14
(vii) archaeology and epigraphy;
(viii) Indian languages;
(ix) creative arts, performing arts and culture;
(x) bio-technology and emerging areas of technology;
(l) three persons, to be nominated by the Central Government, from amongst
heads of associations of industry, trade or commerce with national presence listed in
the Fourth Schedule;
(m) two persons, to be nominated by the Commission, from amongst heads of
civil society or non-governmental organisations with national presence having
experience of engagement with issues relating to education;
(n)  the Chairman of the Central Board of Secondary Education;
(o) the Director of the National Council of Education Research and Training;
(p) the Chairperson or a Member of  the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health referred to in sub-section ( 3) of section 3 of the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health Act, 2011;
(q) a Principal of an autonomous college of excellence to be nominated by the
Commission.
(2) The meetings of the General Council shall be convened at least once in every six
months and at such other times as the Chairperson may consider necessary:
Provided that a meeting of the General Council shall also be convened if at least
one-fifth of the total strength of the General Council express in writing, letters addressed to
the Chairperson, the desire to convene such meeting to deliberate on such matter as may be
expressed in such letter.
(3) The tenure of the persons nominated to the General Council under clauses ( c) to
(j) shall be two years.
(4) The General Council shall have the power to lay down its own procedure for the
conduct of its meetings.
(5) No person being a member of the General Council, shall receive any remuneration
except such sitting fees or  other allowances, as may be prescribed, for attending the
meetings of the General Council.
(6)
 The Commission shall provide funds and administrative support to the General
Council for the conduct of its meetings and other related matters.
27. (1) The General Council shall make recommendations and advise the Commission
in the exercise of its functions.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the General Council
may—
(a) advise on the measures to be taken for enhancing access, inclusion and
equity in higher education;
(b) advise on the measures to be taken for connecting higher education and
research to the practice of professions;
Powers and
functions of
the General
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

15
(c) suggest measures to remove imbalances (including those relating to regions,
academic disciplines, gender and other socio-economic factors) in the development
of higher education and research;
(d) advise on the adequacy of funding for higher education;
(e)  make observations and suggestions in respect of the statement and report
prepared by the Commission under sub-section ( 1) of section 21;
(f) make observations and suggestions on the report prepared by the
Commission under sub-section (4) of section  21;
(g) advise on the course of reforms to rejuvenate higher education and research;
(h) advise on the measures to be taken by the Commission to promote quality of
higher education and nurture excellence;
(i) discharge such other functions as may be prescribed.
(3) The General Council shall, for the discharge of its functions or reporting or advising
upon any matter, constitute Expert Advisory Groups, consisting of such number of persons
as it may deem fit, in each of the following areas, namely:—
(a) legal education;
(b) health and medical education;
(c) education related to general sciences, humanities, social sciences,
engineering or technology;
(d) vocational education;
(e) distance education systems;
(f) such other fields of knowledge as the General Council may deem fit.
(4) The Expert Advisory Group referred to in sub-section ( 3) may include persons
who are not members of the General Council:
Provided that the strength of the members of the General Council in such Expert
Advisory Group shall not exceed one-third of the strength of the Group:
Provided further that a member of the General Council, nominated in this behalf by the
General Council, shall preside over every Expert Advisory Group:
Provided also that the head of the Bar Council of India shall preside over the Expert
Advisory Group concerning legal education:
Provided also that the head of the professional body concerning medical practice
shall preside over the Expert Advisory Group concerning health and medical education.
CHAPTER  V
C
OLLEGIUM OF SCHOLARS
28.  (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish, a “Collegium of
Scholars”, which shall  consist of thirty Fellows, being persons of integrity and eminence in
higher education and research.
(2) No person shall be eligible for appointment as a Fellow of the Collegium unless
he—
(a) is a citizen or an overseas citizen of India;
Establishment
of Collegium
of Scholars.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

16
(b) has made substantial contribution to the advancement of knowledge
demonstrated through publications; and
(c) is, or has been, a National Research Professor or a recipient of awards
specified in the Third Schedule, shall be eligible to be a Fellow of the Collegium.
(3) The First Fellows of the Collegium shall be persons who are, or have been, National
Research Professors or recipients of awards specified in the Third Schedule:
Provided that in case no such person expresses willingness to be a Fellow of the
Collegium, then the Selection Committee, referred to in section 7, shall nominate not more
than ten persons of integrity and eminence in higher education and research, who shall be
the first Fellows of the Collegium.
(4) The Fellows, other than Fellows referred to in sub-section (3), shall be chosen, in
such manner as may be prescribed, from amongst persons of integrity and eminence in
higher education and research proposed by any Fellow, to represent fields of knowledge
which in their opinion are not adequately represented in the Collegium.
(5) Every person so chosen shall be notified as Fellow and shall, as soon as may be
after notification of his appointment, and every year thereafter, make a declaration on the
extent of his interest, whether direct or indirect and whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any
institution of research or higher educational institution.
(6) The declaration so made under sub-section ( 5) shall be placed on the website of
the Commission.
29. Every Fellow, other than a Fellow referred to in clause ( c) of sub-section (3) of
section 28, shall continue as such for a period of ten years from the date of his notification
as Fellow.
30.  (1) The Collegium shall —
(a) recommend to the Commission a vision on the emerging trends in different
fields of knowledge;
(b)  recommend, in respect of appointment of Chairperson or Member of the
Commission, a panel of three persons for each post to the Selection Committee
constituted under section 7;
(c) recommend persons for inclusion in the directory of academics for leadership
positions in accordance with standards for leadership positions, specified by
regulations under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 17;
(d) make an assessment of the performance of the Commission in respect of the
statement and report referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 21;
(e) make observations and suggestions (including an assessment of the
performance of the Commission and recommendations to be taken on measures to
enhance such performance) on the report prepared by the Commission under
sub-section (6) of section 21;
(f) propose eligible persons as members of Board, as provided for in clauses (a)
and (d) of sub section (5) of section 43;
(g) discharge such other functions as may be prescribed.
(2) The Collegium may constitute Advisory Committees comprised of Fellows, for
consideration on matters referred to it for advise or the making of assessments or suggestions
on statement or reports of the Commission.
Tenure and
resignation of
Fellow.
Functions of
Collegium.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

17
31.  (1) The Collegium shall recommend, from time to time and in such manner as may
be specified under regulations, names of persons, for inclusion in the directory of academics
for leadership positions.
(2) The Central Government, State Governments, State Higher Education Councils,
universities and other higher educational institutions, professional bodies listed in the First
Schedule and research Councils listed in the Second Schedule may, from time to time, refer,
names of suitable persons, to the Commission for inclusion in the directory of academics for
leadership positions:
Provided that the Commission shall forward the names of such person or persons
referred to it, along with the credentials of such person so referred, to the Collegium.
(3) A person shall be eligible for inclusion in the directory of academics for leadership
positions, only if he satisfies such standards for leadership positions, specified under
regulations under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 17.
(4)The directory of academics for leadership positions shall be available for all
universities and other higher educational institutions, if they so require.
32. ( 1) The meetings of the Collegium shall be convened at least once every six
months and at such other times as may be required by the Chair:
Provided that a meeting of the Collegium shall also be convened if at least one fifth of
the total strength of the Collegium express to the Chair, the desire to convene such meeting
to deliberate on such matter as may be expressed.
(2) The Collegium shall act collectively in the performance of its functions, and
decisions in such meetings shall be taken, by resolution, by majority of Fellows present and
voting.
(3) The Chairperson or such Member of the Commission, as the Chairperson may
nominate, shall attend and participate in the meetings of the Collegium, but shall not have
the right to vote on any resolution before the Collegium.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Collegium shall have the power to lay
down its own procedure for the conduct of its business and the exercise of its functions.
(5) No act or proceeding of the Collegium shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Collegium; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Fellow of the Collegium; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Collegium not affecting the merits of
the case.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the word “present” shall not be
interpreted to be limited to physical presence of the Fellow but shall be construed in a
broader sense in the Fellow being available to indicate his preference by such means,
including electronic methods, as the Collegium may deem fit.
33.  (1) The Collegium shall have a Chair and a Co-Chair, selected by majority from
amongst Fellows of the Collegium; and shall have a tenure of two years.
(2) The Chair or Co-Chair, as the case may be, shall preside over all meetings of the
Collegium.
(3) The Chair and Co-Chair shall perform such functions for carrying out the purposes
of this Act, as the Collegium may, by resolution, deem fit.
34. 
(1) The Commission shall provide funds and administrative support and assistance
to the Collegium for the discharge of its functions under this Act.
Directory of
Academics for
Leadership
positions.
Meetings of
Collegium.
Chair and
Co-Chair of
Collegium.
Funds and
administrative
support to
Collegium.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
(2) No Fellow shall receive any remuneration except such sitting fees or allowances,
as may be prescribed, for attending the meetings of the Collegium.
(3) The Collegium may obtain the services of such experts in management of, or in,
organisations, with such qualifications and on such terms and conditions, as may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER VI
ENROLMENT OF STUDENTS
35. (1) Every university or institution of higher education empowered by or under
any law for the time being in force to award any degree, intending to enroll students for the
first time in any course or programme of study, shall intimate such intention to the Commission,
along with an assessment report prepared in accordance with section 4 of the National
Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Act, 2010:
Provided that in a case where such university or  higher educational institution
intends to impart medical education, such university or higher educational  institution shall
provide an assessment report of its attached hospital and clinical establishment, prepared
in such manner and in accordance with such norms as may be specified by the Central
Government or by such authority empowered by law.
Explanation .— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the university
or higher educational  institution referred to in the proviso includes those universities
or higher educational institutions which award any degree and does not include any
college or institution which seeks affiliation with such university or higher educational
institution.
(2) The Commission shall specify the manner in which a higher educational institution
intending to commence enrolment of students shall give such intimation to it and shall also
notify the procedure of processing including any fees payable for such intimation.
(3) The Commission shall process the intimation given to it under sub-section ( 1)
expeditiously and in a transparent manner giving opportunity for the institution concerned
wherever necessary and in no case shall the application be kept pending beyond one
hundred and twenty days after which it shall be deemed to have the Commission’s
concurrence for enrolment of students.
36. (1) The Commission shall, within a period of one hundred and twenty days from
the receipt of intimation under sub-section (1) of section 35 declare by notification, either,—
(a) that student enrolment can proceed as  requested; or
(b) that the Commission is unable to accede to the request for reasons recorded
in writing.
(2)  The notification of the Commission under clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1)
along with reasons therefor, shall be published on the website of the Commission.
(3) The declaration in respect of a University or higher educational institution
empowered by or under any law to award a degree existing on the date of commencement of
this Act shall be deemed to have been notified under this Act unless revoked under
section 37.
37.  (1)  If the Commission, after making such enquiry as may be specified by regulations,
is satisfied that public interest so requires, it may revoke, by notification, the permission to
enrol students in any course  or programme of study to the higher educational institution or
university in any of the following cases, namely:—
(a) where the higher educational  institution or university, in the opinion of the
Enrolment of
students.
Notification of
declaration by
Commission.
Revocation of
permission to
enrol students.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
Commission, makes willful or continuous default in doing anything required of it by
or under this Act or the rules or the regulations made thereunder;
(b) where the higher educational  institution or university fails, within the period
fixed in this behalf by its declaration, or any longer period which the Commission may
have granted therefor, to show, to the satisfaction of the Commission, that such
higher educational  institution or university is in a position fully and efficiently to
discharge the duties and obligations imposed on it by its recognition; or
(c) where the higher educational  institution or university has ceased to exist.
(2) No permission shall be revoked under sub-section (1) unless the Commission has
given to the higher educational  institution or university, as the case may be, not less than
sixty days notice, in writing, stating the grounds on which it is proposed to revoke the
permission, and has considered any cause shown by the higher educational  institution or
university within the period of that notice, against the proposed revocation.
(3) Where the Commission revokes the permission under this section, it shall serve an
order of revocation upon the institution or university, and fix a date on which the revocation
shall take effect; and such revocation shall be without prejudice to the action that may be
taken against it under any other law for the time being in force:
Provided that the Commission may, instead of revoking the permission, permit it to
remain in force subject to such further terms and conditions as it may think fit to impose,
and any further terms or conditions so imposed shall be binding upon and be observed by
the higher educational institution or university, and shall be of like force and effect as if they
were contained in the permission.
(4) The Commission shall, while revoking a permission, take, or cause to be taken,
such measures which may be necessary to protect the academic interests of students in
such higher educational institution or university.
(5) Without prejudice to the action that may be taken under any other law for the time
being in force, a university or higher educational institution shall be liable to pay or provide
the costs involved, as may be determined by the Commission, in the implementation of the
measures taken, or caused to be taken, by the Commission under sub-section ( 4).
(6) The Commission shall publish on its website the details of any action initiated
under this section and the final decision on the revocation of the permission or otherwise
together with all documents and reasons for such decision.
38.  Any person aggrieved by an order of the Commission for the permission or
rejection or revocation of  permission under this Chapter, may prefer an appeal, in such form
and manner and accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed, against such order to the
National Educational Tribunal within a period of  ninety days of such order:
Provided that the National Educational Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the
expiry of the said period of ninety days, if it is satisfied that the appellant has sufficient
cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of ninety days.
39. (1) A university, fulfilling such norms of academic quality as may be specified by
regulations made under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 17, may exercise the power
to affiliate any college or any higher educational  institution.
(2) A college or higher educational  institution seeking affiliation of a university, shall,
along with its application for affiliation to the University, submit an assessment report
prepared in such manner and in accordance with such norms as may be specified by the
regulations, from a registered accreditation agency:
Appeal to
National
Educational
Tribunal.
Duties and
obligations of
university in
maintenance
of standards
of academic
quality.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

20
Provided that in respect of a college or higher educational institution intending to
impart medical education, such college or higher educational  institution shall provide an
assessment report of its attached hospital and clinical establishment, prepared in such
manner and in accordance with such norms as may be specified by the National Commission
for Human Resources for Health.
(3) Each university shall maintain standards of academic quality in higher education and
research in such university and in colleges and higher educational  institutions affiliated to it.
(4) Each affiliating university shall take measures to support and develop academic
quality in colleges and higher educational institutions affiliated to it without impinging on
the autonomy of such colleges and higher educational institutions in its administrative and
financial matters.
40. Nothing contained in this Act shall confer powers upon the Commission established
under this Act to revoke permission to establish or wind up a health educational institution
or health institution or to enrol students in the health educational institution or health
institution or refuse affiliation to any college or any institution or  to a University solely on
the ground that it fails to meet the norms and standards specified under this Act or any
other law for the time being in force without prior consent of the statutory regulatory body
referred to in clause (a) of section 2 of the National Commission for Human Resources for
Health Act, 2011.
41. The provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005 shall apply to each university
as if it were a public authority defined in clause (h) of section 2 of that Act.
42.  (1) The right to confer or award a degree shall be exercised only by an higher
educational  institution or university which has been permitted to enrol students, under
clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 36 or deemed to have been so declared under
sub-section (3) of section 36.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), no person, institution, organisation
or agency shall confer, or award, or hold him or itself out as entitled to confer or award, any
degree.
CHAPTER  VII
B
OARD FOR RESEARCH PROMOTION AND INNOVATION
43. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a board to be called
the Board for Research Promotion and Innovation.
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and twelve other members to be appointed
by the Commission.
(3) The Chairperson of the Board shall be a person of eminence and standing in
academia with significant and proven contribution to knowledge through research in any
field of knowledge.
(4) The Chairperson of the Board shall be appointed by the Commission from a panel
of three names recommended by the Collegium under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 30.
Revocation of
permission to
enrol students
in the health
educational
institution or
health
institution or
their
affiliation to
university
without prior
consent of
regulatory
authority  in
health
education.
University to
be public
authority
under Right to
Information
Act, 2005.
Right to
confer
degrees.
Board for
Research
Promotion
and
Innovation.
20 of 2005.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

21
(5)  Of the other Members of the Board—
(a) three shall be persons of eminence and standing in academia with significant
and proven contribution to knowledge through research in various field of knowledge,
as proposed by the Collegium;
(b) one shall be a whole-time Member of the Commission to be nominated by
the Commission, from amongst whole-time Members;
(c) one shall be a Member, other than whole-time Member, of the Commission
to be nominated by the Commission, from amongst such Members referred to in
clause (e) of section 5;
(d) three persons, by rotation, from amongst such Members of the General
Council being heads of research Councils listed in the Second Schedule, as proposed
by the Collegium;
(e) two persons, by rotation, from amongst such Members of the General Council,
nominated under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(f) two shall be persons of eminence and standing in academia with significant
and proven contribution to research in medicine and allied fields of knowledge, to be
nominated by the National Commission for Human Resources for Health.
(6) The Chairperson of the Board shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of
the Board, exercise and discharge such powers and duties, as may be delegated by the
Board.
(7) The Members of the Board nominated under clause (b) to (e) shall be non-executive
Members and shall not be entitled to receive any remuneration except such sitting fees or
allowances, as may be specified by regulations, for attending the meetings of the Board.
(8) The Chairperson and such Members of the Board appointed under clause ( a)
of sub-section ( 5) shall, hold office for a period of five years from the date of assuming
office.
(9) The Members of the Board nominated under clause ( d) or (e) of sub-section (5)
shall have a tenure of two years.
44. (1) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and the Members of the Board shall be such as may be specified
by regulations.
(2) The Commission may, for the efficient performance of the functions by the Board
under this Act, provide to the Board, in such manner, officers and employees, with such
qualifications and on such remuneration and other terms and conditions, as may be specified
by regulations.
(3) Subject to the regulations made in this behalf, the Board may appoint such
committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of
its functions under this Act.
(4) The Board shall have the power to co-opt as members of any committee appointed
under sub-section (3), such persons who are not members of the Board as it may think fit,
and the person so co-opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the committee,
and take part in the proceedings of the committee.
(5)  The Board may engage the services of such persons, being persons of eminence
in research both from within and outside the country as consultants or visiting scientists
on such terms and conditions and remuneration as may be specified by regulations.
45. (1)  The Board shall recommend measures to the Commission to promote and
facilitate research in the fields of knowledge in higher educational institutions (including
research in recognised health educational institutions referred to in clause (r) of section 2 of
the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Act, 2011).
Terms amd
condition of
service of
Chairperson
and certain
Members of
Board and
administrative
arrangements
or discharge
of functions
by Board.
Powers and
functions of
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

22
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions and the scope and
powers of other  national agencies mandated to administer or fund research, the measures
recommended under sub-section (1), may, inter alia, provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) research and innovation policy for the sustained global competitiveness of
the country and harmonious development of society;
(b) promoting transformative and multi-disciplinary research in higher
educational institutions and universities;
(c) balancing the research portfolio amongst various fields of knowledge for
the continuous development of all fields of knowledge in a holistic manner;
(d) facilitating the modernisation of research infrastructure in higher educational
institutions and universities;
(e) inspiring youth to take up research as a career and attracting talent to
research by devising schemes for scholarships and fellowships;
(f) promoting inclusion in research amongst youth by devising schemes aimed
at otherwise disadvantaged sections of society;
(g) promoting synergy of research in higher educational institutions and
universities with research in other agencies or laboratories;
(h) facilitating higher educational institutions and universities in developing
linkages with industry for collaborative research;
(i) facilitating higher educational institution and universities in approaching
agencies involved with research to obtain funding for research in such institutions;
(j) establishing and supporting inter university centres for providing research
facilities and thrust to new and emerging areas of knowledge through development of
common facilities for research for a group of universities or for the universities in general;
(k) discharging such other functions  as may be specified  by  the regulations .
(3) The Board shall identify and recommend to the Commission to grant funding for
competitive, merit-based proposals by higher educational institutions and universities for
research and related infrastructure in such institutions:
Provided that the Board funding available to fund research and related infrastructure
for a given financial year shall be intimated by the Commission to the Board in advance and
the Board shall, while recommending the proposals, duly take into account the funds so
available.
(4) The Board shall, while identifying and recommending proposals to the Commission
under sub-section (3), give due attention and importance to—
(a) the balanced development of all fields of knowledge;
(b) the significance of research in emerging fields of knowledge that promote the
sustained global competitiveness of the country and harmonious development of society;
(c) such research that aims to discover novel phenomena, theories, processes,
products, materials, tools or equipments that addresses significant challenges for the
people of the country and the global environment.
(5) The Commission shall approve, reject or return to the Board for reconsideration,
such of the proposals for research funding as are identified and recommended by the Board
under sub-section (3), as it may deem fit:
Provided that the Commission while approving any proposal for research funding shall
specify the outcome-based parameters for assessment of the productivity of the research proposal:
Provided further that no research proposal shall be rejected or returned without
assigning reasons for such decision.
(6) The research proposals of higher educational institutions and universities approved
by the Commission under sub-section (5) shall be provided by the Board to the Corporation
referred to in section 46 for disbursement of grants to such institutions and universities.
50
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

CHAPTER  VIII
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCIAL SERVICES CORPORATION
46. (1) There shall be established on  and from such date as the Central Government
may notify a corporation to be called the Higher education Financial Services Corporation
for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable , and to contract, and shall, by
the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The general superintendence and direction of the affairs of the Corporation shall
be entrusted to a Board of Directors.
(4) The Board of Directors, referred to in sub-section (3), shall consist of the following,
namely:—
(a)  the Chairperson or such Member of the Commission, as the Commission
may nominate, who shall be the non-executive Chairperson of the Corporation and
shall preside over its meetings;
(b)   two persons, from amongst such members of the General Council nominated
to it under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(c) one person, from amongst such Members of the General Council nominated
to it under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(d) one person, from amongst such Members of the General Council nominated
to it under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(e) one person, by rotation, from amongst such Members of the General Council
nominated to it to represent Central Educational Institutions under clause (f) to clause
(j) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(f) two nominees of the Central Government, of whom one shall be nominated
by the Ministry dealing with the subject of finance;
(g) two persons being experts in matters of finance, banking and management
to be appointed who shall be whole-time officers of the Corporation;
(h) a Managing Director who shall be a whole-time officer of the Corporation.
(5) The Corporation shall, with the prior approval of the Central Government and the
Commission, notify its memorandum and articles of association; and such memorandum
shall provide for the duties and responsibilities of the Managing Director and other officers
of the Corporation.
(6) The Corporation may appoint the Managing Director, the Directors referred to in
clause (h) of sub-section (4) and such other number of officers and other employees with
such qualifications and on such terms and conditions as may be specified by  the regulations.
(7) The Board of Directors shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be
provided in the articles of association.
(8)The Corporation shall not amend or alter its memorandum or articles of association
except with the prior approval of the Central Government and the Commission.
Establishment
of Higher Edu-
cation Finan-
cial Services
Corporation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
23

24
47.  (1)The Corporation shall disburse, in accordance with the norms and principles
specified by regulations made by the Commission under clause ( j) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 17, financial assistance by way of grants to universities and higher educational
institutions; and perform such other functions incidental and related to such assistance.
(2) The Corporation, at the beginning of each financial year, shall, on the basis of
the allocation of grants for that financial year communicated by the Commission, prepare a
proposal, based on the information provided by each  university and higher educational
institution and in accordance with the norms and principles specified by regulations, of
grants to be allocated to each university and higher educational institution in that financial
year.
(3)The Managing Director of the Corporation shall be responsible for disbursal of
grants to universities and higher educational institutions.
(4)In the discharge of its duties and functions, the Corporation shall be guided by
such instructions from time to time, as may be given to it by the Commission.
48. ( 1) The Corporation shall cause to be maintained such books of account and
other books in relation to its account in such form and in such manner as may, in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be prescribed.
(2) The Corporation shall, as soon as may be after closing its annual accounts,
prepare a statement of accounts in such form, and forward the same to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General by such date, as the Corporation may, in consultation with the Comptroller
and Auditor-General, determine.
(3) The accounts of the Corporation shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General at such times and in such manner as he thinks fit.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (3), the accounts and related matters of
the Corporation shall be audited by an auditor duly qualified to act as auditor of companies
under sub-section (1) of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956, who shall be appointed by
the Commission and such remuneration as the Commission may fix shall be paid to the
auditors by the Corporation.
(5) Every auditor shall  be supplied  with a  copy of the annual accounts of  the
Corporation, and it shall be his duty to examine it together with the accounts and vouchers
relating thereto; and every auditor shall  at all reasonable  times have  access to  the  books,
accounts  and other documents of the Corporation,  and may in relation to  such accounts
examine any Director or  officer of  the Corporation.
(6) The auditor shall make a report to the Commission upon the annual accounts and
audit, and in every such report they shall state whether in their  opinion the accounts
contain all necessary particulars and properly drawn up so  as to  exhibit a  true and correct
view of the  state of  the affairs and in accordance with the norms and principles specified
by the Commission,  and in  case they  have called  for  any explanation or information from
the Corporation whether it has been given and whether such explanation or information is
satisfactory.
(7) The Commission shall take such consequential action, in accordance with this Act
and the regulations made thereunder, on the report made to it under sub-section ( 6); and a
report on the action so taken along with an explanatory memorandum thereon shall be
provided to the Central Government.
(8) The Central Government shall, in respect of each financial year, cause to be laid
before both Houses of Parliament, the annual accounts of the Corporation together with the
audit report of the Comptroller and Auditor-General thereon and the report on the action
taken along with the explanatory memorandum thereon, referred to in sub-section (7).
Duties and
functions of
Corporation.
Accounts and
audit.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

25
49. (1)  The Corporation shall furnish to the Commission, quarterly and at such other
times, and in such form and manner as may be specified by regulations or as the Commission
may direct, such returns and statements and such particulars in regard to financing of
universities and higher educational institutions, as the Commission may require.
(2) The Corporation shall furnish to the Central Government, for the purpose of
reporting to Parliament, such returns or other information with respect to its policies or
activities, as may be required.
CHAPTER  I X
Q
UALIFICATIONS ADVISORY COUNCILS IN VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
50. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish, such number of
Qualifications Advisory Councils in vocational education as it may deem fit to aid and
advise it in discharging its functions and exercising powers in respect of vocational education
under this Act.
(2)  Each Qualifications Advisory Council shall be     headed by a Chairperson and
eight other  members.
(3) The Chairperson of each Qualifications Advisory Council shall be appointed by
the Commission, and shall be an academic in a university with proven experience in
vocational education or in relevant areas of higher education relating to practice of
professions.
(4) Every appointment as Chairperson of the Qualifications Advisory Council under
sub-section (3) shall take effect only after its ratification, by majority, by the General Council.
(5)  Of the eight other Members —
(a) two shall be nominated by the Commission from amongst heads of State
Councils of V ocational Education;
(b) two shall be nominated by the Commission from amongst Members of the
General Council with exposure to vocational education or in relevant areas of higher
education relating to practice of professions;
(c) the Chairperson or a Member of the National Council of V ocational Training
to be nominated by the Chairperson of the National Council of V ocational Training;
(d) one shall be nominated by the Central Government to represent trade unions
in the relevant skill area;
(e) two shall be nominated by the Commission possessing exposure to the
relevant skill areas to represent associations of industry, trade or commerce with
national presence listed in the Fourth Schedule:
Provided that the Commission shall make the nominations under this clause
only after consultations with the members of the General Council nominated to it
under clause (k) of sub-section (1) of section 26 from amongst heads of associations
of industry, trade or commerce with national presence listed in the Fourth Schedule.
(6) 
The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson of each Qualifications Advisory Council shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(7) No member of any Qualifications Advisory Council other than the Chairperson of
such Council, shall receive any remuneration except such sitting fees or other allowances,
as may be prescribed, for attending the meetings of such Council.
(8) The Commission shall provide funds and administrative support to each
Qualifications Advisory Council for the conduct of its meetings and other related matters.
Qualifications
Advisory
Councils in
vocational
education.
Furnishing of
returns and
information
by
Corporation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

26
51. Each Qualifications Advisory Council constituted for specific skill areas shall
perform the following duties and functions, namely:—
(a) advise and make recommendations on qualifications framework in such skill
areas defining the competencies required by students pursuing vocational education
in such skill areas;
(b) advise and make recommendations on standards of academic quality and
benchmarking such standards in programmes of study leading to the award of any
diploma in such skill areas;
(c) advise and make recommendations on norms for accreditation of higher
educational institutions imparting vocational education in such skill areas;
(d) advise and contribute to policy in vocational education;
(e) prepare reports on industry requirements in such skill areas and advice on
skill needs in the context of the workplace;
(f) suggest elements of curriculum and syllabus to impart the required
competencies in such skill areas;
(g) perform such other functions or make such other recommendations as may
be referred to it by the Commission.
CHAPTER  X
JOINT MECHANISM
52. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for time
being in force, in case any difference of opinion arises between the National  Commission
for Higher Education and Research established under this Act and the National Commission
for Human Resources for Health established under the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health Act, 2011, such difference of opinion may be referred to a Joint
Committee consisting  of the following, namely :—
(a) the Cabinet Secretary – ex officio, Chairperson;
(b) the Chairperson of National Commission for  Higher Education
and Research–ex officio, Member;
(c) the Chairperson for National Commission for Human Resources
for Health–ex officio, Member;
(d) the Secretary, in charge of the department dealing with the subject of  Higher
Education–ex officio,  Member;
(e) the Secretary, in charge of the department dealing with the subject of Health
and Family Welfare – ex officio, Member.
(2) The Secretary, Department of Higher Education in the Ministry of Human Resource
Development or the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, as the case may be,
who makes reference under sub-section ( 1) shall be the convenor of the meetings of the
Joint Committee referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) The Joint Committee shall follow such procedure as it may consider expedient and
resolve the difference of opinion, within a period of two months from the date of reference
made under sub-section ( 1).
(4)  The decision of the Joint Committee shall be binding on the National Commission
for Higher Education and Research and the National Commission for Human Resources for
Health .
Duties and
functions of
Qualifications
Advisory
Council.
Joint
Mechanism.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

27
CHAPTER  XI
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
53. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, make
to the Commission grants of such sums of money as  the Central Government may think fit
for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
54. (1) The National Commission for Higher Education  and research shall have its
own fund and there shall be credited thereto—
(a) any grants and loans made to the Commission by the Central Government;
(b) all fees and charges received by the Commission under this Act;
(c) all sums received by the Commission from such other sources as may be
decided upon by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund referred to in sub-section (1) shall be applied for meeting—
(a) the salaries and allowances to the Chairperson and Members, officers and
other employees of the Commission ;
(b ) the other expenses of the Commission in connection with the discharge of
its functions and for the purposes of this Act;
(c) the expenses of the General Council, Board, Corporation in connection
with the discharge of their functions and for the purposes of the Act.
55. (1) The Commission shall, in respect of each financial year, provide to the Central
Government a statement of the estimated expenditure on development of higher education
and research for that year, referred to as the “annual financial statement on higher educa-
tion and research”; and such estimated expenditure shall be based on norms and principles
specified under regulations.
(2) The Commission shall provide, that part of the estimated expenditure planned to
be appropriated towards research, along with an explanatory memorandum on the research
programmes proposed to be funded and an assessment of the productivity of research
programmes, based on norms as may be specified by regulations, funded in the past five
years.
(3) The Central Government shall cause the annual financial statement on higher
education and research, with such modifications as it may recommend, to be laid before
both Houses of Parliament.
56.  (1) The Commission, General Council, and the Board shall cause to be maintained
such books of account and other books in relation  to their account in such form and in such
manner as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be
prescribed.
(2) The Commission, General Council, and the Board shall, as soon as may be,  after
closing its annual accounts, prepare a statement of accounts in such form, and forward the
same to the Comptroller and Auditor-General by such date, as the Commission may, in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General, determine.
(3) The accounts of the Commission, General Council, and the Board shall be audited
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General at such times and in such manner as he thinks fit.
57. The Central Government shall, in respect of each financial year, cause to be laid
before both Houses of Parliament, the annual accounts of the Commission General Council,
and the Board together with the audit report thereon along with an explanatory memorandum
on the action so taken, by the Commission, on such report.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Fund of
National
Commission
for Higher
Education and
Research.
Furnishing of
statement of
estimated
expenditure
for
development
of higher
education and
research.
Accounts and
audit.
Laying of
annual
accounts of
Commission,
General
Council, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

28
CHAPTER XII
MISCELLANEOUS
58. The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other
information with respect to its regulations, policies or activities as the Central Government
may, for the purpose of reporting to Parliament or for the making of policy, from time to time,
require.
59.  Each university and each higher educational institution empowered by or under
any law for the time being in force to award any degree, shall furnish to the Commission at
such time and in such form and manner as may be specified by regulations or as the
Commission may seek, such returns and statements and such particulars concerning the
financial position of the university or higher educational institution; or the studies in
various branches of learning undertaken in that university or higher educational institution,
and its rules and regulations concerning standards of teaching and examination in that
university or higher educational institution in respect of each such branch of learning or in
such other matters, as the Commission may, from time to time, require.
60.  The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law, other than the Companies Act, 1956, for the
time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
61. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend, from
time to time, the First, Second, Third  or Fourth  Schedule to this Act.
62.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification make rules to carry out the
purpose of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following, matters, namely:—
(a) the form in which an oath of affirmation is to be made under sub-section (8)
of section 7;
(b) the other disqualifications for removal of the Chairperson or other Members
under clause (k) of sub-section (2) of section 8;
(c) the procedure for the inquiry under sub-section ( 5) of section 8;
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to and the status, other terms and
conditions of service of chairperson under sub-section ( 1) of section 14;
(e) the sitting fee and other allowances payable to the members under
sub-section (2) of section 14;
(f) the other functions to be discharged by the Commission under clause (n) of
sub-section (2) of section16;
(g) the other functions in relation to the determination, coordination and main-
tenance of standards in higher education and research to be entrusted to the Commis-
sion under clause (m) of sub-section (2) of section 17;
(h) the sitting fees and other allowances payable to a member of the General
Council for attending its meeting under sub-section (5) of section 26;
 (i) the other functions to be discharged by the General Council under clause (i)
of sub-section (2) of section 27;
 (j) the manner in which Fellows, other than Fellows referred to in sub-section
(4) of section 28, shall be chosen from amongst persons of integrity and eminence in
higher education and research under sub-section 28;
(k) the other functions to be discharged by the Collegium under clause ( g) of
sub-section (1) of section 30;
Furnishing of
returns and
information to
Central
Government by
Commission.
Furnishing of
returns and
information
by university
and
institutions to
Commission.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power of
Central
Government to
amend Schedule.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
1 of 1956
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

29
(l) the sitting fees and other allowances payable to a fellow of the Collegium for
attending its meeting under sub-section ( 2) of section 34;
(m)  the number of experts in management of, or in, organisations, and their
qualifications and terms and conditions on which their services shall be obtained by
the Collegium under sub-section (3) of section 34;
 (n) the form and manner in which an appeal may be preferred and the documents
to be accompanied with it and the fees payable therewith under section 38;
(o) the form and manner in which the books of account of the Commission shall
be maintained under sub-section (1) of section 48;
(p) the salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service of the Chairperson of each Qualifications Advisory Council under
sub-section (3) of section 50;
(q) the sitting fees or other allowances payable to Members of a Qualifications
Advisory Council other than its Chairperson for attending the meetings of such
Council under sub-section (4) of section 50;
(r) the form and manner in which the books of account of the Corporation shall
be maintained under sub-section (1) of section 56;
 (s) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.
63. (1) The Commission may, with prior approval of the General Council, by notifica-
tion, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rule made there under,  to carry out
the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for the following matters, namely:—
(a) the requirements for the award of any degree or diploma in any field of
knowledge in higher education and parameters for equivalence of academic qualifica-
tions under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 17;
(b) the norms of academic quality for accreditation and benchmarking of higher
educational institutions under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) of section 17;
(c) the norms and processes for establishment and winding up of a higher
educational institution and university  under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2) of
section17;
(d) the norms and processes for declaration of a university or an higher educa-
tional institution (not being a college), empowered, by or under any law to award any
degree, for commencement of enrolment of students under a course or programme,
under clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 17;
(e) the norms of academic quality for a university to affiliate colleges under
clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 17;
(f) the entry and operation of foreign educational institutions in accordance
with any law providing for such regulation for the time being in force under clause (f
)
of sub-section (2) of section 17;
(g) the norms and mechanisms for transparent, efficient and accountable gov-
ernance in universities and other higher educational institutions under clause ( g) of
sub-section (2) of section 17;
(h) the standards for leadership positions for appointment as Vice Chancellor of
a university or head of Central Educational Institution not being a college, under
clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 17;
(i) the norms and mechanisms to measure the productivity of research
programmes funded by the Commission under clause ( i) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 17;
Power of
Commission
to make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

30
(j) the norms and principles for allocation of grants, for the maintenance and
development or research or for any other general or specific purpose, of any class of
higher educational institutions and universities under clause (j) of sub-section (2) of
section 17;
(k) the mechanisms for social audit of the processes in the Commission and
obtain public feedback on its performance and achievements under clause ( k) of
sub-section (2) of section 17;
(l) the manner of establishment of inter university centres for providing cut-
ting-edge research facilities and thrust to new and emerging areas of knowledge,
common facilities for research for a group of universities or for the universities in
general under sub-section ( 1) of section 19;
(m) the qualifications and manner of appointment of officers and employees of
the Commission under sub-section (1) of section 22;
(n) the number of, salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of officers and employees of the Commission under sub-section
(2) of section 22;
(o) the terms and conditions, the qualifications and the period of appointment
of other academic, administrative, accounting, technical and scientific experts as may
be considered necessary by the Commission under sub-section ( 3) of section 22;
(p) the procedure for the conduct of its business and the exercise of its powers
and functions under sub-section ( 1) of section 23;
(q) the manner in which names of persons may be considered by the Collegium
for inclusion in the directory of academics for leadership positions under sub-section
(1) of section 31;
(r) the manner of preparation of the assessment report by a registered accredi-
tation agency and the norms on which such report shall be based under sub-section
(1) of section 35;
(s) the form and manner in which an application may be made for intimation of
intent to commence academic operations and the documents to be accompanied with
it and the fee payable therewith under sub-section ( 2) of section 35;
(t) the manner of preparation of the assessment report by a registered accredi-
tation agency and the norms on which such report shall be based, to be submitted by
a college or higher educational  institution along with the application for grant of
affiliation to a university under sub-section (2) of section 39;
(u) the sitting fees or allowances payable to Members nominated to the Board
for attending the meetings of the Board under sub-section ( 7) of section 43;
(v) the salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and the Members appointed under certain clauses to the
Board under sub-section (1) of section 44;
(w) the manner of providing officers and employees to the Board and their
qualifications, remuneration and other terms and conditions under sub-section (2) of
section 44;
(x) the terms and conditions and remuneration of engagement of services of
persons of eminence in research both from within and outside the country as consult-
ants or visiting scientists under sub-section ( 5) of section 44;
(y) the other functions to be discharged by the Board under clause (
k) of
sub-section (2) of section 45;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

31
(z) the number of officers and employees, and the terms and conditions of
appointment and service of the Managing Director, whole-time Directors and other
officers and employees of the Corporation under sub-section ( 6) of section 46;
(za) the norms and principles of grants to be allocated to each educational
institution under sub-section ( 2) of section 47;
(zb) the form and manner in which returns, statements and particulars in regard
to financing of higher educational institutions  and universities are to be furnished by
the Corporation under sub-section ( 1) of section 49;
(zc) the form and manner in which returns, statements and particulars concern-
ing the financial position of a university or a higher educational  institution are to be
furnished under section 59;
(zd)  any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulation
or in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations.
(3) No regulation shall be made under clause (l) or clause (n) or clause (w) or clause
(z) of sub-section (2) except with the prior approval of the Central Government.
64. Every rule and every regulation made and every notification issued by the Central
Government under this Act,  shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or notification or
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation or notification should not be made or issued,
the rule or regulation or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or
regulation or notification.
65. (1) If,  at any time, the Central Government is of the opinion,—
(a)  that,  on  account  of circumstances beyond the control  of  the Commission,
General Council ,Board  or Corporation,  as the case may be, it  is  unable to discharge
the functions or  perform  the  duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this
Act;  or
(b) that  the Commission,  General Council ,Board or Corporation,  as the case
may be, has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by the
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or perfor-
mance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a
result of such default the financial position of the Commission,  General Council,
Board or Corporation,  as the case may be, or the administration of  the Commission,
General Council, Board, the Corporation, as the case may be,  has suffered;  or
(c)  that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the  public interest so
to do,
it may by notification, supersede the Commission,  General Council, Board, the Board of
Directors  of the Corporation,  as the case may be,   for  such period, not  exceeding six
months, as  may  be  specified  in the notification and appoint a person or persons as the
Chairperson or the President, as the case may be, to exercise powers and discharge functions
of the Commission,  General Council ,Board or Corporation,  as the case may be,  under this
Act:
Provided  that  before  issuing  any such  notification,  the  Central Government shall
give a reasonable opportunity to the  Commission,  General Council , Board or  the Board of
Directors of the Corporation,  as the case may be, to make representations  against  the
Laying of
rules,
regulations
and
notifications.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Commission,
General
Council, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
40

32
proposed  supersession  and  shall consider the representations, if any, of the  Commission,
General Council ,Board or  the Board of Directors of the Corporation,  as the case may be.
(2) Upon  the  publication of a notification  under  sub-section ( 1) superseding the
Commission,  General Council ,Board or Corporation,  as the case may be,—
(a)  the  Chairperson, President, Vice-President  and other members shall, as
from  the  date  of supersession, vacate their offices as such;
(b)  all  the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under  the provisions
of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Commission,  General
Council ,Board or Corporation,  as the case may be,  shall,  until  the  Commission,
General Council ,Board or Corporation,  as the case may be,  is reconstituted under
sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by the person or persons referred to in
sub-section (1);  and
(c)  all properties owned or controlled by the  Commission,  General Council,
Board or Corporation,  as the case may be,  shall, until the Commission,  General
Council ,Board or Corporation,  as the case may be,  is  reconstituted under
sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the  period  of  supersession specified  in  the
notification  issued under  sub-section (1), the Central Government  shall  reconstitute the
Commission,  General Council ,Board or Corporation,  as the case may be,  by a fresh
appointment of its Chairperson and other members and in such case any person who had
vacated his office under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified
for reappointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub-
section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances
leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
66. The Chairperson and other Members of the  General Council ,Board or Corporation,
as the case may be,  shall immediately after entering office and every year thereafter, make
a declaration to the extent of their interest, whether direct or indirect and whether financial
or otherwise, in any  higher educational institution  and university which comes under the
purview of the  General Council ,Board or Corporation,  as the case may be,   and the same
shall be placed in the public domain.
67. ( 1) The Chairperson and other members of the General Council, Board or
Corporation,  as the case may be,   on ceasing to hold office shall not for a period of two
years accept any employment (including as consultant or expert or otherwise) in any higher
educational institution and university  whose matter has been dealt with by such Chairperson
or member, as the case may be.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prevent the Chairperson or a member, as the case
may be, to accept any employment in any university and higher educational institution
controlled or maintained by the Central Government or the State Government.
68. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
or other member of the General Council ,Board or Corporation,  as the case may be, by
reasons of death, removal, suspension or resignation, the senior most whole-time member
of such General Council, Board or Corporation,  as the case may be,  shall act as the
Chairperson till such time the Chairperson is appointed, to fill the vacancy.
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on
account of leave or otherwise, the senior most whole-time member shall discharge the
functions of the Chairperson till the Chairperson is able to discharge his functions.
69. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, no person shall be eligible to be appointed
or nominated or elected in any capacity in the General Council, Board or Corporation, as the
case may be, whether as the Chairperson or member for more than two terms.
Declaration of
interest.
Restriction of
re-employment.
Member to
act as
Chairperson
or to
discharger his
functions in
certain
circumstances.
Restriction on
holding office
for more than
two terms.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

33
70. The Chairperson or a member of the General Council, Board or Corporation, as the
case may be, by notice given in writing under his hand of not less than a period of  thirty
days, addressed to the Central Government resign from his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or a member of General Council, Board or Corporation,
as the case may be, shall, unless permitted by the Central Government to relinquish office
sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of a period of thirty days from the date of
receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon office
or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is earliest.
71. (1) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson or
any member of the General Council, Board or Corporation,  as the case may be, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) being whole-time member has engaged at any time, during his term of office,
in any paid employment; or
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d)  has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson
or other Member; or
(e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(f) has been removed or dismissed from the service of office of the Central
Government or of a State Government or from a body owned or controlled by the
Central Government or a State Government or from any Central or State statutory
body;
(g) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functioning as Chairperson or other Member, as the case may be; or
(h) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to public interest; or
(i)  has been guilty of proved misconduct; or
(j) has been guilty of proved conflict of interest in the discharge of functions.
(2)    The Chairperson or a member of the General Council, Board or Corporation,  as
the case may be, shall not be removed from his office under clause (g) or clause (h) or clause
(i) of sub-section (1), unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
the matter:
Provided that the Central Government may, if it considers necessary in the public
interest, suspend such Chairperson or other member.
72. No act or proceeding of the General Council, Board or Corporation,  as the case
may be,  shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the General Council,
Board or Corporation,  as the case may be; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the General
Council, Board or Corporation,  as the case may be; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the General Council, Board or Corpora-
tion,  as the case may be, not affecting the merits of the case.
73. (1) The General Council or Corporation,  as the case may be, shall be competent to
constitute such other committees for general or special purposes, as it may consider necessary
to carry out the functions assigned to it under this Act.
Resignation of
Chairperson
or a member
of General
Council,
Board or
Corporation.
Removal and
suspension
and
Chairperson
or a member
of General
Council,
Board or
Corporation.
Vacancies,
etc. not to
invalidate
proceedings of
General
Council
Board, or
Corporation.
Power to
appoint
committees.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

34
(2) The General Council, Board or Corporation,  as the case may be  may engage such
experts for discharging its functions under this Act for such period, on such qualification
and on payment of such fees and remuneration as may be specified by regulations made
under this Act.
74. Where any dispute arises regarding any recommendation or advice of General
Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, made to the Commission, it shall be
referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final and binding.
75. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Commission under section 74
may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within such period as may be prescribed.
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed
therefore:
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed
therefor if the appellant satisfies the Central Government that he had sufficient cause for
not preferring the appeal within the prescribed period.
(3) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and shall be
accompanied by a copy of the order appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.
(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
76. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for
anything which has been done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act.
77. The Chairperson and Members and other officers and employees of the
Commission, General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, shall be deemed to
be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
78. (1) Where the Commission, Board, Committee or General Council, as the case may
be, consider it expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing.
(a) call upon any higher educational institution  or university at any time to
furnish in writing, such information or explanation relating to its affairs as the Com-
mission, General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, may require; or
(b) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of
any higher  educational institution and university; and
(c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect the books of account or
other documents of any higher educational institution and university.
(2) Where any inquiry in relation to the affairs of an higher educational institution or
university has been undertaken under sub-section ( 1),—
(a) every officer of the Government Department, if such   higher educational
institution or university is a department of the Government;
(b) every director, manager, secretary or other officer, if such higher educational
institution or university is a company; or
(c) every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if such  higher educational
institution or university is a firm; or
(3) Every other person or body of persons who has had dealings in the course of
business with any of the persons mentioned in sub-section ( 2), shall produce before the
Commission, General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, making inquiry, all
such books of account or other documents in his custody or power relating to, or having a
bearing on the subject-matter of such inquiry and also to furnish to the Commission, General
Reference of
disputes to
Central
Government.
Appeal
against
decisions of
Commission.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Members,
etc., to be
public
servants.
Power of the
Commission,
Board,
Committee or
General
Council to
call for
information
or conduct
investigation,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

35
Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, with any such statement or information
relating thereto, as the case may be, required of him, within such time as may be specified by
the Commission.
(4) Every higher educational institution and university shall maintain such books of
account or other documents as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
(5) The Commission, General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, shall
have the power to issue such directions to higher educational institution and university as
it may consider necessary for proper functioning of such institution.
79. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Commission,
General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, shall, in exercise of its powers
and in performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions
of policy, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the Commission, General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case
may be, shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views before any
direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the Commission, General
Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, as to whether a question is or is not a
question of policy, the decision of the Central Government shall be final.
80. The Commission, General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, shall
furnish to the Central Government any information with respect to their activities as the
Central Government may from time to time require.
81. The Central Government may appoint an independent committee once in every
five years to review the functioning of the Commission, General Council, Board or
Corporation, as the case may be.
82. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
83.  (1) With effect from such date, not later than one year from the date of coming into
force of this Act, as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Commission,
notify, that the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the All India Council for Technical
Education Act, 1987, the National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993, shall stand
repealed and the University Grants Commission, the All India Council  for Technical
Education, and the National Council for Teachers Education shall stand dissolved:
Provided that anything done or any action taken as regards the educational standards
and requirements under the enactments under repeal and the rules and regulations made
thereunder shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions
of this Act and shall continue to be  in force accordingly unless and until superseded by
anything done or by any action taken under this Act:
Provided further that all the degrees awarded and all the colleges and the higher
educational institutions recognised under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Commission,
General
Council,
Board or
Corporation,
to furnish
information
to Central
Gvoernment.
Review.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Repeal and
savings.
3 of 1956.
52 of 1987.
73 of 1993.
3 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

36
the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 shall be deemed to have been
awarded or recognised under this Act:
Provided also that during the period between the date of coming into force of this Act
and the date of repeal of the enactments mentioned in this sub-section, the University
Grants Commission, the All India Council of Technical Education and the National Council
of Teacher Education shall not take any decision or action, except with the prior approval of
the Commission, on any matter as specified by the Commission.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Architects Act, 1972, the Advocates
Act, 1961 , the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, the Dentists Act, 1948,  the Pharmacy Act,
1948, the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970,
and the Homeopathy Central Council Act, 1973, the provisions of this Act shall apply to any
matter concerning the determination, co-ordination, maintenance of standards in, and
promotion of, higher education and research:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be construed as restricting the
power of the Bar Council of India to specify standards of higher education concerning
practice in courts:
Provided further that nothing contained in this section shall be construed as restricting
the power of the professional Councils listed in the First Schedule to specify standards of
higher education concerning professional practice.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indira Gandhi National Open University
Act, 1985, the provisions of this Act shall apply to the co-ordination, determination and
promotion of standards in distance education systems.
  (4)  If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature,
relating to the   the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the All India Council for
Technical Education Act, 1987 the National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993, is
pending, the   same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected
by reason of the  repeal of the said Acts  but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be
continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the Commission.
(5) On and from the date of repeal of the said enactments,—
(a) any reference to the said enactments in any law for the time being in force
shall be construed to be a reference to this Act;
(b) any reference to the University Grants Commission, the All India Council of
Technical Education or the National Council of Teacher Education, in any law or rule
or regulation for the time being in force or any contract or other instrument, shall be
construed as a reference to the Commission established under this Act;
(c) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the University
Grants Commission, the All India Council of Technical Education and the National
Council of Teacher Education shall vest in the Commission;
(d) all rights and liabilities of the University Grants Commission, the All India
Council of Technical Education or the National Council of Teacher Education shall be
transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the Commission;
(e) any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Chairman of the University
Grants Commission, the Chairman of the All India Council of Technical Education or
the Chairman of the National Council of Teacher Education in any law for the time
being in force, or in any instrument or other document, shall be construed as a
reference respectively to the Chairman of the Commission;
(f) on the dissolution of the University Grants Commission, the All India Council
for Technical Education and the National Council for Teacher Education the person
52 of 1987.
20 of 1972.
25 of 1961.
102 of 1956.
16 of 1948.
8 of 1948.
48 of 1947.
48 of 1970.
59 of 1973.
5 of 1985.
3 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

37
appointed as Chairman and every other person appointed a Member and holding
office as such immediately before such date shall vacate their respective offices and
no such Chairperson or other person shall be entitled to claim any compensation for
the premature termination of the term of his office or of any contract of service.
(6) On the dissolution of the University Grants Commission, the All India Council for
Technical Education and the National Council for Teacher Education on repeal of the said
enactments, the Central Government, by notification, shall take consequential action in
regard to officers and staff in the regular service of the University Grants Commission, the
All India Council for Technical Education and the National Council for Teacher Education.
(7) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the mention of particular matters in this
section, shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the
General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of repeals.
84. Notwithstanding the repeal of the  University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the
All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987  and the National Council for Teacher
Education Act, 1993, the educational  standards, requirements and other provisions of the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the All India Council for Technical Education Act,
1987  and the National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993, and the rules and regulations
made thereunder shall continue to be in force and operate till new standards are specified
under this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Transitory
provisions.
3 of 1956.
52 of 1987.
73 of 1993.
3 of 1956.
73 of 1993.
10 of 1897.
5
10
15

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[see clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 26]
List of professional bodies to be represented on the General Council.
S. No.   List of professional bodies
1. Bar Council of India.
2. Central Council of Homeopathy.
3. Central Council for Indian Medicine.
4. Council of Architecture.
5. Dental Council of India.
6. Indian Nursing Council.
7. Institute of Chartered Accountants of India.
8. Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India.
9. Institute of Company Secretaries of India.
10. Institution of Engineers.
11. Medical Council of India.
12. Pharmacy Council of India.
13. Rehabilitation Council of India.
14. V eterinary Council of India.
38
5
10
15

THE  SECOND SCHEDULE
[see clause (e) of  sub-section (1) of section 26]
List of research Councils to be represented on the General Council.
S. No. List of research Councils
1. Council for Industrial and Scientific Research.
2. Department of Atomic Energy.
3. Defence Research and Development Organisation.
4. Indian Academy of Sciences.
5. Indian National Academy of Engineering.
6. Indian Council for Agricultural Research.
7. Indian Council of Historical Research
8. Indian Council of Medical Research.
9. Indian Council for Philosophical Research
10. Indian Council of Social Sciences Research
11. Indian Space Research Organization.
12. Indian National Science Academy.
13. National Academy of Sciences.
39
5
10
15

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[see sub-section (3) of section 28]
List of awards whose recipients shall be Fellows of the Collegium
S. No. List of awards
1. Nobel Prize in any field.
2. Fields Medal.
40
5

THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
[see clause (l) of sub-section (1) of section 26]
List of industry associations with national presence eligible for representation on the
General Council.
S. No. List of industry associations with national presence eligible for representation
on the General Council.
1. Associated Chamber of Commerce  and  Industry of India.
2. Confederation of Indian Industry.
3. Federation of Indian Export Organisations.
4. Indian Machine Tools Manufacturers Association.
5. Manufacturers Association of Information Technology.
6. National Association of Software  and  Service Companies.
7. All-India Manufacturers Association.
8. Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce  and Industry.
9. Indian Electrical  and Electronics Manufacturers’ Association.
10. Organisation of Pharmaceutical Producers of India.
41
5
10
15

42
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Indian Higher Education is a large and growing system with nearly five hundred and
fifty four university level institutions and over thirty two thousand colleges, both publicly
and privately funded. With the rapid growth in the higher education sector, numerous concerns
have arisen about the regulatory structure in various fields of knowledge in institutions of
higher learning. The Higher education sector as a whole is seen as “over regulated but under
governed” with a multiplicity of regulatory agencies.
2. The University Grants Commission was constituted as a statutory body under the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956 for co-ordinating the activities of higher educational
institutions and maintaining standards. It was expected that University Grants Commission
would perform the overarching function of promoting and steering the higher education
sector in the country.
3. Over time however, several Councils have been set up to promote or regulate areas
of technical, professional and medical education. While this has focussed attention on
specialised areas of education, it has also led to fragmentation of knowledge with different
regulatory agencies taking different views on matters of standards and promotion of higher
education. This has prevented flow of ideas across disciplines and created boundaries in the
higher educational sector where none should exist. It has, therefore, become imperative that
a holistic view of higher education is taken because of the increasingly converging nature of
disciplines and the opportunities of knowledge creation that lie at the intersections of existing
disciplines.
4. In its report, the Education Commission (Kothari Commission) (1964-66) had
recommended that the University Grants Commission should represent the entire spectrum
of higher education and that all higher education should be regarded as an integrated whole.
The National Policy on Education, 1986, and the Plan of Action, 1992, have also envisaged
the establishment of a National Apex Body for bringing about greater coordination and
integration in the planning and development of higher education system including research.
The National Knowledge Commission in its Report, 2007 had recommended the establishment
of an Independent Regulatory Authority for Higher Education. The Committee to advise on
the Renovation and Rejuvenation of Higher Education in its Report, 2009, has also
recommended for the creation of an all-encompassing the National Commission for Higher
Education and Research as a Constitutional body to replace the existing regulatory bodies.
5. In view of the above, it is proposed to enact a law, namely, the Higher Education and
Research Bill, 2011 empowering the Central Government to establish the National Commission
for Higher Education and Research which shall be an over-arching body to maintain and co-
ordinate the standards in higher education in the country. The Higher Education and Research
Bill, 2011seeks to promote autonomy of higher educational institutions and universities for
free pursuit of knowledge and innovation;  to provide for a comprehensive and integrated
growth of higher education and research keeping in view the global standards of educational
and research practices and for that purpose to establish the National Commission for Higher
Education and Research to facilitate determination, co-ordination, maintenance and continued
enhancement of standards of higher education and research including university education,
vocational, technical, professional and medical education other than agricultural education.
6. The Higher Education and Research Bill, 2011, inter alia,  provides for the following,
namely:—
(a) to establish a National Commission for Higher Education and Research (the
Commission) for the determination, coordination, maintenance of standards and
promotion of higher education and research including university education, vocational,
technical and professional education;

43
(b)  the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and six other members to be
appointed by the President of India on the recommendation of a Selection Committee
headed by the Prime Minister with the Speaker of Lok Sabha, the Leader of Opposition
in the Lok Sabha and the Ministers in charge of Medical Education and Higher Education
in Government of India as members respectively;
(c) to establish a General Council which shall consist of the Chairperson of the
Commission, who shall chair the meetings of the Council, all members of the Commission
and the Chairpersons or Vice-Chairpersons of State Higher Education Council as may
be determined by such Councils to represent each State and Union territory and also
consist of the heads of professional bodies, research councils and experts in all sectoral
areas of higher education;
(d) the General Council shall advice the Commission in the exercise of its functions
and also advice the measures to be taken by the Commission to promote quality of
higher education and nurture excellence;
(e) to establish a Collegium which consist of thirty persons of eminence in
higher education and research to guide the Commission without interfering in its
activities and by offering advice when solicited;
(f) to establish a Board for Research Promotion and Innovation, consisting of a
Chairperson and twelve other members to be appointed by the Commission to
recommend measures to the Commission to promote and facilitate research in the
fields of knowledge in higher educational institutions;
(g) to establish the Higher Education Financial Services Corporation to disburse
grants to higher educational institutions;
(h) to make a provision for reference of any difference of opinion between the
National Commission for Higher Education and Research under this Act and the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health established under the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health Act, 2011 to the Joint Committee under
this Act for its decision;
(i) to empower the Central Government to supersede the Commission, General
Council, the Board for Research Promotion and Innovation and the Higher Education
Financial Services Corporation under certain circumstances stated in the Bill;
(j) to empower the Commission, the Board for Research Promotion and Innovation,
Corporation or General Council to call for information or conduct investigation in
relation to the affairs of any higher Educational institution and University;
(k) to repeal the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the All India Council
for Technical Education Act, 1987, the National Council for Teacher Education Act,
1993 and to dissolve the University Grants Commission, the All India Council for
Technical Education and the National Council for Teacher Education.
9. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
10.The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
KAPIL SIBAL.
N
EW DELHI;
The 22nd December, 2011.

44
Notes on  clauses
Clause 2.— This clause contains provision for application of the Act. It provides that
this Act shall apply to all the higher educational institutions other than those institutions
engaged mainly in agricultural education and research.
Clause 3.— This clause seeks to define certain expressions used in the proposed
legislation. These definitions, inter alia, include “academic quality”, “accreditation”,
“appropriate statutory regulatory body”, “Central Educational Institution”, “college”,
“degree”, “diploma”, “higher education”, “National Commission for Human Resources for
Health”, “National Research Professor”, etc.
Clause 4.— This clause provides for the establishment of National Commission for
Higher Education and Research. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Central
Government shall, by notification, establish a Commission to be called the “National
Commission for Higher Education and Research”. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides
that the Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable , and to contract, and shall, by
the said name, sue or be sued. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the headquarters
of the Commission shall be in the National Capital Region and may establish offices in such
other locations as it may deem fit.
Clause 5.— This clause contains provision for composition of Commission. It provides
that the Commission shall consist of- (a) a Chairperson; (b) three whole-time members; and
(c)three part-time members, to be appointed, by the President, on the recommendations of
the Selection Committee constituted under section 7; (d) the Chairperson of the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health referred to in sub-section (3) of section 3 of the
National Commission for Human Resources for Health Act, 2011.
Clause 6.— This clause contains provisions relating to the qualifications for
appointment of Chairperson and Members of the Commission. Sub-clause (1) of the said
clause provides that the Chairperson  and the whole-time members shall be a person of
eminence and standing in the field of academics and research possessing leadership abilities,
proven capacity for institution building and governance of institutions of higher learning,
and having not less than twenty-five years experience in the profession, out of which at least
fifteen years shall be in a leadership role, in the area of academics and research. Sub-clause
(2) of the said clause provides that the others part-time Members shall be persons of eminence
and standing in the field of education and research with high academic credentials and
proven contribution to economic and social development with experience of governance of
institutions of higher learning and engagement with policies in the field of higher education,
and having not less than twenty years experience in the profession, out of which at least
fifteen years shall be in a leadership role, in the area of academics,  and research. Sub-clause
(3) of the said clause provides that no person, who is not a citizen of India, shall be eligible
to be appointed as the Chairperson or a Member.
Clause 7.— This clause deals with the Selection Committee. Sub-clause (1) of the said
clause provides that the Central Government shall constitute a Selection Committee consisting
of-(a) the Prime Minister, who shall be the Chairperson of the Selection Committee; (b) the
Speaker of Lok Sabha; (c) the Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha; (d) the Minister in charge
of Higher Education in the Government of India; and (e) the Minister in charge of Medical
Education in the Government of India. The Explanation to the above said sub-clause provides
that for the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where the Leader of
Opposition in the Lok Sabha has not been recognised as such, the Leader of the single
largest group in opposition to the Government in the Lok Sabha shall be deemed to be the
Leader of Opposition. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Selection Committee

45
shall make its recommendations from the panel of three names, submitted by the Collegium
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 30, for each vacancy. Sub-clause (3) of the said
clause provides that before recommending any person for appointment as a Chairperson or
a Member of the Commission, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that such person
does not have any financial or other conflict of interest, which is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as Chairperson or Member, as the case may be. Sub-clause (4) of the said
clause provides that no appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the Commission shall
be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee. Sub-clause (5) of the
said clause provides that subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1) to (4), the Selection
Committee may regulate its own procedure for assessing the suitability of the person from
the panel of names referred to in sub-section (2) to be recommended to the president for
appointment. Sub-clause (6) of the said clause provides that the Central Government shall
initiate the process of appointment in respect of any vacancy due to arise in the office of the
Chairperson or of other Members of the Commission, six months prior to the date of arising
of such vacancy. However, the said sub-clause provides that in case a vacancy arises in the
Selection Committee for the reason of death or removal, or resignation from office, such
vacancy shall be filled expeditiously, within a period of six months from the date on which the
vacancy has arisen. Sub-clause (7) of the said clause provides that every appointment under
this section shall take effect from the date on which it is notified by the Central Government
in the Official Gazette. Sub-clause (8) of the said clause provides that the Chairperson or
other Member shall, before entering office make and subscribe before the President or some
other person appointed by the President in that behalf, an oath of affirmation, in such the
form as may be prescribed.
Clause 8.—This clause relates to resignation and removal of Chairperson and Members.
Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Chairperson or any Member, other than
the Member referred to in clause (d) of section 5 may, by notice in writing under his hand
addressed to the President , resign from office. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides
that the President may remove from office the Chairperson or any Member, other than the
Member referred to in the clause (d) of section 5, who-(a) has been adjudged an insolvent;
(b) has engaged, at any time during his term of office, in any paid employment outside the
duties of his office; (c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such
Chairperson or other Member; or (d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court; (e) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the President,
involves moral turpitude; (f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially the exercise of his functions as such Chairperson or other Member; (g) has
failed to attend three consecutive meetings of the Commission; (h) has so abused his position
as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest; (i) has been guilty of
proved misconduct; (j) has been guilty of proved conflict of interest in the discharge of
functions; or (k) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause(3) of the said clause provides that notwithstanding anything in sub-section
(2), the Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed from his office on the grounds
specified in clause (h) or clause (i) or clause (j) of sub-section (2), except by an order made by
the President after an inquiry made in this behalf by the Chairperson of the National
Educational Tribunal, in which such Chairperson or such Member has been informed of the
charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those
charges. Sub-clause(4) of the said clause provides that in the event of inquiry instituted
under sub-section (3), the President may suspend such Chairperson or other Member against
whom an inquiry has been instituted for a period not exceeding six months if he considers
necessary in public interest. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that the Central
Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the inquiry referred to in sub-section (3).
Clause 9.— This clause contains provisions relating to term of office of Chairperson
and Members. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that a person appointed as
Chairperson and other Members, other than Member referred to in the clause (d) of
section 5, shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his

46
office. However, the said clause provides that the Chairperson and the whole-time Members
shall cease to hold office on attaining the age of seventy years. Sub-clause (2) of the said
clause provides that the Commission shall request the Central Government to initiate the
process of appointment in respect of any vacancy due to arise on the post of Chairperson or
other Members on completion of tenure before a period of six months from the date of arising
of such vacancy. However, the said clause provides that the process of appointment shall be
completed before such vacancy arises. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that where
a vacancy has arisen on account of any reason other than completion of tenure, the process
of appointment in respect of such vacancy to the post of Chairperson or other Members
shall be completed within a period of six months from the date such vacancy had arisen.
 Clause 10.— This clause deals with declaration of interest by the Chairperson or
other Members.  Sub-clause (1) of this clause  provides that the Chairperson or other Members
shall, immediately after entering office and every year thereafter, make a declaration on the
extent of his interest, whether direct or indirect and whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any
institution engaged in research or any higher educational institution or in any other
professional or financial activity which comes under the purview of the commission and the
same shall be displayed on the website of the Commission. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that the Chairperson or any other Member having any direct or indirect interest,
whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of
the Commission, shall, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting; and shall not take
any part in any deliberation or decision of the Commission with respect to that matter.
Z— This clause relates to restriction on re-employment. This  clause provides that the
Chairperson or other Member on ceasing to hold office, other than the Member referred to in
clause (c) and clause (d) of section 5, shall be ineligible, for a period of five years from the
date on which they cease to hold office, for further employment in, or, in matters related to,
any higher educational institution under the Central Government or a State Government or
any private higher educational institution or any accreditation agency.
Clause 12.— This clause provides that subject to other provisions of this legislation,
the general superintendence, direction and control of the administration of the Commission
shall vest in the Chairperson.
Clause 13.— This clause relates to the Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge
his functions in certain circumstances. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that in the
event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson by reason of death,
resignation or otherwise, the President may, by  notification, authorise one of the other
whole-time Members, to act as the Chairperson until the appointment of a person to fill such
vacancy. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that when the Chairperson is unable to
discharge his functions owing to absence on leave or otherwise, such one of the other
whole-time Members, as the President may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall
discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson resumes
his duties.
Clause 14.— This clause provides that the salaries and allowances payable to, and the
status and other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson of the Commission shall
be such as may be prescribed. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the members
referred to in clause 5 (c) and (d), shall receive such sitting fees.
Clause 15.— This clause provides that the vacancies, etc., not to invalidate
proceedings of Commission. It provides that no act or proceeding of the Commission shall
be invalid merely by reason of— (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of,
the Commission; (b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as Member of the
Commission; or (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the
merits of the case.
Clause 16.— This clause relates to the Commission to promote higher education and
research. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Commission shall, in consultation

47
with the Governing Council and  other bodies concerned, take all such steps as it may think
fit for the promotion and co-ordination of higher education and research. Sub-clause (2) of
the said clause provides that without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
the measures referred to in sub-section (1), may, inter alia, provide for all or any of the
matters, namely,— (a) to promote autonomy within higher educational institutions; (b) to
promote accountability framework in regulatory systems of higher education sector; (c) to
promote development of a curriculum framework with specific reference to new or emerging
or inter-disciplinary fields of knowledge; (d) to promote, through the development of a
flexible academic framework, the exercise of choice by students for self-development,
entrepreneurship, acquisition of skills and pursuit of learning; (e) to promote joint and cross-
disciplinary programmes between and amongst the universities and other higher educational
institutions; (f) to promote synergy of research in universities and higher educational
institutions with research in other agencies or laboratories; (g) to promote co-ordination
between higher educational institutions and industry towards innovation for mutual benefit
and for the well-being of society; (h) to encourage  universities to formulate a Code of Good
Practices in leadership, governance and management and to develop a framework Code to
guide universities in formulating such Code of Good Practices; (i) take such other measures
for the promotion of higher education and research in higher educational institutions for the
achievement of the goals in sub-section (1); (j) develop measures to relate higher education
and research to the world of work and needs of society; (k) encourage universities for
enabling colleges to innovate in higher education and research to evolve into universities or
institutions with an authorisation to award degrees by itself; (l) take measures to enhance
access and inclusion in higher education to remove imbalances in higher education; or (m)
perform such other functions as may be prescribed. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides
that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to imply that the measures taken by
the Commission shall be obligatory for higher educational institutions and universities to
adopt, but such measures shall serve to act as reference for higher educational institutions
and universities to advance quality, access and inclusion in higher education and research
therein, and for the achievement of the goals in sub-section (1).
Clause 17.— This clause deals with the Commission to determine, co-ordinate, maintain
and specify standards of higher education and research. Sub-clause (1) of said clause provides
that the commission shall, with the prior approval of the Central Government and subject to
the provisions of this Act, make regulations, to determine, co-ordinate and specify standards
of higher education and research. Sub-clause (2) of said clause provides that without prejudice
to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the regulations referred to in sub-section (1),
may, inter alia, provide for all or any of the matters, namely,—(a) Specify the requirements
for the award of any degree or diploma in any field of knowledge of higher education and
research and specify parameters for equivalence between academic qualifications; (b) specify
norms and standards of academic quality for accreditation and benchmarking of higher
educational institutions and universities ; (c) specify norms and processes for establishment
and winding up of a higher educational institutions or a university; (d) specify norms and
processes for permitting, a university or an higher educational institution empowered, by or
under any law, to award any degree, to enrol students in any course or programme of study
for the first time; (e) specify norms of academic quality for a university to affiliated colleges;
(f) regulate the entry and operation of foreign educational institutions in accordance with
any law providing for such regulation for the time being in force; (g) specify norms and
mechanisms for transparent, efficient and accountable governance in universities and other
higher educational institutions; (h) specify and co-ordinate standards for leadership positions
for appointment as Vice-Chancellor of a university or the head of a Central Educational
Institution not being a college; (i) specify norms to measure the productivity of research
programmes; (j) specify norms and principles for allocation of grants, for the maintenance
and development or research or for any other general or specific purpose, of any class of
higher educational institutions and universities; (k) specify a framework for enabling mobility
of students emerging from vocational education into general higher education; (l) specify
mechanisms for social audit of the processes in the Commission and obtain public feedback

48
on its performance and achievements to foster accountability; or (m) discharge such other
functions in relation to the determination, coordination and maintenance of standards in
higher education and research as the Central Government may subject to the provisions of
this Act, prescribe. Sub-clause (3) of said clause provides that the Commission shall, in the
exercise of powers and functions under this section, create an enabling environment for
universities to emerge as autonomous, self-regulatory bodies. Sub-clause (4) of said clause
provides that nothing contained in this Act shall prevent the National Board for Health
Education constituted under the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Act,
2011 to approve and notify minimum norms and standards of maintenance of academic
quality for accreditation and benchmarking of education in recognised health educational
institutions imparting approved courses in the discipline of health throughout the period of
accreditation.
Clause 18.— This clause relates to advise, monitor and cause to be undertaken policy
research. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Commission shall advise, when
called upon to do so or otherwise, the Central Government or any State Government or any
professional body, on policies relating to higher education and research in any field of
knowledge therein. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Commission shall
cause to be undertaken research concerning policy in higher education to identify future
directions and processes in higher education; or to assess future knowledge manpower
requirements in different fields of knowledge for meeting the needs of the economy; or
research to develop a vision on future trends in knowledge; or in such other matters of policy
as the Commission may deem fit. . Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the
Commission shall monitor, through a national database, all matters concerning academic
quality, sources of funding, access and inclusion in higher education and research. Sub-
clause (4) of the said clause provides that the Commission shall advise and facilitate a body
or institution, seeking such advice or facilitation, in regard to a proposal for the establishment
of a university in accordance with the norms and standards specified by it or for development
of an accountability framework towards achievement of the objectives and purposes of the
body or institution.
Clause 19.—This clause contains provisions relating to establishment of inter university
centres. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Commission may, on the
recommendations of the Board and with the prior approval of the Central Government,
establish, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, inter university centres for
providing research facilities and thrust to new and emerging areas of knowledge, common
facilities for research for a group of universities or for the universities in general and provide
for their maintenance by allocating and disbursing such grants as the Commission may deem
necessary. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the inter university centres
established before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been established
under this Act. However, the said sub-clause provides that the Commission shall, in
consultation with the Central Government, in respect of an inter university centre, established
before the commencement of this Act, whose objectives are not in conformity with the
provisions specified in sub-section (1), decide on the continuance of such Centre as an inter
university centre under this Act.
Clause 20.— This clause contains provisions relating to the maintenance of directory
of academics for leadership positions. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the
Commission shall maintain the directory of academics for leadership positions consisting of
persons fulfilling standards for leadership positions for appointment as Vice Chancellor or
head of a Central Educational Institution not being a college, prepared by the Collegium from
time to time under sub-section (2) of section 31. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides
that the Commission shall, when called upon to do so by the Central Government or Central
Educational Institution not being a college, as the case may be, recommend a panel of five
names from the directory of academics for leadership positions for appointment to the post
of Vice Chancellor of such Central University or Central Educational Institution. Sub-
clause (3) of the said clause provides that the notwithstanding anything contained in this

49
section or in section 31, the Chancellor, State Government or the Governing Body, by whatever
name called, of a university, other than a Central Educational Institution, may appoint a
person as Vice-Chancellor subject to such person satisfying the standards for leadership
positions, specified by the Commission under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 17.
Clause 21.— This clause deals with the Commission to prepare statements on vision
of higher education. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Commission shall
prepare annually an evidence based statement  on the status of higher education and research
and its relation to global trends, and assessment of its performance along with a report on the
activities of the Commission. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the statement
and report referred to in sub-section (1) shall be provided to the General Council for
observations and recommendations and to the Collegium for assessment of the performance
of the Commission and recommendations thereto. Sub-clause (3) of the said Clause provides
that the Commission shall present to the President, the statement and the report, along with
the assessment and recommendations received under sub-section (2). Sub-clause (4) of the
said clause provides that the Commission shall, in respect of every State and Union territory,
before the expiry of five years from the date of commencement of this Act and at an interval
of every five years thereafter, and such other times as it deems fit, prepare a report on the
status of higher education and research in such State or Union territory and its relation to
national trends. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that the Commission shall present
to the Governor of the State or the administrator of an Union territory, as the case may be,
such report prepared under sub-section (4) on the status of higher education and research in
a State or Union territory and its relation to national trends. Sub-clause (6) of the said clause
provides that the Commission shall present to the President, before the expiry of five years
from the date of commencement of this Act and at an interval of every five years thereafter,
a statement on the vision of higher education and research in the forthcoming decade; an
analysis of the performance of higher education sector and implementation of policies in the
past five years, and shall make in such statement, recommendations as to the measures that
ought to be taken for renovation and rejuvenation of higher education and research, including
- (a) vision, policy and strategy for emerging fields of knowledge and norms for developing
requirements of such fields of knowledge; (b) development of qualifications framework to
reflect the vision of higher education and research; (c) norms and mechanisms for evaluating
cost and price of higher education and research. However, the said sub-clause provides that
before the report is presented to the President, the Commission shall provide such report to
the General Council and to the Collegium for offering comments or suggestions (including an
assessment of the performance of the Commission and recommendations to be taken on
measures to enhance such performance) on the report, or any part of it thereof; and such
comments or suggestions received thereon shall be appended to the report presented to the
President. Sub-clause (7) of the said clause provides that the President shall cause to be laid
before both Houses of Parliament, such reports prepared by the Commission under sub-
section (3) and sub-section (6), along with an explanatory memorandum on the action taken,
or proposed to be taken, thereon in respect of each recommendation made by the Commission
or the General Council or the Collegium. Sub-clause (8) of the said clause provides that the
Governor of every State shall cause to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of such State,
the report prepared by the Commission under sub-section (5) concerning the state of higher
education and research in such State, along with an explanatory memorandum on the action
taken, or proposed to be taken, thereon in respect of each recommendation made by the
Commission.
Clause 22.— This clause relates to the Officers and other staff of Commission. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Commission may, for the efficient performance
of its functions under this Act, appoint, in such manner and with such qualifications, officers
and employees, as may be specified by regulations. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides
that the number of, the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service of, officers and employees of the Commission, shall be such as may be specified
by regulations. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Commission may appoint,

50
in such manner for such temporary period and on such terms and conditions as may be
specified by regulations, such other academic, management, accounting, technical and
scientific experts as it may consider necessary for the efficient performance of its functions.
Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that every appointment under sub-section (3),
including the qualifications of the person so appointed and the manner, the terms and
conditions and the period of such appointment, shall be disclosed on the website of the
Commission.
Clause 23.— This clause empowers the commission to delegate powers. Sub-clause
(1) of the said clause provides that the Commission may, by regulations made, by notification
in the Official Gazette under this Act, delegate to its Chairperson or any of its officers, its
power of general superintendence and direction over the business transacted by, or in, the
Commission, including the powers with regard to the expenditure incurred in connection
with the maintenance of the officers and internal administration of the Commission. Sub
clause (2) of the said clause provides that the no regulation shall be made under this section
except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
Clause 24.— This clause relates to review of performance of Commission. Sub-clause
(1) of the said clause provides that the President shall, within five years from the commencement
of this Act and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year, constitute a Committee to
evaluate and review the performance of the Commission in the said period, consisting of
persons of international eminence and standing, to be appointed by the President on the
basis of a panel of names to be proposed by the Collegium. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that the Committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall evaluate and review the
performance of the Commission and make recommendations to the President as to –(a) the
extent of fulfillment of the goals and objectives of the Commission stated in the Preamble to
this Act, as demonstrated by the state of higher education and research; (b) the interaction
between the Commission, the General Council and the Collegium; (c) future directions of the
Commission along with corrective measures, if any; (d) such other matters as may be referred
to the Committee by the President. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the
President shall cause to be laid before both Houses of Parliament, the report of the Committee
constituted under sub-section (1) along with an explanatory memorandum on the action
taken, or proposed to be taken, thereon in respect of each recommendation of the Committee.
Clause 25.— This clause empowers the Central Government to frame national policy.
Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Central Government shall, at such times as
it thinks fit, prepare in consultation with the State Governments and the Commission, a
national policy for the development of higher education and research, which shall guide the
Commission in the exercise of its powers and functions under this Act. Sub-clause (2) of the
said clause provides that the Central Government shall inform the Commission of all the
decisions taken by it on matters of policy concerning higher education and research.
Clause 26.— This clause contains provisions for the establishment of General Council.
Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Central Government shall, by notification,
establish, a General Council, consisting of - (a) the Chairperson of the Commission, who shall
chair the meetings of the Council; (b) all Members of the Commission; (c) the Chairperson or
Vice-Chairperson of a State Higher Education Council, as may be determined by such Council,
to represent each State and Union territory. However, the said sub-clause provides that
where a State Higher Education Council has not been constituted in a State or Union territory,
the State Government concerned shall nominate a Vice Chancellor of a university located in
such State or Union territory. The said sub-clause further provides that where no university
is located in a Union territory, the administration of such Union territory shall nominate a
senior academic to represent such Union territory. The Explanation to the said sub-clause
provides that In respect of a Union territory, the provisions of this clause shall have the
effect as if for the words “State Government”, the words “Central Government” had been
substituted; (d) the head of each professional body listed in the First Schedule; (e) the head
of each research Council listed in the Second Schedule; (f) one person, by rotation, from

51
amongst Vice Chancellors of Central Universities; (g) one person, by rotation, from amongst
Directors of Indian Institutes of Technology; (h) one person, by rotation, from amongst
Directors of Indian Institutes of Management; (i) one person, by rotation, from amongst the
Vice Chancellors of National Law Universities; (j) one person, by rotation, from amongst
heads of institutions of national importance in medical education; (k) one person to be
nominated by the Central Government, from amongst academics in higher education and
research from each of the sectoral areas, namely- (i) agriculture and allied areas; (ii)
environment and forestry; (iii) medicine, pharmaceuticals and allied areas; (iv) industrial
training; (v) economics and finance; (vi ) sports; (vii) archaeology and epigraphy; (viii)
Indian languages; (ix) creative arts, performing arts and culture; (x) bio-technology and
emerging areas of technology; (l) three persons, to be nominated by the Central Government,
from amongst heads of associations of industry, trade or commerce with national presence
listed in the Fourth Schedule; (m) two persons, to be nominated by the Commission, from
amongst heads of civil society or non-governmental organizations with national presence
having experience of engagement with issues relating to education; (n) the Chairman of the
Central Board of Secondary Education; (o) the Director of the National Council of Education
Research and Training; (p) the Chairperson or a Member of the National Commission for
Human Resources for Health referred to in sub-section (3) of section 3 of the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health Act, 2011; (q) a principal of an autonomous
college of excellence to be nominated by the Commission. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that the meetings of the General Council shall be convened at least once in every six
months and at such other times as the Chairperson may consider necessary. However, the
sub-clause provides that a meeting of the General Council shall also be convened if at least
one-fifth of the total strength of the General Council express in writing, letters addressed to
the Chairperson, the desire to convene such meeting to deliberate on such matter as may be
expressed in such letter. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the tenure of the
persons nominated to the General Council under clauses (c) to (j) shall be two years. Sub-
clause (4) of the said clause provides that the General Council shall have the power to lay
down its own procedure for the conduct of its meetings. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause
provides that no person being a member of the General Council, shall receive any remuneration
except such sitting fees or other allowances, as may be prescribed, for attending the meetings
of the General Council. Sub-clause (6) of the said clause provides that the Commission shall
provide funds and administrative support to the General Council for the conduct of its
meetings and other related matters.
Clause 27.— This clause deals with the powers and functions of the General Council.
Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the General Council shall make recommendations
and advise the Commission in the exercise of its functions. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the General Council
may–(a) advise on the measures to be taken for enhancing access, inclusion and equity in
higher education; (b) advise on the measures to be taken for connecting higher education
and research to the practice of professions; (c) suggest measures to remove imbalances
(including those relating to regions, academic disciplines, gender and other socio-economic
factors) in the development of higher education and research; (d) advise on the adequacy of
funding for higher education; (e) make observations and suggestions in respect of the
statement and report prepared by the Commission under sub-section (1) of section21; (f)
make observations and suggestions on the report prepared by the Commission under sub-
section (5) of section 21; (g) advise on the course of reforms to rejuvenate higher education
and research; (h) advise on the measures to be taken by the Commission to promote quality
of higher education and nurture excellence; (i) discharge such other functions as may be
prescribed. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the General Council shall, for the
discharge of its functions or reporting or advising upon any matter, constitute Expert Advisory
Groups, consisting of such number of persons as it may deem fit, in each of the following
areas, namely-(a) legal education; (b) health and medical education; (c) education related to
general sciences, humanities, social sciences, engineering or technology; (d) vocational
education; (e) distance education systems; (f) such other fields of knowledge as

52
the General Council may deem fit. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the Expert
Advisory Group referred to in sub-section (3) may include persons who are not members of
the General Council. However, the said sub-clause provides that the strength of the members
of the General Council in such  Export Advisory Group shall not exceed one-third of the
strength of the Group. The said sub-clause further provides that a member of the General
Council, nominated in this behalf by the General Council, shall preside over every Expert
Advisory Group. The said sub-clause also provides also that the head of the Bar Council of
India shall preside over the Expert Advisory Group concerning legal education. The said
sub-clause also provides that the head of the professional body concerning medical practice
shall preside over the Expert Advisory Group concerning health and medical education.
Clause 28.— This clause relates to establishment of collegium of scholars. Sub-clause
(1) of the said clause provides that the Central Government shall, by notification, establish,
a “Collegium of Scholars”, which shall consist of thirty Fellows, being persons of integrity
and eminence in higher education and research. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides
that the no person shall be eligible for appointment as a Fellow of the Collegium unless he –
(a) is a citizen or an overseas citizen of India; (b) has made substantial contribution to the
advancement of knowledge demonstrated through publications; and (c) is, or has been, a
National Research Professor or a recipient of awards specified in the Third Schedule, shall be
eligible to be a Fellow of the Collegium. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the
first Fellows of the Collegium shall be persons who are, or have been, National Research
Professors or recipients of awards specified in the Third Schedule. However, the said sub-
clause provides that in case no such person expresses willingness to be a Fellow of the
Collegium, then the Selection Committee, referred to in section 7, shall nominate not more
than ten persons of integrity and eminence in higher education and research, who shall be
the first Fellows of the Collegium. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the Fellows,
other than Fellows referred to in sub-section (3), shall be chosen, in such manner as may be
prescribed, from amongst persons of integrity and eminence in higher education and research
proposed by any Fellow, to represent fields of knowledge which in their opinion are not
adequately represented in the Collegium. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that the
every person so chosen shall be notified as Fellow and shall, as soon as may be after
notification of his appointment, and every year thereafter, make a declaration on the extent of
his interest, whether direct or indirect and whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any institution
of research or higher educational institution. Sub -clause (6) of the said clause provides that
the declaration so made under sub-section (5) shall be placed on the website of the
Commission.
Clause 29.— This clause deals with tenure and resignation of Fellow. It provides that
every Fellow, other than a Fellow referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 28,
shall continue as such for a period of ten years from the date of his notification as Fellow.
Clause 30.— This clause provides functions of collegium. Sub-clause (1) of the said
clause provides that the Collegium shall –(a) recommend to the Commission a vision on the
emerging trends in different fields of knowledge; (b) recommend ,in respect of appointment
of Chairperson or Member of the Commission, a panel of three persons for each post to the
Selection Committee constituted under section 7; (c) recommend persons for inclusion in the
directory of academics for leadership positions in accordance with standards for leadership
positions, specified by regulations under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 17; (d) make
an assessment of the performance of the Commission in respect of the statement and report
referred to in sub-section (1) of section 21; (e) make observations and suggestions (including
an assessment of the performance of the Commission and recommendations to be taken on
measures to enhance such performance) on the report prepared by the Commission under
sub-section (6) of section 21; (f) propose eligible persons as members of Board, as provided
for in clauses (a) and (d) of sub-section (5) of section 43; (g) discharge such other functions
as may be prescribed. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Collegium may constitute
Advisory Committees comprised of Fellows, for consideration on matters referred to it for
advise or the making of assessments or suggestions on statement or reports of the
Commission.

53
Clause 31.— This clause contains provisions relating to directory of Academics for
Leadership positions. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Collegium shall
recommend, from time to time and in such manner as may be specified under regulations,
names of persons, for inclusion in the directory of academics for leadership positions. Sub-
clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Central Government, State Governments, State
Higher Education Councils, universities and other higher educational institutions,
professional bodies listed in the First Schedule and research Councils listed in the Second
Schedule may, from time to time, refer, names of suitable persons, to the Commission for
inclusion in the directory of academics for leadership positions. However, the said sub-
clause provides that the Commission shall forward the names of such person or persons
referred to it, along with the credentials of such person so referred, to the Collegium. Sub-
clause (3) of the said clause provides that a person shall be eligible for inclusion in the
directory of academics for leadership positions only if he satisfies such standards for
leadership positions specified under regulations under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section
17. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the directory of academics for leadership
positions shall be available for all universities and other higher educational institutions, if
they so require. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the directory of academics for
leadership positions shall be available for all universities and other higher educational
institutions, if they so require.
Clause 32.— This clause relates to meetings of Collegium. Sub-clause (1) of the said
clause provides that the meetings of the Collegium shall be convened at least once every six
months and at such other times as may be required by the Chair. However, the said sub-
clause provides that a meeting of the Collegium shall also be convened if at least one fifth of
the total strength of the Collegium express to the Chair, the desire to convene such meeting
to deliberate on such matter as may be expressed. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides
that the Collegium shall act collectively in the performance of its functions, and decisions in
such meetings shall be taken, by resolution, by majority of Fellows present and voting. Sub-
clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Chairperson or such Member of the Commission,
as the Chairperson may nominate, shall attend and participate in the meetings of the Collegium,
but shall not have the right to vote on any resolution before the Collegium. Sub-clause (4) of
the said clause provides that subject to the provisions of this Act, the Collegium shall have
the power to lay down its own procedure for the conduct of its business and the exercise of
its functions. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that no act or proceeding of the
Collegium shall be invalid merely by reason of—(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the
constitution of, the Collegium; (b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Fellow of the
Collegium; or (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Collegium not affecting the merits of
the case. The Explanation to the said sub-clause provides that for the purposes of this
section, the word “present” shall not be interpreted to be limited to physical presence of the
Fellow but shall be construed in a broader sense in the Fellow being available to indicate his
preference by such means, including electronic methods, as the Collegium may deem fit.
Clause 33.— This clause relates to Chair and Co-Chair of Collegium. Sub-clause (1) of
the said clause provides that the Collegium shall have a Chair and a Co-Chair, selected by
majority from amongst Fellows of the Collegium; and shall have a tenure of two years. Sub-
clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Chair or Co-Chair, as the case may be, shall
preside over all meetings of the Collegium. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the
Chair and Co-Chair shall perform such functions for carrying out the purposes of this Act, as
the Collegium may, by resolution, deem fit.
Clause 34.— This clause deals with funds and administrative support to Collegium.
Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Commission shall provide funds and
administrative support and assistance to the Collegium for the discharge of its functions
under this Act. Sub-clause (2) of the said Clause provides that no Fellow shall receive any
remuneration except such sitting fees or allowances, as may be prescribed, for attending the
meetings of the Collegium. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Collegium may
obtain the services of such experts in management of, or in, organisations, with such
qualifications and on such terms and conditions, as may be prescribed.

54
Clause 35.— This clause contains provisions for the enrolment of students. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that every university or institution of higher education
empowered by or under any law for the time being in force to award any degree, intending to
enroll students for the first time in any course or programme of study, shall intimate such
intention to the Commission, along with an assessment report prepared in accordance with
section 4 of the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational
Institutions Act, 2010. However, the said sub-clause provides that in a case where such
university or institution intends to impart medical education, such University or institution
shall provide an assessment report of its attached hospital and clinical establishment, prepared
in such manner and in accordance with such norms as may be specified by the Central
Government or by such authority empowered by law. The Explanation to the said sub-
clause provides that for the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the university or
higher educational institution referred to in the proviso includes those universities or higher
educational  institutions which award any degree and does not include any college or
institution which seeks affiliation with such university or institution. Sub-clause (2) of the
said clause provides that the Commission shall specify the manner in which a higher
educational institution intending to commence enrolment of students shall give such
intimation to it and shall also notify the procedure of processing including any fees payable
for such intimation. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Commission shall
process the intimation given to it under sub-section (1) expeditiously and in a transparent
manner giving opportunity for the institution concerned wherever necessary and in no case
shall the application be kept pending beyond one hundred and twenty days after which it
shall be deemed to have the Commission’s concurrence for enrolment of students.
Clause 36.— This clause relates to notification of declaration by Commission. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that  the Commission shall, within a period of one
hundred and twenty days from the receipt of intimation under sub-section (1) of section 35
declare by notification, either—(a) that student enrolment can proceed as requested; or
(b) that the Commission is unable to accede to the request for reasons recorded in writing.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the notification of the Commission under
clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) along with reasons therefore, shall be published on the
website of the Commission. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the declaration in
respect of a university or higher educational institution empowered by or under any law to
award a degree existing on the date of commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have
been notified under this Act unless revoked under section 37.
Clause 37.— This clause provides revocation of permission to enrol students. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that if the Commission, after making such enquiry as
may be specified by regulations, is satisfied that public interest so requires, it may revoke, by
notification, the permission to enroll students in any course or programme of study to the
higher education institution or university in any of the cases, namely —(a) where the higher
education institution or university, in the opinion of the Commission, makes wilful or
continuous default in doing anything required of it by or under this Act or the rules or
regulations made thereunder; (b) where the higher education institution or university fails,
within the period fixed in this behalf by its declaration, or any longer period which the
Commission may have granted therefore, to show, to the satisfaction of the Commission, that
such higher education institution or university is in a position fully and efficiently to discharge
the duties and obligations imposed on it by its recognition; or (c) where the higher education
institution or university has ceased to exist. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that
no permission shall be revoked under sub-section (1) unless the Commission has given to
the higher education institution or university, as the case may be, not less than sixty days
notice, in writing, stating the grounds on which it is proposed to revoke the permission, and
has considered any cause shown by the higher education institution or university within the
period of that notice, against the proposed revocation. Sub-clause  (3) of the said clause
provides that where the Commission revokes the permission under this section, it shall serve
an order of revocation upon the institution or university, and fix a date on which the revocation
shall take effect; and such revocation shall be without prejudice to the action that may be

55
taken against it under any other law for the time being in force. However, the said sub-clause
provides that the Commission may, instead of revoking the permission, permit it to remain in
force subject to such further terms and conditions as they think fit to impose, and any further
terms or conditions so imposed shall be binding upon and be observed by the higher
educational institution or university, and shall be of like force and effect as if they were
contained in the permission. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the Commission
shall, while revoking permission, take, or cause to be taken, such measures which may be
necessary to protect the academic interests of students in  such higher educational institution
or university. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that without prejudice to action that
may be taken under any other law for the time being in force, a university or higher educational
institution shall be liable to pay or provide the costs involved, as may be determined by the
Commission, in the implementation of the measures taken, or caused to be taken, by the
Commission under sub-section (4). Sub-clause  (6) of the said clause provides that the
Commission shall publish on its website the details of any action initiated under this section
and the final decision on the revocation of the permission or otherwise together with all
documents and reasons for such decision.
Clause 38.— This clause lays down the provisions for appeal to the National
Educational Tribunal. It provides that any person aggrieved by an order of the Commission,
for the permission or rejection or revocation of permission under this Chapter, may prefer an
appeal, in such form and manner and accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed,
against such order to the National Educational Tribunal within a period of ninety days of
such order. However, the said sub-clause provides that the National Educational Tribunal
may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of ninety days, if it is satisfied that
the appellant has sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of ninety days.
Clause 39.— This clause deals with duties and obligations of university in maintenance
of standards of academic quality. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that a University,
fulfilling such norms of academic quality as may be specified by regulations made under
clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 17, may exercise the power to affiliate any college or
any  higher educational institution. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that a college
or higher educational institution seeking affiliation of a university, shall, along with its
application for affiliation to the University, submit an assessment report prepared in such
manner and in accordance with such norms as may be specified under regulations, from a
registered accreditation agency. However, the said sub-clause provides that in respect of a
college or institution intending to impart medical education, such college or institution shall
provide an assessment report of its attached hospital and clinical establishment, prepared in
such manner and in accordance with such norms as may be specified by the National
Commission for Human  Resources for Health. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that
each university shall maintain standards of academic quality in higher education and research
in such University and in colleges and institutions affiliated to it. Sub-clause (4) of the said-
clause provides that each affiliating University shall take measures to support and develop
academic quality in colleges and institutions affiliated to it without impinging on the autonomy
of such colleges and institutions in its administrative and financial matters.
Clause 40.— This clause contains provisions for revocation of permission to enrol
students in the health educational institution or health institution or their affiliation to
University without prior consent of regulatory authority in health education. It provides that
nothing contained in this Act shall confer powers upon the Commission established under
this Act to revoke permission to establish or wind up a health educational institution or
health institution or to enrol students in the health educational institution or health institution
or refuse affiliation of any college or any institution to a University solely on the ground that
it fails to meet the norms and standards specified under this Act or any other law for the time
being in force without prior consent of the statutory regulatory body referred to in clause (a)
of section 2 of the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Act, 2011.
Clause 41.— This clause provides that University to be public authority under Right
to Information Act, 2005. It provides that the provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005

56
shall apply to each University as if it were a public authority defined in clause (h) of section
2 of the said Act.
Clause 42.— This clause contains provisions relating to right to confer degrees. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that the right to confer or award a degree shall be
exercised only by an institution or university which has been permitted to enrol students,
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 36 or deemed to have been so declared under
sub-section (3) of section 36. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the subject to
the provisions of sub-section (1), no person, institution, organisation or agency shall confer,
or award, or hold him or itself out as entitled to confer or award, any degree.
Clause 43.— This clause relates to Board for Research Promotion and Innovation.
Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Central Government shall, by notification,
establish a  Board to be called the Board for Research Promotion and Innovation. Sub-clause
(2) of the said clause provides that the board shall consist of a Chairperson and twelve other
members to be appointed by the Commission. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that
the Chairperson of the Board shall be a person of eminence and standing in academia with
significant and proven contribution to knowledge through research in any field of knowledge.
Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the Chairperson of the Board shall be appointed
by the Commission from a panel of three names recommended by the Collegium under clause
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 30. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that of the
other Members of the Board–(a) three shall be persons of eminence and standing in academia
with significant and proven contribution to knowledge through research in various field of
knowledge, as proposed by the Collegium; (b) one shall be a whole-time Member of the
Commission to be nominated by the Commission, from amongst whole-time Members;
(c) one shall be a Member, other than whole-time Member, of the Commission to be nominated
by the Commission, from amongst such Members referred to in clause (c)  of section 5;
(d) three persons, by rotation, from amongst from amongst such Members of the General
Council being heads of research Councils listed in the Second Schedule, as proposed by the
Collegium; (e) two persons, by rotation, from amongst from amongst such Members of the
General Council, nominated under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 26; (f) two shall be
person of eminence and standing in academia with significant and proven contribution to
research in medicine and allied fields of knowledge, to be nominated by the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health. Sub-clause (6) of the said clause provides that
the Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board, exercise and
discharge such powers and duties, as may be delegated by the Board. Sub-clause (7) of the
said clause provides that the Members of the Board nominated under clause (b) to (e) shall
be non-executive Members and shall not be entitled to receive any remuneration except such
sitting fees or allowances, as may be specified by regulations, for attending the meetings of
the Board. Sub-clause (8) of the said clause provides that the Chairperson and such Members
of the Board appointed under clause (a) of sub-section (5) shall, hold office for a period of
five years from the date of assuming office. Sub-clause (9) of the said clause provides that
the Members nominated under clause (d) or (e) of sub-section (5) shall have a tenure of two years.
Clause 44.— This clause deals with terms and conditions of service of Chairperson
and certain Members of the Board and administrative arrangements for discharge of functions
by Board. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the salary and allowances payable
to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the Members of the
Board shall be such as may be specified by regulations. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that the Commission may, for the efficient performance of functions by the Board
under this Act, provide to the Board, in such manner, officers and employees, with such
qualifications and on such remuneration and other terms and conditions, as may be specified
by regulations. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the subject to the regulations
made in this behalf, the Board may appoint such committees as may be necessary for the
efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under this Act. Sub-clause
(4) of the said clause provides that the Board shall have the power to co-opt as members of
any committee appointed under sub-section (4), such persons who are not members of the

57
Board as it may think fit, and the person so co-opted shall have the right to attend the
meetings of the committee, and take part in the proceedings of the committee. Sub-clause (5)
of the said clause provides that the Board may engage the services of such persons, being
persons of eminence in research both from within and outside the country as consultants or
visiting scientists on such terms and conditions and remuneration as may be specified by
regulations. Sub-clause (b) of this clause provides that the research proposals of higher
educational institutions and universities approved by the Commission under sub-section (5)
shall be provided by the Board to the Corporation referred to in section 46 for disbursement
of grants to such institutions and universities.
Clause 45.— This clause provides the powers and functions of Board. Sub-clause (1)
of the said clause provides that the Board shall recommend measures to the Commission to
promote and facilitate research in the fields of knowledge in higher educational institutions
(including research in recognised health educational institutions referred to in clause (r) of
section 2 of the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Act, 2011). Sub-clause
(2) of the said clause provides that without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
provisions and the scope and powers of other national agencies mandated to administer or
fund research, the measures recommended under sub-section (1), may, inter alia, provide for
all or any of the matters, namely,—(a) research and innovation policy for the sustained
global competitiveness of the country and harmonious development of society; (b) promoting
transformative and multi-disciplinary research in higher educational institutions; (c) balancing
the research portfolio amongst various fields of knowledge for the continuous development
of all fields of knowledge in a holistic manner; (d) facilitating the modernisation of research
infrastructure in higher educational institutions; (e) inspiring youth to take up research as a
career and attracting talent to research by devising schemes for scholarships and fellowships;
(f) promoting  inclusion in research amongst youth by devising schemes aimed at otherwise
disadvantaged sections of society; (g) promoting synergy of research in higher educational
institutions with research in other agencies or laboratories; (h) facilitating higher educational
institutions in developing linkages with industry for collaborative research; (i) facilitating
higher educational institutions in approaching agencies involved with research to obtain
funding for research in such institutions; (j) establishing and supporting inter university
centres for providing research facilities and thrust to new and emerging areas of knowledge
through development of common facilities for research for a group of universities or for the
universities in general; (k) discharging such other functions as may be specified by the
regulations . Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Board shall identify and
recommend to the Commission grant funding for competitive, merit-based proposals by
higher educational institutions for research and related infrastructure in such institutions.
However, the said sub-clause provides that the broad funding available to fund research and
related infrastructure for a given financial year shall be intimated by the Commission to the
Board in advance and the Board shall, while recommending the proposals, duly take into
account the funds so available. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the Board
shall, while identifying and recommending proposals to the Commission under sub-section
(3), give due attention and importance to – (a) the balanced development of all fields of
knowledge; (b) the significance of research in emerging fields of knowledge that promote the
sustained global competitiveness of the country and harmonious development of society;
(c) such research that aims to discover novel phenomena, theories, processes, products,
materials, tools or equipments that addresses significant challenges for the people of the
country and the global environment. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that the
Commission shall approve, reject return to the Board for reconsideration, such of the proposals
for research funding as are identified and recommended by the Board under sub-section (3),
as it may deem fit. However, the said sub-clause provides that the Commission while approving
any proposal for research funding shall specify the outcome-based parameters for assessment
of the productivity of the research proposal. The said sub-clause further provides that no
research proposal shall be rejected or returned without assigning reasons for such decision.
Sub-clause (6) of the said clause provides that the research proposals of higher educational
institutions approved by the Commission under sub-section (5) for funding shall be provided

58
to the Corporation referred to in section 46 for disbursement of grants to such institution.
Clause 46.—This clause contains provision for the establishment of Higher Education
Financial Services Corporation. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that  there shall be
established, on and from such date as the Central Government may notify, a Corporation
called the Higher Education Financial Services Corporation for the purposes of this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Corporation shall be a body corporate by
the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to
the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and
immovable , and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. Sub-clause (3) of the
said clause provides that the general superintendence and direction of the affairs of the
Corporation shall be entrusted to a Board of Directors. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause
provides that the Board of Directors, referred to in sub-section (3), shall consist of —(a) the
Chairperson or such Member of the Commission, as the Commission may nominate, who
shall be the non-executive Chairperson of the Corporation and shall preside over its meetings;
(b) two persons  from amongst such members of the General Council nominated to it under
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 26; (c) one person, by rotation, from amongst such
Members of the General Council nominated to it under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of
section 26; (d) one person, by rotation, from amongst such Members of the General Council
nominated to it under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 26; (e) one person, by rotation,
from amongst such Members of the General Council nominated to it to represent Central
Educational Institutions under clause (f) to clause (j) of sub-section (1) of section 26; (f) two
nominees of the Central Government, of whom one shall be nominated by the Ministry
dealing with the subject of finance; (g) two persons being experts in matters of finance,
banking and management to be appointed who shall be whole-time officers of the Corporation;
or (h) a Managing Director who shall be a whole-time officer of the Corporation. Sub-clause
(5) of the said clause provides that the Corporation shall, with the prior approval of the
Central Government and the Commission, notify its memorandum and articles of association;
and such memorandum shall provide for the duties and responsibilities of the Managing
Director and other officers of the Corporation.  Sub-clause (6) of the said clause provides
that the Corporation may appoint the Managing Director, the Directors referred to in clause
(g) of sub-section (4) and such other number of officers and other employees with such
qualifications and on such terms and conditions as may be specified by the regulations. Sub-
clause (7) of the said clause provides that the Board of Directors shall meet at such times and
places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at
its meetings as may be provided in the articles of association. Sub-clause (8) of the said
clause provides that the Corporation shall not amend or alter its memorandum or articles of
association except with the prior approval of the Central Government and the Commission.
Clause 47.— This clause deals with duties and functions of Corporation. Sub-clause
(1) of the said clause provides that the Corporation shall disburse, in accordance with the
norms and principles specified by regulations made by the Commission under clause (j) of
sub-section (2) of section 17, financial assistance by way of grants and loans to higher
educational institutions; and perform such other functions incidental and related to such
assistance. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Corporation, at the beginning
of each financial year, shall, on the basis of the allocation of grants for that financial year
communicated by the Commission, prepare a proposal, based on the information provided
by each higher educational institution and in accordance with the norms and principles
specified by regulations, of grants to be allocated to each higher educational institution in
that financial year. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Managing Director of
the Corporation shall be responsible for disbursal of grants to higher educational institutions.
Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that in the discharge of its duties and functions,
the Corporation shall be guided by such instructions  from time to time as may be given to it
by the Commission.
Clause 48.— This clause contains provisions relating to accounts and audit. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Corporation shall cause to be maintained such

59
books of account and other books in relation to its account in such form and in such manner
as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be prescribed.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Corporation shall, as soon as may be after
closing its annual accounts, prepare a statement of accounts in such form, and forward the
same to the Comptroller and Auditor-General by such date, as the Corporation may, in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General, determine. Sub-clause (3) of the said
clause provides that the accounts of the Corporation shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General at such times and in such manner as he thinks fit. Sub-clause (4) of the said
clause provides that the notwithstanding anything in sub-section (3), the accounts and
related matters of the Corporation shall be audited by an auditor duly qualified to act as
auditor of companies under sub-section (1) of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956, who
shall be appointed by the Commission and such remuneration as the Commission may fix
shall be paid to the auditors by the Corporation. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides
that the every auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the annual accounts of the Corporation,
and it shall be his duty to examine it together with the accounts and vouchers relating
thereto; and every auditor shall at all reasonable times have access to the books, accounts
and other documents of the Corporation, and may in relation to such accounts examine any
Director or officer of the Corporation. Sub-clause (6) of the said clause provides that the
auditor shall make a report to the Commission upon the annual accounts and audit, and in
every such report they shall state whether in their opinion the accounts contain all necessary
particulars and properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and correct view of the state of the
affairs and in accordance with the norms and principles specified by the Commission, and in
case they have called for any explanation or information from the Corporation whether it has
been given and whether such explanation or information is satisfactory. Sub-clause (7) of
the said clause provides that the Commission shall take such consequential action, in
accordance with this Act and the regulations made thereunder, on the report made to it under
sub-section (6); and a report on the action so taken along with an explanatory memorandum
thereon shall be provided to the Central Government. Sub-clause (8) of the said clause
provides that the Central Government shall, in respect of each financial year, cause to be laid
before both Houses of Parliament, the annual accounts of the Corporation together with the
audit report of the Comptroller and Auditor-General thereon and the report on the action
taken along with the explanatory memorandum thereon, referred to in sub-section (7).
Clause 49.— This clause relates to furnishing of returns and information to by the
Corporation.  Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Corporation shall furnish to
the Commission, quarterly and at such other times, and in such form and manner as may be
specified by regulations or as the Commission may direct, such returns and statements and
such particulars in regard to financing of higher educational institutions, as the Commission
may require. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Corporation shall furnish to
the Central Government, for the purpose of reporting to Parliament, such returns or other
information with respect to its policies or activities, as may be required.
Clause 50.— This clause deals with qualifications, advisory councils in vocational
education. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Central Government shall, by
notification, establish, such number of Qualifications Advisory Councils in vocational
education as it may deem fit to aid and advise it in discharging its functions and exercising
powers in respect of vocational education under this Act. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that the each Qualifications Advisory Council shall be headed by a Chairperson
and eight other members. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Chairperson of
each Qualifications Advisory Council shall be appointed by the Commission, and shall be an
academic in a university with proven experience in vocational education or in relevant areas
of higher education relating to practice of professions. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause
provides that the every appointment as Chairperson of the Qualifications Advisory Council
under sub-section (3) shall take effect only after its ratification, by majority, by the General
Council. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that the of the eight other Members – (a)
two shall be nominated by the Commission from amongst heads of State Councils of V ocational
Education; (b) two shall be nominated by the Commission from amongst Members of the

60
General Council with exposure to vocational education or in relevant areas of higher education
relating to practice of professions; (c) the Chairperson or a Member of the National Council
of V ocational Training to be nominated by the Chairperson of the National Council of V ocational
Training; (d) one shall be nominated by the Central Government to represent trade unions in
the relevant skill area; (e) two possessing exposure to the relevant skill areas shall be
nominated by the Commission to represent associations of industry, trade or commerce with
national presence listed in the Fourth Schedule. However, the said sub-clause provides that
the Commission shall make the nominations under this clause only after consultations with
the members of the General Council nominated to it under clause (k) of sub-section (1) of
section 24 from amongst heads of associations of industry, trade or commerce with national
presence listed in the Fourth Schedule. Sub-clause ( 6) of the said clause provides that the
salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the
Chairperson of each Qualifications Advisory Council shall be such as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause (7) of the said clause provides that no member of any Qualifications Advisory
Council other than the Chairperson of such Council, shall receive any remuneration except
such sitting fees or other allowances, as may be prescribed, for attending the meetings of
such Council. Sub-clause (8) of the said clause provides that the Commission shall provide
funds and administrative support to each Qualifications Advisory Council for the conduct of
its meetings and other related matters.
Clause 51.— This clause contains provisions for duties and functions of Qualifications
Advisory Council .It provides that each Qualifications Advisory Council constituted for
specific skill areas shall perform the following duties and functions, namely-(a) advise and
make recommendations on qualifications framework in such skill areas defining the
competencies required by students pursuing vocational education in such skill areas; (b)
advise and make recommendations on standards of academic quality and benchmarking
such standards in programmes of study leading to the award of any diploma in such skill
areas; (c) advise and make recommendations on norms for accreditation of higher educational
institutions imparting vocational education in such skill areas; (d) advise and contribute to
policy in vocational education; (e) prepare reports on industry requirements in such skill
areas and advice on skill needs in the context of the workplace; (f) suggest elements of
curriculum and syllabus to impart the required competencies in such skill areas; (g) perform
such other functions or make such other recommendations as may be referred to it by the
Commission.
Clause 52.— This clause deals with Joint Mechanism. Sub-clause (1) of the said
clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for
time being in force, in case  any difference of opinion arises between the National Commission
for Higher Education and Research established under this Act and the National Commission
for Human Resources for Health established under the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health Act, 2011, such difference of opinion may be referred to a Joint Committee
consisting of - (a) the Cabinet Secretary – ex officio, Chairperson;(b) the Chairperson of
National Commission for Higher Education and Research – ex officio,  Member;(c) the
Chairperson for National  Commission for Human Resources for Health – ex officio ,Member;(d)
the Secretary in charge of Department dealing with the subject  of Higher Education –  ex
officio, Member;(e) the Secretary, in charge of the Department dealing with the subject  of
Health and Family Welfare – ex officio, Member. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides
that the Secretary, Department of Higher Education in the Ministry of Human Resource
Development, Government of India shall be the convener of the meetings of the Joint
Committee referred to in sub-section (1). Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the
Joint Committee shall follow such procedure as it may consider expedient and resolve the
difference of opinion, within a period of two months from the date of reference made under
sub-section (1). Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the decision of the Joint
Committee shall be binding on the National Commission for Higher Education and Research
and the National Commission for Human Resources for Health.
Clause 53.— This clause contains provision for grants by the Central Government. It
provides that the Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament,

61
make to the Commission grants of such sums of money as the Central Government may think
fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
Clause 54.— This clause relates to National Commission on Higher Education and
Research Fund .  Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that there shall be constituted a
Fund to be called the National Commission  for Higher Education Fund and Research and
there shall be credited thereto-(a) any grants and loans made to the Commission by the
Central Government (b) all fees and charges received by the Authority under this Act; (c) all
sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by the
Central Government.  Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Fund referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be applied for meeting-(a) salaries and allowances to the Chairperson
and Members officers and other employees of the Commission; (b) the other expenses of the
Commission in connection with the discharge of its functions and for the purposes of the
Act; (c) the expenses of the General Council, Board ,Corporation in connection with the
discharge of their functions and for the purposes of this  Act.
Clause 55.— This clause contains provision relating to furnishing of statement of
estimated expenditure for development of higher education and research. Sub-clause (1) of
the said clause provides that the Commission shall, in respect of each financial year, provide
to the Central Government a statement of the estimated expenditure on development of
higher education and research for that year, referred to as the “annual financial statement on
higher education and research”; and such estimated expenditure shall be based on norms
and principles specified under regulations. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that
the Commission shall provide, that part of the estimated expenditure planned to be
appropriated towards research, along with an explanatory memorandum on the research
programmes proposed to be funded and an assessment of the productivity of research
programmes, be based on norms as may be specified by regulations, funded in the past five
years. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Central Government shall cause the
annual financial statement on higher education and research, with such modifications as it
may recommend, to be laid before both Houses of  Parliament.
Clause 56.— This clause deals with accounts and audit. Sub-clause (1) of the said
clause provides that the Commission, General Council, Board shall cause to be maintained
such books of account and other books in relation their account in such form and in such
manner as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be
prescribed. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Commission, General Council,
Board shall, as soon as may be after closing its annual accounts, prepare a statement of
accounts in such form, and forward the same to the Comptroller and Auditor-General by such
date, as the Commission may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General,
determine. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the accounts of the Commission,
General Council, and Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General at such
times and in such manner as he thinks fit.
Clause 57.— This clause lays down the provision for laying of annual accounts of
Commission, General Council, etc. It provides that the Central Government shall, in respect
of each financial year, cause to be laid before both Houses of Parliament, the annual accounts
of the Commission General Council, Board together with the audit report thereon along with
an explanatory memorandum on the action so taken, by the Commission, on such report.
Clause 58.— This clause relates to furnishing of returns and information to the Central
Government by Commission. It provides that the Commission shall furnish to the Central
Government such returns or other information with respect to its regulations, policies or
activities as the Central Government may, for the purpose of reporting to Parliament or for the
making of policy, from time to time require.
Clause 59.— This clause deals with furnishing of returns and information by university
and institutions to Commission. It provides that each university and each higher educational
institution empowered by or under law to award any degree, shall furnish to the Commission

62
at such time and in such form and manner as may be specified by regulations or as the
Commission may seek, such returns and statements and such particulars concerning the
financial position of the University or higher educational institution; or the studies in the
various branches of learning undertaken in that University or higher educational institution,
and its rules and regulations concerning standards of teaching and examination in that
University or institution in respect of each such branch of learning or in such other matters,
as the Commission may, from time to time, require.
Clause 60.— This clause lays down the provision for overriding effect of the proposed
legislation. It provides that the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law, other than the
Companies Act, 1956, for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue
of any law other than this Act.
Clause 61.— This clause empowers Central Government to amend the Schedule. It
provides that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend,
from time to time, the First, Second or Third or Fourth Schedule to this Act.
Clause 62.— This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules. Sub-clause
(1) of the said clause provides that the Central Government may, by notification make rules to
carry out the purposes of this Act. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies matters for
which such rules may be made by the Central Government.
Clause 63.— This clause empowers the Commission to make regulations. Sub-clause
(1) of the said clause provides that the Commission may, with prior approval of the Central
Government and after previous publication, by notification, make regulations consistent
with this Act and the rule made there under, to carry out the purposes of this Act. Sub-clause
(2) of the said clause specifies matters for which such regulations may be made by the
Commission. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that certain matters under sub-clause (2)
shall not be made except with the prior approval of the Central Government.
Clause 64.— This clause provides for laying of rules, regulations and notifications
before Parliament. It provides that every rule and every regulation made and every notification
issued by the Central Government under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or
notification or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation or notification should not be
made or issued, the rule or regulation or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule or regulation or notification.
Clause 65.— This clause confers powers on the Central Government to supersede
commission, General Council, etc. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that if, at any
time the Central Government is of the opinion—(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond
the control of the Commission, General Council ,Board or Corporation, as the case may be, it
is unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act; or (b) that the Commission, General Council ,Board or Corporation, as
the case may be, has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by the
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or performance of the
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the
financial position of the Commission, General Council ,Board or Corporation, as the case may
be, or the administration of the Commission, General Council, Board, the Corporation, as the
case may be, has suffered; or (c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the
public interest so to do, It may by notification, supersede the Commission, General Council,
Board, the Board of Directors of the Corporation, as the case may be, for such period, not
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification and appoint a person or persons
as the Chairperson or the President, as the case may be, to exercise powers and discharge

63
functions of the Commission, General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be,
under this Act. However the said sub-clause provides that before issuing any such
notification, the Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Commission,
General Council , Board or the Board of Directors of the Corporation, as the case may be, to
make representations against the proposed supersession and shall consider the
representations, if any, of the Commission, General Council, Board or the Board of Directors
of the Corporation, as the case may be. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that upon
the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) superseding the Commission, General
Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, (a) the Chairperson, President, Vice-
President and other members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as
such; (b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this
Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Commission, General Council, Board
or Corporation, as the case may be, shall, until the Commission, General Council ,Board or
Corporation, as the case may be, is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and
discharged by the person or persons referred to in sub-section ( 1); and (c) all properties
owned or controlled by the Commission, General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case
may be, shall, until the Commission, General Council ,Board or Corporation, as the case may
be, is reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government. Sub-clause (3) of
the said clause provides that on or before the expiration of the period of supersession
specified in the notification issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government shall
reconstitute the Commission, General Council ,Board or Corporation, as the case may be, by
a fresh appointment of its Chairperson and other members and in such case any person who
had vacated his office under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified
for reappointment. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the Central Government
shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub-section (1) and a full report of any
action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid
before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
Clause 66.— This clause deals with declaration of interest. It provides that the
Chairperson and other Members of the General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case
may be, shall immediately after entering office and every year thereafter, make a declaration
to the extent of their interest, whether direct or indirect and whether financial or otherwise, in
any higher educational institution which comes under the purview of the General Council,
Board or Corporation, as the case may be, and the same shall be placed in the public domain.
Clause 67.— This clause relates to restriction of re-employment. Sub-clause (1) of the
said clause provides that the Chairperson and other members of the General Council, Board
or Corporation, as the case may be, on ceasing to hold office shall not for a period of two
years accept any employment (including as consultant or expert or otherwise) in any higher
educational institution whose matter has been dealt with by such Chairperson or member, as
the case may be. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that  nothing in sub-section (1)
shall prevent the Chairperson or a member, as the case may be, to accept any employment in
any higher educational institution controlled or maintained by the Central Government or the
State Government.
Clause  68.— This clause provides that Member to act as Chairperson or to discharger
his functions in certain circumstances. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that in the
event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or other member of
the General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, by reasons of death, removal,
suspension or resignation, the senior most whole-time member of such General Council,
Board or Corporation, as the case may be, shall act as the Chairperson till such time the
Chairperson  is appointed, to fill the vacancy. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that
when the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on account of
leave or otherwise, the senior most whole-time member shall discharge the functions of the
Chairperson till the Chairperson is able to discharge his functions.
Clause 69.— This clause relates to restriction on holding office for more than two
terms. It provides that notwithstanding anything in this Act, no person shall be eligible to be

64
appointed or nominated or elected in any capacity in the General Council, Board or
Corporation, as the case may be, whether as the Chairperson or member for more than two
terms.
Clause 70.— This clause contains provision for resignation of Chairperson or a member
of General Council, Board or Corporation. It provides that the Chairperson or a member of the
General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, by notice given in writing under
his hand of not less than a period of thirty days, addressed to the Central Government resign
from his office. However, the said sub-clause provides that the Chairperson or a member
General Council Board or Corporation, as the case may be, shall, unless permitted by the
Central Government to relinquish office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of a
period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed
as his successor enters upon office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the
earliest.
Clause 71.— This clause provides removal and suspension of Chairperson or a member
of General Council, Board or Corporation. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the
Central Government may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson or any member of the
General Council ,Board or Corporation, as the case may be, who—(a) has been adjudged an
insolvent; or (b) being whole-time member has engaged at any time, during his term of office,
in any paid employment; or (c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the
Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or (d) has become physically or mentally
incapable of acting as such Chairperson or other Member; or (e) is of unsound mind and
stands so declared by a competent court; or (f) has been removed or dismissed from the
service or office of the Central Government or of a State Government or from a body owned
or controlled by the Central Government or a State Government or from any Central or State
statutory body; (g) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functioning as Chairperson or other Member, as the case may be; or (h) has
so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to public interest; or
(i) has been guilty of proved misconduct; or (j) has been guilty of proved conflict of interest
in the discharge of functions. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Chairperson
or a member of the General Council ,Board or Corporation, as the case may be, shall not be
removed from his office under clause (g) or clause (h) or clause (i) of sub-section (1), unless
he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. However, the said
sub-clause provides that the Central Government may, if it considers necessary in the public
interest, suspend such Chairperson or other member.
Clause 72.— This clause relates to vacancies ,etc not to invalidate proceedings of
General Council ,Board or Corporation. It provides that no act or proceeding of the General
Council ,Board or Corporation, as the case may be shall be invalid merely by reason of—(a)
any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the General Council ,Board or Corporation,
as the case may be; or (b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the
General Council ,Board or Corporation, as the case may be ; or (c) any irregularity in the
procedure of the General Council ,Board or Corporation, as the case may be not affecting the
merits of the case.
Clause 73.— This clause deals with power to appoint committees.  Sub-clause (1) of
the said clause provides that the General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be,
shall be  competent to constitute such other committees for general or special purposes, as
it may consider necessary to carry out the functions assigned to it under this Act. Sub-
clause (2) of the said clause provides that the General Council ,Board or Corporation, as the
case may be may engage such experts for discharging its functions under this Act for such
period, on such qualification and on payment of such fees and remuneration as may be
specified by regulations made under this Act.
Clause 74.— This clause relates to reference of disputes to the Central Government. It
provides that where any dispute arises regarding any recommendation or advice of General
Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, made to the Commission, it shall be
referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final and binding.

65
Clause 75.— This clause provides for appeal against decisions of Commission. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that any person aggrieved by an order made by the
Commission under section 74 may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within such
period as may be prescribed. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that no appeal shall
be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor.  However, the
said sub-clause provides that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period
prescribed therefor  if the appellant satisfies the Central Government that he had sufficient
cause for not preferring the appeal within the prescribed period. Sub-clause (3) of the said
clause provides that every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and
shall be accompanied by a copy of the order appealed against and by such fees as may be
prescribed. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the procedure for disposing of an
appeal shall be such as may be prescribed. However, the said sub-clause provides that
before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Clause 76.— This clause relates to protection of action taken in good faith. It provides
that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything
which has been done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act.
Clause 77.— This clause specifies the Members, etc., as public servants. It provides
that the Chairperson and Members and other officers and employees of the Commission,
General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be public
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 78.— This clause contains provisions relating to power of the Commission,
Board, Committee or General Council to call for information or conduct investigation, etc.
Sub- clause (1) of the said clause provides that where the Commission, Board, Committee or
General  Council, as the case may be, consider it expedient so to do, it may, by order in
writing- (a) call upon any higher educational institution or university  at any time to furnish
in writing, such information or explanation relating to its affairs as the Commission, General
Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, may require; or (b) appoint one or more
persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of any higher educational institution and
university ; and (c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect the books of account or
other documents of any higher educational institution and university.  Sub-clause (2) of the
said clause provides that where any inquiry in relation to the affairs of an higher educational
institution has been undertaken under sub-section (1),—(a) every officer of the Government
Department, if such higher educational institution or university is a department of the
Government; (b) every director, manager, secretary or other officer, if such higher educational
institution or university is a company; or (c) every partner, manager, secretary or other
officer, if such higher educational institution or university is a firm; or  sub-clause (3) of the
said clause provides that every other person or body of persons who has had dealings in the
course of business with any of the persons mentioned in sub-section (2), shall produce
before the Commission, General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, making
the inquiry, all such books of account or other documents in his custody or power relating to,
or having a bearing on the subject-matter of such inquiry and also to furnish to the Commission,
General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, with any such statement or
information relating thereto, as the case may be, required of him, within such time as may be
specified by the Commission. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that every higher
educational institution shall maintain such books of account or other documents as may be
specified by regulations made by the Commission. Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides
that the Commission, General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, shall have
the power to issue such directions to higher educational institution as it may consider
necessary for proper functioning of such institution.
Clause 79.— This clause confers powers upon the Central Government to issue
directions. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that without prejudice to the foregoing
provisions of this Act, the Commission, General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case
may be, shall, in exercise of its powers and in performance of its functions under this Act, be
bound by such directions on questions of policy, as the Central Government may give in

66
writing to it from time to time. However, the said sub-clause provides that the Commission,
General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be, shall, as far as practicable, be
given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under this sub-
section. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that if any dispute arises between the
Central Government and the Commission, General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case
may be, as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the Central
Government shall be final.
Clause 80.— This clause provides that the Commission, General Council, Board or
Corporation, as the case may be, shall furnish to the Central Government any information
with respect to their activities as the Central Government may from time to time require.
 Clause 81.— This clause provides that the Central Government may appoint an
independent committee once in every five years to review the functioning of the Commission,
General Council, Board or Corporation, as the case may be.
 Clause 82.— This clause makes provisions for  removal of difficulties. Sub-clause (1)
of the said clause provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty However, the said sub-clause provides that no order
shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the date of commencement
of this Act. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that every order made under this
section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
 Clause 83.— This clause contains provisions relating to repeal and savings. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that with effect from such date, not later than one year
from the date of coming into force of this Act, as the Central Government may, in consultation
with the Commission, notify, the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the All India
Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 the National Council for Teacher Education Act,
1993 shall stand repealed and the University Grants Commission, the All India Council for
Technical Education, and the National Council for Teachers Education shall stand dissolved.
However, the said sub-clause provides that anything done or any action taken as regards the
educational standards and requirements under the enactments under repeal and the rules
and regulations made thereunder shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of this Act and shall continue to be in force accordingly unless
and until superseded by anything done or by any action taken under this Act. The said sub-
clause further provides that all the degrees awarded and all the colleges and the educational
institutions recognised under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and the All India
Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 shall be deemed to have been awarded or recognised
under this Act. The said sub-clause also provides that during the period between the date of
coming into force of this Act and the date of repeal of the enactments mentioned in this sub-
section, the University Grants Commission, the All India Council of Technical Education and
the National Council of Teacher Education shall not take any decision or action, except with
the prior approval of the Commission, on any matter as specified by the Commission. Sub-
clause (2) of the said clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the
Architects Act, 1972, the Advocates Act, 1961 , the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, the
Dentists Act, 1948 the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Indian
Medicine Central Council Act, 1970, and the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973, the
provisions of this Act shall apply to any matter concerning the determination, co-ordination,
maintenance of standards in , and promotion of, higher education and research. However,
the said sub-clause provides that nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
restricting the power of the Bar Council of India to specify standards of higher education
concerning practice in courts. The said sub-clause further provides that nothing contained
in this section shall be construed as restricting the power of the professional Councils listed
in the First Schedule to specify standards of higher education concerning professional
practice. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained

67
in the Indira Gandhi National Open University Act, 1985, the provisions of this Act shall
apply to the co-ordination, determination and promotion of standards in distance education
systems. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that if, on the appointed day, any suit,
appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature , relating to the University Grants Commission
Act, 1956, the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 the National Council for
Teacher Education Act, 1993, is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in
any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the repeal of the said Acts but the suit, appeal or
other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the Commission.
Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that on and from the date of repeal of the said
enactments - (a) any reference to the said enactments in any law for the time being in force
shall be construed to be a reference to this Act; (b) any reference to the University Grants
Commission, the All India Council of Technical Education or the National Council of Teacher
Education, in any law or rule or regulation for the time being in force or any contract or other
instrument, shall be construed as a reference to the Commission established under this Act;
(c) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the University Grants Commission,
the All India Council of Technical Education and the National Council of Teacher Education
shall vest in the Commission; (d) all rights and liabilities of the University Grants Commission,
the All India Council of Technical Education or the National Council of Teacher Education
shall be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the Commission; (e) any reference,
by whatever form of words, to the Chairman of the University Grants Commission, the
Chairman of the All India Council of Technical Education or the Chairman of the National
Council of Teacher Education in any law for the time being in force, or in any instrument or
other document, shall be construed as a reference respectively to the Chairman of the
Commission; (f) on the dissolution of the University Grants Commission, the All India Council
for Technical Education and the National Council for Teacher Education the person appointed
as Chairman and every other person appointed a Member and holding office as such
immediately before such date shall vacate their respective offices and no such Chairperson
or other person shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the premature termination of
the term of his office or of any contract of service. Sub-clause (6) of the said clause provides
that on the dissolution of the University Grants Commission, the All India Council for Technical
Education and the National Council for Teacher Education on repeal of the said enactments,
the Central Government, by notification, shall take consequential action in regard to officers
and staff in the regular service of the University Grants Commission, the All India Council for
Technical Education and the National Council for Teacher Education. Sub-clause (7) of the
said clause provides that save as otherwise provided in this section, the mention of particular
matters in this section, shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of repeals.
Clause  84.—This clause deals with transitory provision. It provides that
notwithstanding the repeal of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the All India
Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 and the National Council for Teacher Education
Act, 1993, the educational standards, requirements and other provisions of the University
Grants Commission Act, 1956, the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 and the
National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993, and the rules and regulations and
thereunder shall continue to be in force and operate till new standards are specified under
this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder.

68
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 54 of the Bill provides that the National  Commission for
Higher Education and Research shall have its own fund into which the grants and loans
made to the Commission by the Central Government, all fees and charges and other sums
received by the Commission shall be credited. The Fund shall be used for meeting the
salaries and allowances to the Chairperson and Members, officers and other employees of
the Commission and other expenses of the Commission  and the expenses of the General
Council, Board for Research Promotion and Innovation and Higher Education Financial
Services Corporation.
2. It is estimated that the administrative expenditure (Plan and Non-plan) involved in
supporting the Commission shall be approximately the same as involved in supporting the
existing regulatory bodies (University Grants Commission, All India Council for Technical
Education and the National Commission for Teachers Education, which shall be subsumed
by the Commission.
3. Sub-clause ( 5)(c) of clause 83 of the Bill provides that all property, movable and
immovable, belonging to the existing regulatory bodies shall vest in the  Commission. Hence,
no substantial increase in the capital cost is estimated. Expenditure on account of salaries
and other recurring expenses shall also be not substantially higher than what is presently
incurred on all these regulatory bodies.
4. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 46 of the Bill empowers the Commission to establish the
Higher Education Financial Services Corporation. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 47 of the Bill
provides that the said Corporation shall disburse, in accordance with the norms and principles
specified by regulations made by the Commission, financial assistance by way of grants to
universities and higher educational institutions. Most of the grants now flow from the
Government to the universities and higher educational institutions through the existing
regulatory bodies. With the creation of the Corporation, these grants shall flow through it.
No substantial increase in the financial burden of the Government is expected on this account.

69
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 62 empowers the Central Government to make, by notification
in the Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.   Sub-
clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters,
inter alia, include matters: (a) the other disqualifications for removal of the Chairperson or
other Members under clause (k) of sub-section ( 2) of section 8; ( b) the procedure for the
inquiry under sub-section (5) of section 8; (c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the
status and other terms and conditions of services of the chairperson under sub-section (1) of
section 14; (d) the sitting fees and other allowances payable to members under sub-section
(2) of section 14; (e) the other functions to be discharged by the Commission under clause
(n) of sub-section (2) of section16; (f) the other functions to be discharged by the General
Council under clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section27; (e) the form and manner in which an
appeal may be preferred and the documents to be accompanied with it and the fees payable
therewith under section 38; and (h) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.
2.       Sub-clause (1) of clause 63 of the proposed legislation empowers the Commission
to make, with prior approval of the General  Council and after publication, by notification in
the Official Gazette, regulations for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which such regulations may be made.
These matters, inter alia, include: (a) the norms and processes for establishment and winding
up of a higher educational institution under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section17; (b) the
norms of academic quality for a university to affiliate colleges under clause (e) of sub-section
(2) of section 17; ( c) ‘the norms and mechanisms to measure the productivity of research
programmes funded by the Commission under clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 17; (d)
the manner in which names of persons may be considered by the Collegium for inclusion in
the directory of academics for leadership positions under sub-section (1) of section 20; (e)
the procedure for the conduct of its business and the exercise of its powers and functions
under sub-section (2) of section 24; (f) the norms of academic quality for accreditation and
benchmarking of higher educational institutions under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section
26; (g) the powers and duties as may be exercised by the Chairperson of the Board under
sub-section (6) of section 43; ( h)  any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
specified by regulation or in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations.
3. The rules made by the Central Government and regulations made by the Commission
shall be laid, as soon as they are made, before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself.   The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to promote autonomy of higher educational institutions and  universities for free pursuit of
knowledge and innovation and to provide for comprehensive and integrated growth
of higher education and research keeping in view the global standards of educational
and research practices and for that purpose to establish the National Commission for
Higher Education and Research to facilitate determination, co-ordination, mainte-
nance and continued enhancement of standards of higher education and research
including university education, vocational, technical, professional and medical edu-
cation other than agricultural education and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development)
GMGIPMRND—3551RS(S-3)—23-12-2011.