THE SALARIES, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION OF MEMBERS
OF PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Salary, Allowances and Pension of the Members
of Parliament Act, 1954
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Salary, Allowances and Pension of the Members of
Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 3 of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act,
1954 after the second proviso the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘Provided also that no member shall be entitled for the salary and allowance on a day
when the House of the People or the Council of States, as the case may be, is unable to
transact the listed business for the day due to bedlam, slogan shouting and forced adjournment
for the day in any manner whatsoever.’’
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LX of 2008
Amendment
of section 3.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Ours is the largest democracy of the world and fourteen general elections of Lok Sabha
have further strenghtened the roots of democratic polity of our nation. We do feel proud
when our Parliament debates the national and international issues of public importance in
right earnest. But, it is certainly painful when we frequently found our Parliament in a State of
continuous disruptions when sloganeering by many members reaches a deafening and
deadening crescendo. Now that the issues of public importance are pushed in the back and
pandemonium has taken its place, which certainly is not serving the cause of our democracy.
Rather the image and prestige of our great institution of Parliament is being tranished for
whatever reasons. For the restoration of dignity of Parliament corrective measures have to
be initiated on priority basis. One corrective measure will be the principle of ‘‘No work No
pay’’ for our Parliamentarian. If the proceedings of either House are stalled forcibly for
whatever reasons the members should be denied the salary and dearness allowance for that
day.
Hence this Bill.
O. T.  LEPCHA

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Salary, Allowances and Pension of  the Members
of Parliament Act, 1954.
—————
(Shri O.T. Lepcha, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND— 4770RS(S-5)—29.12.2008.