AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. LX of 2025 
  THE RECORDS OF COURT PROCEEDINGS BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the transcription, maintenance, and public availability 
of accurate records of proceedings of all courts in India 
and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
5 
1. (1 ) This Act may be called the Records of Court Proceedings Act, 2025.
(2
) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: — 
(a)  “court” means the Supreme Court of India, all High Courts in 
India, and all subordinate courts as defined under Chapter VI of Part VI 
of the Constitution of India; 
(b)  “court proceeding” means all words uttered by judge s, 
magistrates, lawyers, or any other party involved in a matter during the 
hearing of any matter in any court in India, whether civil or criminal; 
(c)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
(d)  “public record” shall have the same meaning as ass igned to it 
under clause (e)  of section 2 of the Public Records Act, 1993; and 
(e)  “transcript” means an accurate and complete verbat im record 
of the proceedings of the court rendered in written  form, whether 
manually or electronically generated. 
5 
10 69 of 1993. 
 
Maintenance  of 
 
transcripts of 
court 
proceedings. 
 
3. (1)  Every court shall maintain a transcript of all cour t proceedings held 
before it, which shall be treated as public record. 
(2)   The transcripts under sub-section (1)  shall be — 
(a)  accurate and verbatim in nature; and 
(b) recorded either by court-authorised stenographers, trans-
cription services, or by automated speech-to- text systems, as may be 
prescribed. 
(3)  The format and standards of transcription, manner of authentication, and 
storage shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(4)   Every court shall nominate one of its officers as  the Officer in-
charge of 
the transcripts of court proceedings, who shall be responsible for the proper 
arrangement, maintenance, preservation and periodic  review of such 
transcripts, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
15 
20 
25 
 
Public access  
to transcripts  of 
court 
proceedings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. (1)  Every court shall, for the purpose of access to the  public, upload the 
transcript of the daily court proceedings held befo re it on its official 
website in an electronic format within twenty four hours from the 
conclusion of such proceedings.  
(2)  Notwithst anding anything contained in this section, every co urt may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, withhold, redact , or delay the publication 
of any portion of a transcript, if such publication is likely to — 
(a)  prejudice the administration of justice; 
(b) infringe the privacy of parties, especially in matt ers involving 
minors, sexual offences, or other sensitive issues; 
(c)  contravene any existing statutory restriction; and 
(d)  any other circumstance, as may be prescribed by ru les made 
by the court.  
(3) The manner of redaction, time period for withholdin g, etc. shall be such 
as may be prescribed by rules made by the court.  
30 
35 
40 
 
Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 
 
5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwi thstanding anything 
therewith inconsistent contained in any other law f or the time being in force 
or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law. 
  
Power  of  
Courts to make 
rules, etc. 
 
 
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, eve ry court shall have the 
power to make rules, regulations, directions or ord ers, as may be required, 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
45  

3 
 
 
5 
10 
7. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2)  Every rule made by the Central Government under th is Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each Hou se of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days wh ich may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry  of 
the session immediately following the session or th e successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifica tion in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule shoul d not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modific ation or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything pr eviously done under that 
rule. 
 Power to make 
rules.  
 
  

4 
 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Maintenance of records is an essential function in a democracy so as to 
ensure that the correct information about the day-t o-day functioning of any public 
institution is preserved and recorded. The Public R ecords Act, 1993, already covers 
the management, a dministration and preservation of public records of  the Central 
Government, Union territory Administrations, Public  Sector Undertakings, 
statutory bodies and corporations, Commissions and committees constituted by the 
Central Government or a Union territor y Administration and matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  Similarly, verbat im proceedings of the Parliament 
of India and all State Legislatures are recorded un der the relevant rules of that 
legislative body. Therefore, it is crucial to maint ain accurate records of all 
proceedings that take place before the Judiciary as  is already done for the 
Executive and the Legislature.  
Hence, this Bill. 
SAKET GOKHALE.  
  
 
  

5 
 
  FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM  
Clause 3 of the Bill requires all Courts of India t o maintain transcript of their 
court proceedings, recorded either by court- authorised stenographers, transcription 
services, or by automated speech-to-text systems. C lause 4 requires all courts to 
upload the transcript of each day’s proceedings hel d before i t on their official 
website in an electronic format. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to invol ve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify the 
exact amount of recurring and non-recurring expenditure likely to be involved. 
  
 
  

6 
 
  MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Governmen t to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Act. As the matter s in respect of which rules may 
be made are matters of procedure and administrative detail, the  delegation of 
legislative power is, of a normal character. 
 
  
 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the transcription, maintenance, and public availability 
of accurate records of proceedings of all courts in India 
and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
___________ 
(Shri Saket Gokhale, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–275–08.12.2025. 