THE COMPULSORY BASIC FACILITIES FOR NEGLECTED SENIOR
CITIZENS, WIDOWS AND ORPHANS BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory basic facilities like housing, food, water
medicine and security to neglected senior citizens, widows
and orphans of the country.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Basic Facilities for Neglected Senior
Citizens, Widows and Orphans Bill 2015.
(2) it extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "neglected senior citizen"means such an old man or woman who is more than
sixty years of age and has no facilities for shelter or any relatives to provide him or her
shelter.
(c) "orphan" means a child who is below fourteen years of age and is without
parents or other relatives to take his or her minimum basic care.
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(e) "widow" means any woman who has not remarried after the death of her
husand and who does not have any facilities for shelter.
Short title, and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. LX of 2015
5
10
15
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 18TH DECEMBER, 2015

2
3. The Central Government shall as soon as may be, but within six months of the
commencement of this Act, by notification frame a national policy for protection and welfare
of the neglected senior citizens, widows and orphans.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish residential centres all over the country
for use by the neglected senior citizens, widows and orphan free of cost.
(2) The residential centre shall have the capacity of minimum eighty and maximum two
hundred persons to live there at a time.
(3) Stay arrangement in the residential centre shall be such that for every two orphans
there is one senior citizen and one widow.
5. The appropriate Government shall ensure that—
(a) housing, food, water, medicine, security and the minimum resources necessary
to lead a balanced and healthy life in the Centre is provided.
(b) employment opportunities in the form of domestic production units is set up
in the centre for interested men or women.
6. (1) At each Residential Centre there shall be a Managing Committee to Oversee the
functioning of the residential centre consisting of:
(i) the Chairman of the local bodies, Chairman
(ii) Secretary, Social welfare department, Member
(iii) a senior-most senior citizen from the Residential Centre, -do-
(iv) an oldest widow from the Residential Centre, -do-
(v) a local eminent social worker nominated by the -do-
appropriate Government.
(2) The term of the office of the Chairman, Secretary and members of the Managing
Committee and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Committee
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Residential Centres shall have such members of staff with such terms and
conditions of services as may be prescribed from time to time.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up in each State, the State Monitoring
Board to monitor, supervise and coordinate the Residential Centres operating in each district.
The board shall comprise—
(i) Chairman of the State Women Commission, Chairman
(ii) Secretary, Social Welfare department, Member
(iii) an eminent social activist nominated by the appropriate Member.
Government,
(2) The term of the office of the Chairman, Secretary and members of the Board and
the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functioning of the board shall be such
as may be prescribed.
(3) The Board shall have a secretariat with such officers and staff and with such terms
and conditions of services as may be prescribed from time to time.
8. (1) The appropriate Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The share of the Centre and the State for financing the operation of the Residential
Centres shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Framing a
National
policy.
Establishment
of Residential
Centres.
Residential
centres to
have proper
facilities for
the beneficia-
ries.
Management
and Operation
of the
Residential
centres.
State Monitor-
ing Board.
Central
Government
to provide
Fund.
Power to
make rules. 45

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In the last one decade, the old age population in the country has risen by 39.3%. This
segment of population is expected to rise by 45-50% in the coming decades. Because of the
continual nuclearization of families in the society, they have to suffer from several problems
on their own. There are more than a thousand old age homes in India but they have not been
able to yield expected results. In a similar way, there are also a large number of widows in the
country who are not only discriminated in their family but also in the entire society. In several
cases, they are deprived of basic support and assistance. The necessity today is to create a
conducive climate whereby these widows can live their remaining lives in a productive and
happy manner. There is also a large section of the population of orphan kids who are without
any support and who live a destitute life. Most of these kids are either subjected to child
labour or they are addicted to drugs or are involved in illegal organ trading.
The Bill provides integrated provisions to bring these three disadvantaged sections of
the society under one roof where they can use their mutual cooperating role. The need of the
hour is to bring together these three sections of the society in a socially conducive manner.
Widow women should undertake the role of mother for orphan children and neglected old
citizens should play the role of guardian for both of them. This should make a family
environment for all of them. Through these Centres, along with basic facilities such as food,
shelter and clothing, an opportunity to live a more dignified life can be given to all these three
sections in the society—old age, widows and destitute children. It is also important that this
arrangement should make their lives happy by mutually interdependent and emotional
bonding. In these Centres the neglected, suffering and deprived classes of our society
should be able to live a life where they should be free from deprivation and many other
problems.
The most important reason to establish these Centres is to create a unified shelter for
various needy sections instead of separate orphanage, widow Ashram, old age home etc.
Two distinctive benefits that should arise from such arrangement are that on one hand there
should be a reduction in government spending on infrastructure, human resources, etc. and
on the other hand these disadvantaged groups should have an opportunity to take care of
each other and live a better life with emotional, protective and mental satisfaction.
Hence this Bill.
VIVEK  GUPTA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of the residential centres all over the
country for use of the neglected senior citizens, widow and orphans. Clause 5 provides that
appropriate Government shall ensure residential centres to have proper basic facilities to be
beneficiaries. Clause 6 provides for management and operations of the residential centres by
the management committee. Clause 7 provides for establishment of monitoring board across
the country. Clause 8 provides that Central Government shall provide adequate funds for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to quantify the expenditure at this
juncture. However, it is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may involve as
recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore may also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory basic facilities like housing, food, water
medicine and security to neglected senior citizens, widows
and orphans of the country.
————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3845RS(S3)—18-12-2015.