THE ALL-INDIA  INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES
 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment)
Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. For sub-section (1) of section 7 of the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences Act,
1956, the following section shall be substituted namely:—
7.(1) ‘‘There shall be a President of the Institute who shall be nominated by the
Central Government from among the members other than the Director of the Institute
and the Minister, if he is one of the members.”
Bill No. LX of 2016
Short title and
commencement.
5
Amendment
to section 7.
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 24TH MARCH, 2017

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
All-India Institute of Medical Sciences was set up as a premier institution for medical
education and research in highly specialized areas having a hospital with world class facilities.
For enabling such an institution to work smoothly for achieving its objectives, it's founding
fathers in their wisdom, sought to accord it complete autonomy by enabling a separate
legislation i.e. All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) Act, 1956, which is clearly
reflected in the debates that took place in both Houses of Parliament. Such a vision stands
clearly undermined today. As a result, while it is very good in academic, it is very low on
administration.
It is a matter of great concern that the intended autonomy of the Institute remain
seriously compromised in all possible manner mainly due to the fact that the Union Minister
of Health has been holding the charge of President of the Institute body (I.B.) as well as the
Governing Council. Minister of Health being a member of the I.B. and also its Chairman is
nowhere provided in the AIIMS Act-nor is it as per the spirit of the Act. It is a clear case of
conflict of interest that impinges upon the core character and autonomy of the Institute.
This Bill seeks to expressly bar the Minister to be appointed as President of the
Institute Body by amending section 7 of AIIMS Act, 1956.
DR. KANWAR DEEP SINGH

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES ACT, 1956
(25 OF 1956)
* * * * *
7.  President of the Institute: (1) There shall be a President for every Institute who
shall be nominated by the Central Government from among the members other than the
Director of the Institute:
Provided that the President of the existing Institute shall also be the President of
every corresponding Institute and other Institutes established on and after the
commencement of the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, till
such date the Central Government nominates a separate President for every corresponding
Institute and other Institute established after such commencement.
(2) The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are laid
down in this Act or as may be presicribed by rules or regulations.
* * * * *

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences Act, 1956.
————
(Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5499RS(S3)—24-03-2017.