THE CONSTITUTIONAL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitutional (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall  come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 51A of the Constitution in clause (h), after the words, ‘‘spirit of inquiry and
reform’’ the words, ‘‘through school text books and other institutional mechanism’’ shall be
inserted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LXI of 2016
5 Amendment
of article 51A.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 10TH MARCH, 2017

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Despite several attempts being made by individuals and social organisations, no
perceptible progress is seen in the matter of achieving the objectives of developing scientific
temper and spirit of inquiry and reforms in the society.
Those who propagate progressive thoughts are murdered during daylight and,
shockingly, culprits go scot-free. Even in cases where charge sheets are filed after long
delays, it is difficult to presume that any justice would be done.
People in the name of religion spread superstitions openly and television channels do
not lag behind, in spreading their messages and earn fortunes. Same is the case of fake
astrologers who have answers to all the problems from marriages, divorce, love affairs,
business issues, child births, relations, court matters to political fortunes.
Children are pressed with legs for giving the child godly blessings, thrown from a
height and shockingly, are advised to sacrifice at the altar of ‘God’.
The ‘godmen’ who are respected in the society do not speak a word about the need of
eliminating superstitious beliefs in society. Some of them are pampered by society both in
India and abroad. Others have left eminent business houses behind by becoming producers
of consumer goods at a speed that no genuine businessman in India could achieve or even
think of.
It is, therefore, high time that society by and large realize the game plan of fake people
who are out to demolish the spirit of inquiry and reform.
Hence this Bill.
SHANTARAM  NAIK
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  INDIA
51A. Fundamental duties.—It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
* * * * *
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform.
* * * * *
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
————
(Shri Shantaram Naik, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4929RS(S3)—10-03-2017.