Bill No. LXI of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 21ST JUNE, 2019
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Repulbic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 85 of the Constitution, for sub-clause (1), the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘‘(1). The President shall summon each House of Parliament to meet for three
sessions in a year commencing in the first or second week of February, July and
November respectively:
Provided that the President may from time to time summon each House of
Parliament to meet for additional sessions, as he may deem necessary, at such time and
place as he thinks fit:
Provided further that each House of Parliament shall meet for not less than one
hundred days in a year.’’
Amendment of
article 85.
10
5

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Parliamentary convention has evolved in such a manner that Parliament usually meets
for three sessions in a year - Budget Session (February-May), Monsoon Session (July-
August) and Winter Session (November-December). However, the Constitution does not
provide for a fixed calendar of sittings or a minimum number of sittings. While the idea of a
fixed calendar was explored by the General Purposes Committee of the Lok Sabha in 1955, the
importance of having a minimum number of sittings was highlighted by the National
Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution in 2002.
Enshrining the parliamentary convention in the body of the Constitution of India itself
will ensure that the Government of the time cannot evade the accountability of the legislature
by delaying the commencement of a session. It will also allow Members of Parliament to plan
their  parliamentary agenda around the fixed schedule to fully take advantage of every
mechanism of parliamentary oversight and law-making. Furthermore, to address the decline
in the number of sittings, it has been proposed that a minimum of 100 days be incorporated
within the Constitution.
The healthy functioning of a representative democracy requires a careful scrutiny of
legislation and regular parliamentary engagement on issues of public importance. To achieve
this objective, it is imperative that a fixed calendar for parliamentary sessions along with a
minimum number of sittings is established.
Hence, this Bill.
DEREK O’BRIEN

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
85. Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution.—(1) The President shall
from time to time summon each House of Parliament to meet at such time and place as he
thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the
day appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The President may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissove the House of the People.
* * * *

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
.
————
(Shri Derek O’Brien, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—851RS(S3)—24-06-2019.