—RS/4548RS

AS INTRODUCED IN THE ‘RAJYA SABHA.

Bill No. LXI of 2000

THEFOREST CONSERVATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. This Act may be called The Forest Conservation (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title.
69 of 1980. 2. In section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as the ~=Amendment
5. principal Act),— of Section 2.

(i) in clause (a) of the Explanation, the words “or medicinal plants” shall be
omitted.

(ii) the existing Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation I thereof and
after Explanation | as so numbered, the following Explanation shall be inserted,
10 namely:—

“Explanation II —In this section, the expression “forest land or portion thereof”
shall not include bushes grown naturally.”.


Insertion of
new section
2A.

Forest land
containing
medicinal
plants not
to be used
for forest or
non-forest
Purpose.

2

3. After section 2 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—

“2A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law relating to
forests for the time being in force, no forest land or any portion thereof having grown or
developed with medicinal plants shall be used for any forest or non-forest purpose as the
case may be.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

. The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 is no doubt a very effective law to save our forest
wealth. The Act helps to ensure adequate forest cover in the country in order to maintain
ecological balance and to sustain rain fall. However over the years some difficulties have
been experienced in implementation of provisions of this Act. Sometimes its
implementation has resulted in hampering of developmental works. Even bushes grown
naturally are considered as forest and lengthy formalities like getting approval of the
Government has to be obtained for the use of such land. Hence this shortcoming is being
rectified in this Bill.

Similarly Medicinal plants in the country are rare and they ought to be protected at
any cost. Therefore, it is proposed that no forest land where medicinal plants have grown
naturally or otherwise should be used for any purpose whatsoever except for the development
of medicinal plants.

Hence this Bill.

RS. GAVAI


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE FOREST (CONSERVATION) ACT, 1980
(Act No. 69 oF 1980)

* * * “ .

Restriction 2. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being int force in

oe ne ation a State, no State Government or other authority shall make, except with he prior approval
i

of forests or Of the Central Government, any order directing—

use of forest

land for @ . * * * *
non-forest है
purpose. (iv) * * * *

‘Explanation— For the purpose of this section “non-forest purpose” means the breaking
up or clearing of any forest land or portion thereof for—

(a) the cultivation of tea, coffee, spices, rubber, palms, oil-bcaring plants,
horticultural crops or medicinal plants;

(6) any purpose other than reafforestation,

but does not include any work relating or ancillary to conservation, development
and management of forests and wild life, namely, the establishment of check-posts,
fire lines, wireless communications and construction of fencing, bridges and culverts,
dams, waterholes, trench marks, boundary marks, pipe-lines or other like purposes’.

* * * * *


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.

(Shri R. S. Gavai, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4548RS—13-11-2000.