1
THE HINDU SHRINES AND RELIGIOUS PLACES (MANAGEMENT
AND REGULATION) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide for management, protection, administration and governance of Hindu shrines
and religious places in the country and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Hindu Shrines and Religious Places (Management
and Regulation) Act, 2019.
 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 (a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LXI of  2019
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
5
10

2
 (b) "Board" means Hindu Shrine Board constituted under section 4 of the Act;
(c) "chadhawa" means offerings made by the pilgrims at Hindu shrines and
religious places including the offering made to anyone within the precincts of such
shrines and places;
(d) "endowment" means all properties, movable or immovable belonging to or
endowed for the maintenance, improvement, addition to or worship in the specified
shrines or for the performance of any service or charity within the precinct of the
shrines and lands and buildings attached or appurtenant thereto;
(e) "endowment fund" means the income or revenue received or receivable on
account of any specified shrines and includes all donations, offerings and gifts as are
received on behalf of or for the benefit of any specified shrines by the Management
Committee or any other persons authorized by the committee as the case may be;
(f) "Hindu" means a person professing Hindu religion who is born at any place
in India and also includes those persons who are born in the families of such person
and are residing outside the country;
(g) "Hindu shrines and religious places" means the shrines temple, ashram,
devals, mutts endowments, springs and hillocks and includes other religious places
and shrines properties, both movable and immovable worshipped by Hindus;
(h) "Management Committee" means any Body or Authority or Committee,
constituted under section 7, having the power to direct or control any or all of the
operations of a place of worship;
(i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) "service" means a person who is in service of a religious place of worship if he
or she has either been authorized by the Managing Committee or has been traditionally
doing any type of work, either full-time or part-time, at or in relation to the Hindu
shrines and religious places, irrespective of whether he or she is receiving or not
receiving any remuneration for the work.
3. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint one
or more Special Officers in every State, as may be necessary, for the purpose of making a
survey of Hindu shrines and religious places in every State.
(2) The Special Officers shall be empowered to call for any information, document or
record from any functionary of the appropriate Government or any other person or authority
as may be considered necessary, for conducting the survey and shall have the same powers
as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(3) The Special Officer shall, after making such inquiry as he may deem necessary,
submit a report to the Central Government in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Special Officer may prefer an appeal to the
appropriate Government within sixty days from the date of the order.
4. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Hindu Shrine Board to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions
assigned to it, under the Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and ten other members who shall be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Board shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common
seal.
(4) The head office of the Board shall be at New Delhi.
Survey of
Hindu shrines
and religious
places.
Establishment
of the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5 of 1908.

3
(5)The Chairperson and members of the Board shall hold office for a period of three
years and shall be eligible for re-nomination as the case may be,
(6)The Board shall meet at such time and place and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be prescribed.
(7)The Board shall appoint such officers as it considers necessary with such
designations, pay, allowances and other remuneration, from time to time as may be prescribed.
(8)The Board shall comply with such direction as may, from time to time, be given to it
by the Central Government.
5. The functions of the Board shall be to,—
(a) administer, manage and regulate the Hindu Shrines and religious places to
preserve, protect and use the properties in accordance with the provisions of the Act;
(b) manage and administer the endowment fund in accordance with the provisions
of the Act;
(c) arrange for the proper performance of worship at the shrine and to provide
facilities to the pilgrims;
(d) undertake developmental activities concerning the area of the shrine and its
surroundings including construction of buildings, sanitary work etc. for the benefit of
pilgrims;
(e) make provisions of medical relief for pilgrims;
(f) make provisions for the payment of salaries, allowances and other payments
to the staff from the endowment fund;
(g) make provisions for relief to the indignant and the destitute; and
(h) do all such other things as may be necessary under the Act.
6. The members of the Board shall be individually and collectively liable for the loss,
waste or misappropriation of the endowment fund, if such loss, waste or misappropriation is
a direct consequence of his willful act or omission and a suit for compensation may be
instituted against him by the Board.
7. (1) There shall be a established a Management Committee for every State consisting
of a Chairperson and nine members who shall be appointed by the appropriate Government
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Chairperson and members of the Management Committee shall hold office for
a period of three years and shall be eligible for re-nomination as the case may be,
(3) The provisions of the Act relating to the meeting of the Board shall apply, mutatis
mutandis for conducting the meeting of the Management Committee.
(4) Subject to overall superintendence and control of the Board, a Management
Committee shall have the same functions and exercise the same powers within the jurisdiction
of the State concerned as are vested in the Board under section 5.
8. (1) It shall be lawful for the Board or the Management Committee or any other
person authorized by the Board or the Management Committee in this behalf to seek or
receive any donation, grants, offerings and chadhawa against proper receipts and the
donations, grants, offerings and chadhawa so received shall be deposited in the endowment
fund.
(2) The Board or the Management Committee, as the case may be, shall have the power
to borrow money or raise loans for carrying out the objectives of the Act from banks,
financial institutions and other corporate bodies and also have the powers to invest money
not immediately required in such security, bonds, etc. as it may deem proper and necessary.
Functions.
Liability of
members.
Establishment
of
Management
Committee.
Endowment
fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(3) Whoever solicits or receives any donations, grants, offerings and chadhawa in the
name or on behalf of the Board or the Management Committee in contravention of the
provisions of the Act shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to twenty thousand
rupees or two times of the amount received, whichever is higher.
9. (1) Whoever violates any provision of this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend upto three years and fine or both.
(2) Misuse of income or asset of a Shrine or any religious place of worship as well as
use of such income or asset without due authorization from the Board or the Management
Committee shall be an offence under sub-section (2).
10. No suit or other proceedings shall lie in any court against the Board or its officers
for anything done or purported to be done in good faith by it under this Act.
11. (1) The accounts of the Board and the Management Committee for a financial year
shall be audited annually by the Chartered Accountant to be appointed by the Board or the
Management Committee as the case may be.
(2) The Board shall annually prepare a report on the administration of the affairs of the
Shrine or any religious place of worship and submit it to the Central Government.
(3) The Central Government shall cause the annual report along with the statement if
any laid in both the Houses of the Parliament.
12. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contrary
contained in any other law for the time being in force.
13. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Bar to suits or
proceedings.
Audit and
Annual report.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules.
Savings.
5
15
10
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is known for its temples as much as it is known for the cultural diversity. The
Hindu religious places of worships like shrines, mandirs, abodes of particular idols, mutts,
devals, gaushalas, dharmshalas, etc. are all well known and recognized by the Indian law.
Constitutionally, India is secular country and has not State religion. However, it has developed
over the years its own unique concept of secularism and is fundamentally different from the
parallel concept of secularism requiring complete separation of Church and the State. Freedom
of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution of India as a group right under article 26, 29 and
30 but right cannot be enjoyed in an absolute unrestricted way.
In India, many State Governments have taken over many Hindu shrines and religious
places of worship. In many cases, Government representatives and nominees sit on the
controlling bodies of these shrines and religious places of worship. In the absence of any
norm or law in this regard, the principles of secularism are often violated. The Supreme Court
has set the Constitutional parameters on the scope of the Government intervention in the
day to day management of Hindu religious places of worship and opined that takeover of a
Hindu shrines and religious places must be for a fixed period as it allows misappropriation of
temple wealth, lands, and diversion for funds for non religious purposes. Therefore, the
management of the temple must be handed back after the evil has been remedied.
It is, therefore, felt that a Central law is needed to make sure that the Hindu shrines and
religious places of worship are independent and the funds collected by any Hindu shrines
and religious places of worship are used in line with the tenets of Hindu religion or sect or
community. Prominent persons and religious persons of a religion or sect or community
have a say in managing affairs of their religious institutions and places of worship, and
persons misusing religious institutions and places of worship for their personal ends should
be punished.
Hence this Bill.
AJAY PRATAP SINGH
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Hindu Shrine Board including
its Chairperson, Members and appointment of staff and empowers the appropriate
Government to provide salaries and allowances for the functionaries of the Board. Clause 7
provides for the establishment of the Management Committee for every State. The Bill, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of Union
Territories. It is estimated that approximately a sum of rupees five thousand crore will be met
by the Central Government as recurring expenditure in respect of the Board falling under its
jurisdiction.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for management, protection, administration and governance of Hindu shrines
and religious places in the country and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ajay Pratap Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4325RS(S3)—11-12-2019.