1
Bill No. LXI of 2022
THE PREVENTION OF MONEY-LAUNDERING
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Money-Laundering (Amendment)
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In the Prevention of money-Laundering Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 6,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), after the words, "powers and authority conferred by or
under this Act", the words, "after consultation with the Chief Justice of India" shall be
inserted.
(b) in sub-section (12), after the words, "after giving necessary opportunity of
hearing", the words "and after consultation with the Chief Justice of India" shall be
inserted.
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 6.
5
10

2
3. In section 50 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words, "have the same powers as are vested in a
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908", the words "have the same powers
as are vested in an agency under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946"
shall be substituted.
(b) in sub-section ( 2), for the words "he considers necessary whether to", the
words "is necessary to" shall be substituted.
(c) sub-section (4) shall be deleted.
(d) in sub-section (5), in clause (b), for the words "the previous approval of the
Joint Director", the words "the previous approval of the Court" shall be substituted.
5 of 1908
25 of 1946
Amendment of
section 50.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Under the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002, in order to ensure impartiality
and to ensure that the principle of the separation of powers is upheld, there is a need to have
wider consultation regarding the appointment and removal of the adjudicating authority.
2. The authority under the Act which is enjoying the powers of a quasi-judicial system
as well as an enquiring agency, and at the same time functioning under the government loses
its independent working character. Therefore, there is need to ensure the independent
character of the authority.
3. The enforcing authority, being under the government and having been vested with
quasi-judicial powers, does not stand up to the principles of separation of powers, and also
is resulting in the high centralisation of power. Therefore, there is need to ensure to uphold
the principle of separation of power under the Act to ensure fairness in dispensing justice to
the People.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
DR. V . SIVADASAN.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE PREVENTION OF MONEY-LAUNDERING ACT, 2002
****
6. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification, appoint an Adjudicating
Authority to exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred by or under this Act.
****
(12) The Chairperson or any other Member shall not be removed from his office except
by an order made by the Central Government after giving necessary opportunity of hearing.
****
50. (1) the Director shall, for the purposes of section 13, have the same powers as are
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect of
the following matters, namely:—
(a) discovery and inspection;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any officer of a reporting
entity and examining him on oath;
(c) compelling the production of records;
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) The Director, Additional Director, Joint Director, Deputy Director or Assistant
Director shall have power to summon any person whose attendance he considers necessary
whether to give evidence or to produce any records during the course of any investigation
or proceeding under this Act.
(3) All the persons so summoned shall be bound to attend in person or through
authorised agents, as such officer may direct, and shall be bound to state the truth upon any
subject respecting which they are examined or make statements, and produce such documents
as may be required.
(4) Every proceeding under sub-sections (2) and (3) shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code.
(5) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the Central Government, any officer
referred to in sub-section (2) may impound and retain in his custody for such period, as he
thinks fit, any records produced before him in any proceedings under this Act:
Provided that an Assistant Director or a Deputy Director shall not—
(a) impound any records without recording his reasons for so doing; or
(b) retain in his custody any such records for a period exceeding three months,
without obtaining the previous approval of the Joint Director.
5 of 1908
45 of 1860
Adjudicating
Authorities,
compostion,
powers etc.
Powers of
authorities
regarding
summons
production of
documents and
to give
evidence, etc.
4

RAJY A SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002.
————
(Dr. V .  Sivadasan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1779RS(S3)—12-12-2022.