1
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008
Bill No.  LXI  of  2008
THE NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY AUTHORITY
BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Food Security Authority and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Food Security Authority Act, 2008.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of October, 2008.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "National Authority" means the National Food Security Authority constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 3.
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
5

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a National Authority
to be known as the National Food Security Authority to exercise the powers conferred on,
and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The National Authority shall consist of the following persons, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be of the rank of Cabinet Secretary having domain
knowledge and professional expertise in the field of agriculture and food security.
(b) not more than three members of the rank of Secretary to the Government of
India to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons having
experience in the fields of agriculture, food security management, economics,
Consumer Affairs and judiciary:
Provided that if the powers of the National Authority are vested in an individual,
such individual shall be entitled to the same powers and functions and shall be assisted
or provided with the same secretarial support and technical expertise as are available
to the National Authority consisting of more than one person under this Act.
(3) The head office of the National Authority shall be in Delhi.
(4) The National Authority may appoint such number of officers and employees as it
considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(5) The qualifications and experience, terms of office and allowances of the members,
officers and employees of the National Authority shall be such, as may be prescribed.
4. The powers and functions of the National Authority, shall inter alia, include,—
(i) to gather information in respect of food from across different countries as well
as from within the country, global national cropping patterns and prepare global
inventory for consumption habits and weather patterns affecting rains;
(ii) to advise Government with regard to timing and modalities for trade in food
and inputs thereof;
(iii) to suggest cropping patterns designed to meet consumer preferences for
domestic consumption as well as for exports to other countries;
(iv) to study and consider the impact of changes in global climate on food
production and make appropriate recommendations thereon;
(v) to consider and advise on linkages between food insecurity and energy
security; and
(vi) to advise the Government and such other matters as may be referred to it
from time to time.
5. The National Authority shall prepare, once every year, in such form and at such time
as may be prescribed, an annual report, giving summary of its activities during the previous
year and submit it to the Central Government.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the composition of the National Authority,
(b) the method of the appointment of the Chairperson and members of the National
Authority,
(c) any matter or matters not expressly provided for in the Act, but considered
necessary for the appointment and functioning of the National Agency.
2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Constitution
of National
Food Security
Authority.
Functions of
National
Authority.
Annual Report.
Power to make
rules.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As a result of global  warming, there  is a drastic change in the climatic conditions.
Weather  cycles are also changing. Agricultural productivity is  on the verge of decline. Cost
of production  per tonne would rise because  of  rising cost of inputs. Besides,  as  a result of
various factors, consumer tastes and preferences are also undergoing a drastic change.
Hence, there is a need for establishment of a National Food  Security Authority to study and
consider  the impact of changes in global climate on food production and make  appropriate
recommendations to the Government from time  to time.
Hence the Bill.
N. K.  SINGH

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3  of the  Bill  seeks to constitute the National Food Security  Authority and
makes provisions for salary and allowances of the Members, officers and employees of the
Agency.
The Bill, if enacted will involve an additional expenditure  from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is  estimated that a sum of rupees two hundred crore may involve as recurring
expenditure from the Consolidated  Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees  fifty crore is also  likely to be incurred.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 6  of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. As such the delegation
of legislative power is of normal character.

6
RAJYA  SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Food Security Authority and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri N.K. Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4760RS(S-5)—29-12-2008.