SER5\BILL_ 2004/RS/2212RS
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2006.
   (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in section 29A, after sub-section (9),
the following proviso shall be inserted namely:—
“(10). Notwithstanding any order of the Commission issued under the Election
Symbols (Reservation and Allotment)  Order, 1968, recognition of any National
Party or State Party, shall not be withdrawn except by or under provisions of this
section.”
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LXI of 2006
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 11TH AUGUST, 2006
Amendment of
Section 29 of
Act 43 of
1951.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Election Commission of India under the Election Symbols (Reservation and
Allotment) Order, 1968 has made a provision which empowers the Commission to withdraw
recognition of a recognised political Party for its failure to observe Model Code of Conduct
or follow lawful directions and  instructions  of the Election Commission, if the Commission
is satisfied on information in its possession that a political party recognised either as a
National Party or a State Party has failed or has refused or is refusing or has shown or is
showing defiance by its conduct or otherwise ( a) to observe the provisions of the “Model
Code of Conduct for Guidance of Political parties and Candidates"  as issued by the
Commission in January, 1991 or as amended by it from time to time, or (b) follow or carry out
the lawful directions and instructions of the Commission given from time to time with a view
to furthering the conduct of free, fair and peaceful elections or safeguarding the interests of
the general public and the electorate in particular.
In fact, article 324  of the Constitution which is merely regulatory in nature and confers
up on the Commission very limited powers  cannot be construed as conferring powers of
making substantive provisions, which come under the domain of Parliament.
Registration of Political Parties is not that insignificant a matter to be dealt with under
Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968. Such an aspect has necessarily
to be a part of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 which deals with important
substantive law relating to holding of elections in the country.
If violation of Code of Conduct is required to be punished, the provisions of the Code
of Conduct, should, first be included in the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in which,
punishment for various kinds of violations with respect to Code of Conduct can be provided
for.
It is not proper that the said 1968 Order provides for punishment for violation of Code
of Conduct, which is still in the form of a Code, with as harsh  a punishment as withdrawing
of recognition of political parties.
On account of such an irrational punishment, the Commission has, at no time, been
able to punish any political party for the violations, small or big, that they have done with
respect to the Code of Conduct.
Hence the Bill.
SHANTARAM  LAXMAN  NAIK.
2

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2212RS(S5)—11-08-2006.