Archival Advisory Board, 
Functions of the Board. 
Power of the Director General to lay down norms and stan dards for COUrseS in archi val science. Protec tion of action. taken in good faith. 
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification the Oficial Gazette, constitute an Archival Advisory Board for the purposes of this Act, (2) The Advisory Board shall consist of the following members, namely:-
6 
(a) Sccretary to the Government of India, in the Ministrv of Central Governnnent dealing with culture 
(b) on ofticer, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Govornment of India, each from the Cabinet Secretariet, Ministry cf Dsfenec, of External Affairs. Home Affairs, Ministry of Ministry of Finan:e and Ministry of Personnel. Publ ic Griovano and Pension (c) two representatives not below the rank of Jcint Secretary in ènion territory Administrations to be nominated by the C*atral Government th 
(e) Director-General 
Chariman, exr officio. Mèmbers er oficio. 
Members 
(d) three persons to be nominated by the Central Goverament for Members a period not exceeding three years, one being archives and two being professors in the Post-graduate Department of History in any recognised Unive sity Member-Secretary ex oficio 
(3) The members nominated under clause (d) of sub-section (2) -shall be paid such allowances as may be prescribed, 14. The Board shall perform the following functions, namely: (a) advise the Central Government and Union territory Adminl strations on matters concerning the administration, management, con servation and use of public records; (6) lay down guidelines for training of archivists; (c) give directions for acquisition of records from private cusouy * (d) deal with such other matters as may be prescribed. 
15 
the training in archival science and other ancillary subjects. 
20 
15. The Director-General shall have the power to lay down norms and standards for courses curricula, assessmnent and examinations relating to 
25 
30 
16. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person în respect of anything which is done or intended to be done j5 in good faith in pursuance of this Act or the rules made thereunder. 