THE WOMEN (EQUAL PARTICIPATION IN DECISION MAKING)
BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for the empowerment of women to enable them to have equal participation
in the governance of the country by making reservations and such other
provisions in the body polity such as executive, legislative and
judiciary and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Women (Equal Participation in Decision Making)
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "appropriate government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "Election Commission" means the Election Commission established under
article 324 of the Constitution of India;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. LXI of 2015
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 18TH DECEMBER, 2015

2
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force the
Election Commission shall, while conducting elections of the office of the President of India
or the Vice-President of India, as the case may be, shall ensure that a woman candidate is
elected to each of these offices for alternate terms in such manner as may be determined by
the Election Commission.
4. The Prime Minister shall ensure that not less than thirty-three per cent of Ministerial
berths in the Union Council of Ministers are filled up from amongst the women Members of
Parliament.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Election Laws or any other law for
the time being in force, the Election Commission shall reserve not less than thirty three per
cent of the total seats each in the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha for women candidates in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The seats so reserved for women under sub-section ( 1) shall bear, as nearest as
may be, to the total number of seats allotted to a State or Union Territory in Lok Sabha as the
population of women in that State or Union Territory as the case may be, in respect of which
seats are so reserved bears to the total population of the State or Union territory.
(3) In case of Rajya Sabha provisions of sub-section (1) of section 5 shall apply only
to those States or Union territories which have been allocated more than three seats under
the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution and in respect of those States and Union Territories
which have been allocated one or two seats, the seat for women shall be earmarked in the
following manner:—
(a) where there are two seats one seat shall be reserved for a woman candidate;
(b) where there is only one seat it shall be filled up by a woman candidate in
alternate terms.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution or in any other law for the
time being in force, the appropriate Government shall reserve not less than thirty-three per
cent of the total strength of Judges in the Supreme Court, all High Courts and the Subordinate
or lower Courts for women Judges.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution or in any other law or
practice for the time being in force, the President of India shall, while appointing Governor of
a State or Lieutenant Governor or Administrator of a Union territory, as the case may be,
ensure that a woman is appointed to that office for alternate term in such manner as may be
determined by the President.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Election Laws or any other law for the
time being in force, the Election Commission shall, reserve not less than thirty-three per cent
of the total seats in the Legislature of a State for women in such manner as may be prescribed.
9. The Chief Minister of a State or Union Territory, as the case may be, shall, while
constituting his Council of Ministers, ensure that forty per cent of the Ministerial berths are
filled up from amongst the women legislators of the State or Union Territory, as the case may be.
10. The President shall while constituting a Finance Commission or the Niti Ayog as
the case may be, appoint a minimum of two women members excluding the chairperson of
such Commissions in such manner as may be determined by him.
11. The President or Governor of a State shall, while appointing the Chairman or
members of the Union Public Service Commission, or of the State Public Service Commission,
appoint as nearly as may be, one half of the members from amongst the women in such a
manner as may be prescribed.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Ministeral
berths for
women in the
Union
Council of
Ministers.
Election of
women to the
office of
President and
Vice-President
of India.
Reservation of
seats for
women in
Parliament.
Reservation
for women in
Judiciary.
Appointment
of Women
Governors.
Reservation of
women in state
legislature.
Ministerial
Berths in the
Council of
Ministers of
the states for
Women.
Reservation
for women in
Finance and
Niti Ayog.
Reservation
for women in
Public Service
Commission.

3
12. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
the President shall appoint the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners
in the Election Commission in such manner that there shall always be one woman Election
Commissioner serving in the Election Commission.
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall reserve as nearly as may be one half of the members of the
Boards of autonomous bodies including Banks, Universities, Colleges, Councils, Boards
etc. from amongst the women in such manner as may be prescribed.
14. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt
within this Act.
15. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5
10
Reservation
for women in
the Election
Commission.
Reservation
for women in
Boards of
various
bodies.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Women despite being nearly half of the country's population, still remain socially
neglected and economically dependent on others and are educationally backward and an
exploited lot. Majority of them are confined to their houses looking after their children and
performing household chores. Many of them are still superstitious, orthodox and backward
because literacy among them and more so in rural areas is significantly low. Now only,
women are becoming aware of their multiple role and responsibilities and they have started
playing a vital role in the polity of the nation right from village Panchayat to Parliament.
On the basis of their sheer number, women should have equal participation vis-a-vis
men in the Governance of the nation but the fact is otherwise. Their participation is far from
their potential. Despite being most suitable, no woman has ever occupied the office of either
the Vice-President of India or the Chief Justice of India. Their number in Parliament is negligible,
for example in Lok Sabha it is 66 and in Rajya Sabha 31. The gender profile of State Legislatures
of the country is much like the same or even worse. The issue of reservation for women in
Parliament and State Legislature is hanging for a long time. Most of the political parties swear
for the upliftment of women but at the time of elections they give tickets mostly to male
candidates. Similarly, women are neglected in the formation of the Council of Ministers at the
Union as well as at the State levels. As such the representation of women is negligible in the
Executive as also in the Legislature.
The representation of women in the Judiciary, notably in the Supreme Court and High
Courts, is far from satisfactory, though, best legal brains amongst women are available in the
country. Similarly, the Election Commission and the Public Service Commissions of the country
are yet to get the requisite gender representation. So far fourteen Finance Commissions have
been constituted but women have been completely ignored therein. Similar is the case in
respect of Boards of Directors of various bodies of the Governments, Public Sector Enterprises
and other institutions.
In Government services also, the representation of women is abysmally low as compared
to men. It is below twenty percent and in reserved categories, the representation of women
is negligible.
The most evident factor visible over the growing violence of women seems to be due
to lack of adequate women representation in decision making bodies to safeguard their
interests. Though their number in the Police service and the Defence forces is constantly on
the rise, earning gallantry awards and bringing laurels to their forces and the nation but
despite all this they still do not have much respite from sexual harassment from within their
forces or otherwise.
However, with the demand of equal participation of women in decision making on the
principle of equality enshrined in the Constitution, a beginning has been made by providing
for reservation for women in local bodies like Village Panchayats, Municipalities, etc. but that
is not enough. They should have equal participation in the governance of the nation on the
basis of their numerical strength.
Hence this Bill.
ANUBHA V MOHANTY
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the empowerment of women to enable them to have equal participation
in the governance of the country by making reservations and such other
provisions in the body polity such as executive, legislative and
judiciary and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Anubhav Mohanty, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3847RS(S3)—18-12-2015.