AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. LXI of 2025 
THE HISTORICAL HERITAGE CONSERVATION 
BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to provide for a mechanism to maintain, preserve and protect 
identified and unidentified ancient, historical or 
 archaeological  sites, remains, monuments, 
 modules and carvings in the country  
and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental 
 thereto. 
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:— 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Historical Heritage Conservation Act, 2025.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Definitions.  2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, 
the Government of that State, and in other cases, the Central 
Government;  
(b) “Authority” means the Heritage Conservation 
Regulatory Authority to be cons tituted under clause (c)  of sub -
section (2) of section 3; 
(c) “historical or archaeological site” means areas having 
or believed to have ruins or remains of historical or archaeological 
importance for more than one hundred years, including locations 
related to Indian civilization or the freedom movement; 
(d) “historical heritage” includes any historical site, 
archaeological remain, antiquity, or monument of national or 
cultural significance; 
(e) “non-governmental organisation” means any institution 
engaged in the conservation of historical heritage for at least three 
years with a demonstrable track record; and 
 (f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Setting up of a 
mechanism 
for heritage 
conservation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification  in the Official 
Gazette, establish a mechanism for the conservation of historical 
heritage across all States of the country.  
(2) The mechanism est ablished under sub- section (1) shall include the 
following, namely: 
(a) entrusting conservation work, to eligible non -
governmental organisations, of historical or archaeological  sites 
declared to be of national or local importance by the appropriate 
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b)   defining the eligibility criteria for selection of   non -
governmental organisations for the purpose under clause (a); 
(c)     constitution of a Heritage Conservation Regulatory 
Authority, with such composition, functions and subject to 
such procedural regulations, as may be prescribed, to 
monitor, approve, and report on the acti vities of the selected 
non-governmental organisations; 
(d)     provision of financial assistance to the selected non-
governmental organisations on the recommendation of the 
Authority constituted under clause (c); 
(e) mandating the selected non -governmental 
organisations to undertake public awareness campaigns on 
heritage conservation; 
(f)     provision for appropriate legal action against selected 
non-governmental organisations in case of any malpractice or 
violation of the provisions of the Act; 
(g)    designating the Union Ministry of Culture as the nodal 
agency for implementation of the mechanism established under 
sub-section (1) and oversight on the functioning of the Authority 
constituted under clause (c); 
(h) empowering  the  selected  non-governmental 
organisations to collect nominal entry fe es to historical or 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 

3 
 
5 
archaeological sites, with prior approval of the Authority 
constituted under clause (c); and 
(i) authorizing selected non -governmental organisations
with the responsibility  of excavation, maintenance, and 
protection of local-level historical or archaeological sites, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
 
10 
4. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure
effective and timely implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government shall regularly review and monitor th e
f
unctioning of non -governmental organisations working in the historical
heritage conservation sector as provided under this Act, in such manner as
may be prescribed.
Implementation 
by the appropriate 
Government. 
 
15 
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation m ade by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State
Governments and the Authority for carrying out the provisions of this
Act.
Central 
Government to 
provide adequate 
funds. 
 
24 of 1958. 
20 
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act, 1958 or the rules made thereunder or any other law in this
regard  for the time being in force and in case of any inconsistency, the
provisions of this Act shall have over riding effect on the provisions of any
s
uch law to the extent of such inconsistency.
Act not in 
derogation of any 
other laws. 
 
25 
 
30 
7. If any non-governmental organisation entrusted under this Act is found to
have violated the objectives of this Act or misused funds or acted in a
manner detrimental to heritage conservation as provided under this Act,
the appropriate Government may    in addition to taking appropriate  legal
action as provided under clause (f)  of sub -section (2) 
of section 3,
withdraw the work permission entrusted under clause (a) of sub-section
(2) of section 3:
     Provided that no such work permission shall be withdrawn 
without giving the concerned non-governmental organisation a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in such manner as may be prescribed. 
Action against 
non-
governmental 
organisations. 
 
35 
 
40 
45 
8. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and i
f, before the expiry of the sessi on
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be
; so, however, that any such  modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything  previously done under that rule.
(3) E very rule made by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as ma y
b
e after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature, where it
consists of two Houses or where such Legislature consists of only one
House, before that House.
Power to make  
rules. 

4 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India’s rich and ancient heritage is a global symbol of civilization, culture, and 
freedom. However, several historical sites, monuments, and ruins remain unidentified, 
unprotected, or poorly maintained. Unplanned urbanization, neglect, and lack of local 
participation threaten this legacy. Therefore, there is a compelling need for a formal 
mechanism that involves public institutions and credible non- governmental organisations 
(NGOs) in the conservation effort. 
This Bill aims to: 
● Identify and preserve both well-known and lesser- explored heritage sites; 
● Empower experienced non- governmental organisations to participate in 
preservation efforts; 
● Ensure adequate financial and administrative support for these efforts; 
● Create awareness and local ownership for heritage protection. 
 Hence, this Bill. 
DHANANJAY BHIMRAO MAHADIK. 
 
  

5 
 
                                          FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to establish a me chanism for 
conservation of historical heritage across all States of the country including inter alia  therein 
to constitute a national-level Heritage Conservation Regulatory Authority to monitor, approve 
and report on the activities of non- governmental organisations entrusted with the work of 
conserving historical or heritage sites of national or local importance,  provision of financial 
assistance to such non -governmental organisations and mandating them to undertake public 
awareness campaigns on heritage conservation. Clause 4 mandates that it shall be the duty of 
the appropriate Government to ensure effective and timely implementation of the provisions of 
this Bill.  Clause 5 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the 
State Governments and the Authority for carrying out the provisions of this Bill.  
 The Bill , therefore, if enacted, would involve recurring expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India, whi ch is estimated at one thousand crore rupees per annum. No 
major non-recurring expenditure is anticipated. 
 
  

6 
 
             MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
      Clause 8 empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions 
of the Act.  As these rules pertain to procedural and administrative detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a routine and normal character. 
 
  

7 

RAJYA SABHA 
______________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for a mechanism to maintain, preserve and protect 
identified and unidentified ancient, historical or 
 archaeological  sites, remains, monuments, 
 modules and carvings in the country  
and for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental 
 thereto. 
______________ 
(Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik, M.P.) 
 RS-P&PS-PMB(E)―359―08.12.2025 