Short title and
commencement.
THE JUDICIAL  APPOINTMENTS COMMISSION BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for the composition of the Judicial Appointments Commission for the
purpose of recommending persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India
and other Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices and other Judges of
High Courts, its functions, procedure to be followed by it and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Judicial Appointments Commission Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Judicial Appointments
Commission referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3;
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. LXI of 2013
5

2
(b) "Commission" means the Judicial Appointments Commission referred
to in sub-section ( 1) of section 3;
(c) "Member" means a Member of the Commission and includes its
Chairperson;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(e) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Commission under
this Act.
3.  (1) The Judicial Appointments Commission, referred to in clause (1) of article
124A of the Constitution, shall consist of—
(a) the Chief Justice of India, Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) two other Judges of the Supreme Court next to the Chief Justice of
India in seniority—Members, ex officio;
(c) the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice—Member, ex officio;
(d) two eminent persons, to be nominated by the collegium consisting of
the Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of India and the Leader of Opposition in
the House of the People—Members:
Provided that the eminent persons shall be nominated for a period of
three years and shall not be eligible for re-nomination.
(2) The Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Justice
shall be the convener of the Commission.
(3) The fee and allowances payable to the eminent persons shall be such as
may be prescribed.
4.  It shall be the duty of the Commission,—
(a) to recommend persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India,
Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of High Courts and other Judges
of High Courts;
(b) to recommend transfer of Chief Justices of High Courts and the Judges
of High Courts from one High Court to any other High Court; and
(c) to ensure that the person recommended is of ability, integrity and
standing in the legal profession.
5. In case of appointment of Judge of a High Court, the views of the Governor
and the Chief Minister of the concerned State as also of the Chief Justice of High
Court shall be elicited in writing in accordance with the procedure as may be specified
by regulations made by the Commission.
6. (1) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers and
other employees as it may consider necessary for the discharge of functions of the
Commission under this Act.
(2) The terms and other conditions of service of the officers and other employees
of the Commission appointed under sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, within a period of three months from the
date of coming into force of this Act, intimate the vacancies existing in the Supreme
Court and a High Court to the Commission for making of its recommendations.
(2) The Central Government shall, two months prior to the date of occurrence of
any vacancy by reason of completion of the term of Judge of the Supreme Court and
a High Court, make a reference to the Commission for filling up the vacancies.
Constitution of
Judicial
Appointments
Commission.
Functions of
Commission.
Procedure for
recommendation
with respect to
appointment of
High Court
Judges.
Officers and
employees of
Commission.
Reference to
Commission for
filling up of
vacancies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(3) The Central Government shall, within a period of two months from the date
of occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death, resignation of the Judge of the
Supreme Court and a High Court, make a reference to the Commission for filling up the
vacancies.
8. (1) The Convenor of the Commission shall initiate the process for selection
by inviting recommendations from the Chief Justices of High Courts, the Central
Government and the State Governments in respect of candidates fulfilling the eligibility
criteria.
(2) The Commission may, by regulations, specify the procedure for short-listing
of candidates for considering their appointment as Judges to the Supreme Court.
(3) The Commission may, by regulations, specify the procedure for short-listing
of candidates for considering their appointment as Judges to the High Court.
9. (1) The Commission shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may
decide.
(2) The Commission shall have the power to specify, by regulations, the
procedure for the discharge of its functions under the Act.
10.  No act or proceedings of the Commission shall be questioned or shall be
invalidated merely on the ground of existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the
constitution of, the Commission.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the fee and allowances payable to the eminent persons under sub-
section (3) of section 3;
(b) the terms and other conditions of service of officers and other
employees of the Commission under sub-section ( 2) of section 6;
(c) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed, in respect of
which provision is to be made by the rules.
12. (1) The Commission may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the procedure for recommendation with respect to appointment of
Judge of a High Court under section 5;
(b) the procedure for short-listing of candidates for considering
their appointment as Judges of the Supreme Court under sub-section ( 2) of
section 8;
(c) the procedure for short-listing of candidates for considering their
appointment as Judges of the High Court under sub-section ( 3) of section 8;
(d) the procedure to be followed by the Commission in discharging of its
functions under sub-section ( 2) of section 9;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by
regulations or in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations.
Procedure for
short-listing of
candidates.
Meetings of
Commission.
Vacancies, etc.,
not to invalidate
proceedings of
Commission.
Power to make
regulations.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
13.  Every rule and regulation made under this Act  shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,  for a
total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation
should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have  effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or regulation.
14. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, after consultation with the Commission, by an order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made,
be laid before each House of Parliament.
Rules and
regulations to be
laid before
Parliament.
Power to remove
difficulties.
5
10
15

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Judges of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President under
clause (2) of article 124 of the Constitution while the Judges of the High Courts are
appointed by the President under clause (1) of article 217 of the Constitution. The
President is required to hold consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme
Court and of the High Courts in the States as he may deem necessary for the purpose.
However, every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State and, in the case
of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High
Court.
2. The transfer of Judges from one High Court to another High Court is made
by the President after consultations with the Chief Justice of India under clause (1) of
article 222 of the Constitution.
3. As regards the appointment of Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts,
the Supreme Court in the matters of the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record
Association Vs. Union of India and its Advisory Opinion 1998 in Third Judges case,
had interpreted articles 124(2) and 217(1) of the Constitution with respect to the
meaning of "consultation" as "concurrence". It was also held that the consultation of
the Chief Justice of India means collegium consisting of Chief Justice and two or four
Judges, as the case may be. This has resulted in a Memorandum of Procedure laying
down the process which is being presently followed for appointment of Judges to
both the High Courts and the Supreme Court. The Memorandum of Procedures confers
upon the Judiciary itself the power for appointment of Judges.
4. After review of the pronouncements of the Supreme Court and relevant
constitutional provisions, it was felt that a broad based Judicial Appointment
Commission could be established for making recommendations for selection of Judges.
It would provide a meaningful role to the executive and judiciary to present their view
points and make the participants accountable while introducing transparency in the
selection process.
5. Thus, the Judicial Appointments Commission Bill, 2013 seeks to broad base
the appointment process and make it more participatory to ensure greater transparency
and objectivity in the appointments to higher judiciary.
6. The proposed Bill provides for the constitution of the Judicial Appointments
Commission,  comprising of —(a) the Chief Justice of India, an ex officio Chairperson;
(b) two other Judges of the Supreme Court next to the Chief Justice of India in
seniority as ex officio Members; (c) the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice
as ex officio Member; and (d) two eminent persons, to be nominated by the collegium
consisting of the Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of India and the Leader of Opposition
in the House of the People, as members.
7. The proposed Bill would enable equal participation of Judiciary and Executive,
make the system of appointments more accountable, and thereby increase the
confidence of the public in the institutions.
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; KAPIL SIBAL
The 24 th August, 2013

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the Judicial
Appointments Commission, referred to in clause (1) of article 124A of the Constitution,
comprising —(a) the Chief Justice of India an ex officio Chairperson; (b) two other
Judges of the Supreme Court next to the Chief Justice of India in seniority as
ex officio Members; (c) the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice as ex officio
Member; and (d) two eminent persons to be nominated by the collegium consisting of
Prime Minister, Chief Justice of India and the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 3 provides that Secretary to the Government of India in
the Department of Justice be the convener of the Commission.
Sub-clause ( 3) of clause 3 provides that the fee and allowances payable to
eminent person shall be such as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 6 provides that the Central Government may appoint
such number of officers and other employees as it may consider necessary for the
discharge of functions of the Commission under this Act.
The expenditure on account of the aforesaid provisions would be negligible. At
this stage, it is not practicable to make an estimate of expenditure likely to be involved
in the financial year 2013-2014, both recurring and non-recurring. However, the
expenditure would be met from the Consolidated Fund of  India.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the provisions of the Bill.  The matters in respect of which rules may
be made are—( a) the fee and allowances payable to the eminent persons under
sub-section (3) of section 3; (b) the terms and other conditions of service of officers
and other employees of the Commission under sub-section ( 2) of section 6; and
(c) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed, in respect of which provision
is to be made by the rules.
2. Clause 12 of the Bill confers power upon the Judicial Appointments
Commission to make regulations consistent with the Act and the rules made thereunder
to carry out the provisions of the Act.  The matters in respect of which, regulations
may be made are matters relates to—( a) the procedure for recommendation with
respect to appointment of Judge of a High Court under section 5; ( b) the procedure
for short-listing of candidates for considering their appointment as Judges of the
Supreme Court under sub-section (2) of section 8; (c) the procedure for short-listing
of candidates for considering their appointment as Judges of the High Court under
sub-section (3) of section 8; (d) the procedure to be followed by the Commission in
discharging of its functions under sub-section ( 2) of section 9; and ( e) any other
matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect of
which provision is to be made by regulations.
3. The rules made by the Central Government and the regulations made by the
Commission shall be laid as soon as may be after they are made before each House of
Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations may be made are
generally matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to
provide them in the Bill itself.  The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the composition of the Judicial Appointments Commission for the purpose
of recommending persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India and other
Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices and other Judges of
High Courts, its functions, procedure to be followed by it
and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of  Law and Justice)
GMGIPMRND—2372RS(S4)—27.08.2013