1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) The Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2014.
1. (2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution, for paragraph 6 the following shall be
substituted , nemely:—
“6. If any question arises as to whether a member of a House has become subject to
disqualification under this schedule, the question shall be referred for the decision of the
Election Commission of India.”
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. XXXIII of  2014
5 Amendment
of Tenth
Schedule.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2014

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Tenth Schedule of the Constitution has succeeded in bringing considerable purity
in our political system. The schedule has recently undergone a change. However, there is a
popular demand that the authority to decide whether a member has become subject to
disqualification under the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution, should rest in the Election
Commission. This demand is gaining force in the States on account of controversies created
following decisions of the Presiding Officers of some States.
The entire process of decisions under Tenth Schedule should be transparent and
should be totally insulated from possible political bias.
Although Presiding Officers are independent in their own right, even than declaring a
member disqualified should be left to a constitutionally independent authority like Election
Commission of India.
The proposed amendment seeks to provide for the same.
Hence this Bill.
SHANTARAM NAIK
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
6. Decision on questions as to disqualification on ground of defection.—(1) If any
question arises as to whether a member of a House has become subject to disqualification
under this Schedule, the question shall be referred for the decision of the Chairman or, as the
case may be, the Speaker of such House and his decision shall be final:
Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the Chairman or the
Speaker of a House has become subject to such disqualification, the question shall be
referred for the decision of such member of the House as the House may elect in this behalf
and his decision shall be final.
(2) All proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation to any question
as to disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule shall be deemed to be
proceedings in Parliament within the meaning of article 122 or, as the case may be, proceedings
in the Legislature of a State within the meaning of article 212.
3

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Shantaram Naik, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3790RS(S3)—18-12-2014.