THE GIRL CHILD (PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING AND
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of girl child trafficking through commercialised means by
pushing or forcing the girl child for prostitution after luring, procuring or kidnapping
and making her available for hiring or taking possession by her client for promiscuous
sexual acts for commercial gains and for the rescue, rehabilitation and welfare of such
girl child by the State and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Girl Child (Prevention of Trafficking and Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LXIII of 2008
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008

2
(b) “commercialised trafficking” includes forcing the girl child into prostitution
for earning money or using the girl child for any unlawful or immoral purpose, or
procuring or supplying the girl child for such purpose or hiring or obtaining possession
of the girl child for promiscuous sexual purposes;
(c) “girl child” means a female human being who is below the age of eighteen
years;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860, or the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
3. (1) The trafficking of girl child for commercial purposes or for any purpose,
whatsoever, in any manner is hereby prohibited.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever,—
(a) abets or induces, by whatever means including emotional or by blackmailing
a girl child into prostitution notwithstanding the family relation of such girl child with
the accused or under any prevailing custom, shall be punished with life imprisonment
and also with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees;
(b) pushes or forces through coercive means, or by bearing or causing injury or
such other cruel means a girl child into prostitution shall be punished with death;
(c) lures, procures or kidnaps a girl child for trafficking purposes shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but may extend to
life imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees;
(d) owns or runs a brothel having a girl child prostitute, such owner or manager
shall be punished with life imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees;
(e) indulges in the immoral traffic of a girl child, or makes available a girl child for
any unlawful or immoral purpose shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but may extend to ten years and also with fine
which may extend to two lakh rupees;
(f) hires, procures or obtains possession of a girl child for promiscuous sexual
intercourse with her shall be punished with life imprisonment and also with fine which
shall not be less than five lakh rupees but may extend to ten lakh rupees.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
6. (1) The offences under this Act shall be tried by the Special Court or The Fast
Track Court, as the case may be.
(2) The trial of an offence committed under this Act shall be held in Camera.
(3) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of Special Courts and
Fast Track Courts as it may deem necessary for the purposes of sub-section (1) and for the
quick disposal of cases under this Act.
7. (1) the girl child covered under this Act shall be rescued by the appropriate
Government through the local Police or by a Non-governmental Organisation and produced
before a Magistrate or Judicial Officer so designated by such Government so that she is
suitably rehabilitated.
Prohibition of
trafficking of
girl child.
Penalty.
45 of 1860.
104 of 1956.
Offences to
be cognizable.
Offences to
be tried by
Special and
Fast Track
Courts.
Rehabilitation
and other
welfare
measures.

3
(2) The appropriate Government shall extend welfare measures for the girl child
rescued from flesh trade or who may be rendered out of profession after the commencement
of this Act and these welfare measures shall include free medical care, shelter, food, clothing
and other necessities of life, free education including vocational education, gainful
employment, marriage and such other measures as that Government may deem necessary
or as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being applicable to the subject matter of this Act.
11. The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.

4
SERVER 5 \ BILL_2004 \LOK SABHA \ 3921LS.PM6.5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
These days thousands of minor and adolescent girls go missing from various parts of
the country every year and only a few fortunate ones are restored to their parents. Most of
these hapless girls are either kidnapped or lured by organised gangs of criminals and pimps
and then forced into prostitution. Girl child trafficking is going on in a very large scale mostly
in the name of adventure tourism in many parts of our country which are tourist destinations.
The greed for more and more money is pushing more adolescent girls into flesh trade because
they fetch large amount of money from their prospective clients who hire them for sexual
pleasure. In this large scale girl child trafficking, the pimps, organised gangs, underworld
dons, brothel keepers, hoteliers, tour operators, etc. are involved. In many cases even the
natural guardians and their near and dear ones have been found forcing the girl child into
prostitution either due to prevailing customs or for the money involved therein. For the
trafficking purpose the girls are procured by whatever means be it kidnapping, luring on the
pretext of getting employment for a comfortable and decent life-style or making heroine in a
film or television serial or procuring from the unsuspecting poverty stricken parents particularly
from the tribal and rural areas. The girls are even brought in from neighbouring countries for
trafficking. Many times, the unsuspecting girls elope with their so-called lovers who sell
them off to the brothel keepers. Recently, it was reported in the media that pimps have
become active in drought-prone areas of the country where farmers are committing suicide
luring the girls of such tragedy stricken families promising them a decent life. Once the girls
fall into their trap, they land into the world of flesh trade and sacrifice them at the altar of
adventure tourism which is gaining momentum in the world including our country where the
tourists indulge in promiscuous sex for fun and joy and they prefer girl child prostitutes by
offering huge amounts. Though we cannot blame all the tourists for this but few tourists
particularly the effluents ones do indulge in sex tourism. But the ever increasing trafficking
has put the lives of the girl child sex workers in constant danger of deadly AIDS and other
sexually transmitted diseases but those responsible for their plight are least bothered for
these hapless girls.
The time is ripe to take effective steps to save the girl child by dealing heavily with
those who are responsible for their trafficking by providing deterrent penalty for them including
capital punishment.
Hence this Bill.
GIREESH  KUMAR  SANGHI

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Special Courts and Fast Track
Courts for trying the offences. Clause 7 provides for the rehabilitation of rescued girl child
from prostitution. Clause 8 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide adequate
funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
Though it is difficult to quantify the exact amount at this stage, it is estimated that a sum of
rupees one thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees four thousand crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 or the Bill gives powers to the Central Government for making rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of girl child trafficking through commercialised means by
pushing or forcing the girl child for prostitution after luring, procuring or kidnapping
and making her available for hiring or taking possession by her client for
promiscuous sexual acts for commercial gains and for the rescue,
rehabilitation and welfare of such girl child by the State and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND— 4757 RS(S-5)—29.12.2008.