AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026 
BILL No. LXII of 2025 
THE PERSONS WITH RARE AND LIFE-THREATENING 
DISEASES (FINANCIAL SUPPORT AND MEDICAL 
ENTITLEMENT) BILL, 2025
A  
BILL 
to provide for the identification, free medical treatment, and financial assistance and 
support to persons suffering from rare and life-threatening diseases, 
for the establishment of a statutory Treatment of Rare and 
 Life-threatening Diseases Fund and to provide 
 for its governance structure, and for matters 
 connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
 PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Persons with Rare and Life -Threatening
Diseases (Financial Support and Medical Entitlement) Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Definitions.  2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—  
(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 
(b) “Centre of Excellence” means any medical institution, 
hospital, or research centre  as may be  designated by the Central 
Government under section 9,  for the treatment of rare and life -
threatening diseases  notified under section 3 ; 
(c) “Fund” means the T reatment of Rare and Life- Threatening 
Diseases Fund  constituted under section 5; 
(d) “Life-Threatening Disease” means a disease which poses a 
substantial risk of mortality or irreversible long -term impairment, as 
may be notified by the Central Government under section 3; 
(e) “person” means any citizen of India diagnosed with a disease 
classified and notified under section 3; 
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
and 
(g) “Rare Disease” means a disease notified as such by the 
Central Government under section 3. 
5 
10 
15 
 
   CHAPTER II  
  CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 
20  
Classification of 
diseases. 
  
 3. (1) For the purposes of this Act, a disease   may be classified into one of the 
following two categories, namely, –  
(a) Part A – Rare Diseases, as defined under clause (g) of section 
2; and.  
(b) Part B – Life-Threatening Diseases, as defined under clause 
(d) of section 2. 
(2) The Central Government shall, within one year of the commencement of 
this Act, having regard to the medical evidence, recommendations of 
medical experts and such other criteria as may be prescribed, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify  from time to time the list of diseases falling 
under each Part under sub-section (1). . 
(3) The list of diseases so notified under sub- section (2) shall be reviewed 
and updated at such intervals and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
25 
30 
 
   CHAPTER III 
MEDICAL ENTITLEMENTS AND TREATMENT OBLIGATIONS  
35  
Medical   
entitlements of 
persons 
diagnosed with 
notified 
diseases. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. (1) Every person diagnosed with a disease falling under Part A or Part 
B, as notified under section 3 shall, upon certification in this regard by 
such authority as may be prescribed, be entitled to,–  
(a) free diagnosis and treatment at such designated Centre 
of Excellence;  
(b) access to prescribed medication, assistive devices, gene or 
cell therapy, or surgical interventions, as deemed necessary by the 
40 
 

3 
 
 
5 
designated Centre of Excellence;  
(c) reimbursement or payment of transport allowance and 
attendant compensation for visits to hospitals located at a distance 
exceeding fifty kilometers from the place of ordinary residence in 
such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed;  
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that no person shall be 
denied treatment on the ground of financial incapacity. 
   CHAPTER IV 
 FUND AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 of 2013. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, constitute a fund to be known as the Treatment of Rare and 
Life-threatening Diseases Fund, for the purposes of implementation of 
the provisions of this Act.  
(2) The Fund shall be credited with,—  
(a) contributions in the form of voluntary grants or donations 
from individuals, institutions, corporations, multilateral agencies, in 
such manner as may be prescribed;  
(b) budgetary allocations made by the Central Government 
from the Consolidated Fund of India, from time to time, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf;  
(c) contributions from the Members of Parliament Local Area 
Development Scheme (MPLADS), in such manner and subject to such 
norms, as may be prescribed;  
(d)   budgetary allocations made by the State Government, from 
time to time after due appropriation made by the State Legislature by 
law in this behalf; and 
(e) contributions made by companies or corporate entities as part 
of their Corporate Social Responsibi lity obligations under section 35 
of the Companies Act, 2013 and the relevant rules made thereunder, in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
 Constitution of 
the Treatment 
of Rare and 
Life-threatening 
Diseases Fund. 
 
35 
40 
6. (1) The Fund shall be utilised for the following purposes, namely—  
(a) providing direct financing and provision of cashless 
treatment or financial treatment support at designated Centres of 
Excellence;  
(b) providing financial assistance for diagnostics, medi cations, 
and emergency medical care;  
(c) providing post -treatment rehabilitation, including home -
based care, nutritional assistance and mobility support; and 
(d) strengthening capacity- building and infrastructure 
enhancement of designated Centres of Excellence. 
(2)  The disbursement of the financial assistance under sub-section (1) shall 
be done through Direct Benefit Transfer to institutions or eligible families 
in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that persons diagnosed with the diseases notified under 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disbursement 
and utilisation. 

4 
 
section 3 shall apply to the Nodal Officer appointed under section 10, in the 
prescribed format in such manner as may be prescribed for receiving  
financial assistance and support from the Fund under sub-section (1). 
Provided further that the financial assistance shall be disbursed only 
after processing and scrutiny of the applications in such manner and subject 
to fulfillment of eligibility conditions as may be prescribed.  
(3) The appropriate Government shall ensure transparency in the 
disbursement of funds through measures such as real-time public disclosure 
of disbursals on such public platform, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed and an  independent annual audit by such agency, as may be 
notified by the Central Government. 
 
 
 
5 
10 
Administration 
of the Fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. (1) The Fund shall be administered by a Governing Council constituted 
by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette.  
(2) The Governing Council shall consist of the following members, –  
(a) the Minister of Health and Family Welfare, Government of 
India– Chairperson ex-officio;  
(b) Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in the 
Government of India – Member ex-officio;  
(c) Secretary, Ministry of Finance in the Government of India –  
Member ex-officio;  
(d) three experts in medical science, each having at least fifteen 
years of experience in the treatment, research, or policy relating to rare 
or life -threatening disea ses, to be nominated by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed - Members;  
(e) one representative from a nationally recognised patient 
advocacy organisation, to be nominated by the Central Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed – Members. 
(3) The Governing Council shall discharge the following functions, namely –  
(a) approve and oversee the disbursement of funds under this 
Act, ensuring equitable and need-based allocation;  
(b) frame, review, and revise operational, procedural, and 
eligibility guidelines for the utilisation and disbursement of the Fund, 
including timelines for processing of applications in this behalf;  
(c) establish, regulate, and supervise mechanisms for emergency 
disbursement of financial assistance in urgent cases, as may be 
prescribed;  
(d) recommend to the Central Government periodic revisions of  
financial limits, categories of eligible diseases, and income criteria, in 
accordance with medical advancements, inflation, and policy 
priorities; 
(e) monitor and evaluate the impact and effectiveness of financial 
assistance provided under this Act, through annual reports, data 
analysis, and outcome tracking;  
(f) promote collaboration with research institutions, charitable 
organisations, and private stakeholders for resource mobilisation, 
technical support, and innovation in treatment strategies;  
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
 

5 
5 
10 
15 
20 
(g) ensure that grievance redressal mechanisms are accessible
and effective for persons aggrieved by fund disbursal decisions or 
delays;  
(h) recommend measures to improve awareness and accessibility
of schemes and benefits provided under this Act, particularly among 
economically weaker and socially disadvantaged sections;  
(i
) r
eview compliance with audit, transparency, and reporting
requirements relating to the Fund; and 
(j) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the
Central Government to ensure the effective implementation of this Act.
(4) The term of office of, the salaries and allowances payable to and
other service conditions of the Members of the Governing Council other
t
han the ex-officio Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5)
The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and
staff to the Governing Council to assist it in the efficient discharge of its 
functions under the Act. 
(6)
The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to a nd
o
ther terms and conditions of service of the officers and staff so
appointed under sub-section (5) shall be such as may be prescribed.
(7) The Governing Council shall prepare and publish within such period of
time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, an annual statement of accounts  of the Fund and forward the
same to the Central Government, which shall cause it to be laid before both
Houses of Parliament.
25 8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law on this behalf, provide adequate funds to the
Governing Council for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds 
CHAPTER V  
 IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING 
30 
3
5 
40 
45 
9. (1) The Central Government shall designate Centres of Excellence for
diagnosis, treatment, and training in the field of diseases notified under
section 3.
(2) The Centres of Excellence, as designated under sub section (1), shal l
c
arry out the following functions, –
(a) provide timely, accessible, and standardised medical care in
accordance with the clinical protocols and treatment guidelines 
prescribed under this Act or as notified by the Central Government;  
(b) maintain detailed and accurate patient record s, including
treatment outcomes, and submit periodic reports to  such authority of 
the Central Government as may be prescribed;  
(c) undertake regular community outreach, public awareness
campaigns, and professional capacity -building programmes, 
including training of healthcare personnel, to promote early diagnosis, 
treatment adherence, and social inclusion of affected persons; and 
(d) such other functions as the Central Government may assi gn
to
 them, time to time. 
Centres of 
Excellence. 

6 
Compliance and 
monitoring. 
10. (1) The appropriate Government shall appoint an officer of appropriate rank
and experience, as may be prescribed, to be the  Nodal Officer for
implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Nodal Officer shall be responsible for:
(a
) identification and registration of eligible persons;
(b) coordination with Centres of Excellence and Central
authorities; and 
(c) timely submission of fund applications and status updates.
(3) The Central Government shall establish and maintain a national
web-based platform  to, –
(a) track diagnosis, treatment, and fund disbursement; and
(b) generate outcome metrics and public transparency
reports. 
5 
10 
Annual report.  11. The Central Government shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such
time of each financial year as may be prescribed, an annual report on the
status of implementation of this Act, including therein details of
beneficiaries, medical and financial assistance rendered, fund
disbursements, compliance by concerned authorities, and other information,
as may be prescribed and cause it to be laid before each House of Parliament.
15 
CHAPTER VI  
 MISCELLANEOUS 
20 
Grievance  
redressal.  
12. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette,
designate  an authority or officer of  appropriate rank, as may be prescribed,
in each district as the District Grievance Redressal Authority, for the
purposes of receiving, inquiring into, and redressing grievances arising out
of the implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) T he manner of filing of grievances, the procedure to be followed by  the
District Grievance Redressal Authority under sub -section (1), shall be such
as may be prescribed.
25 
Power to make 
rules. 
13. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government or the Union territory
Government with Legislature, as the case may be, under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the Stat
e
L
egislature or the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two
Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House.
30 
35 
40 
45 

7 
 
  14.  No suit, prosecution, or legal proceeding shall lie against any person or 
authority acting in good faith under this Act. 
 Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 
 
5 
15. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any 
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on the 
provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency. 
 Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
 
10 
16.  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to 
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 
            Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 
 Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
 
  

8 
 
 
 
 STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
 Rare and life -threatening diseases, though affecting a small fraction 
of the population individually, collectively impact millions of lives across 
India. According to the National Policy for Rare Diseases, 2021, over 7,000 
rare diseases have been documented worldwide, with nearly 450 diseases 
reported in India alone. However, access to affordable and timely diagnosis, 
and treatment remains an enormous challenge. The exorbitant cost of 
therapies—often ranging from rupees ten lakh to rupees two crore annually per 
patient—places life-saving treatment out of reach for most families, especially 
those from economically weaker sections.  
               The Persons with Rare and Life -Threatening Diseases (Financial 
Support and Medical Entitlement), Bill, 2025 seeks to establish a structured, 
rights-based framework to ensure free treatment, and financial support for 
persons affected by such conditions. This includes the creation of a Treatment 
of Rare and Life -Threatening Diseases  Fund with contributions from the 
Central Government, State Governments, private donors, Members of 
Parliament, and other sources. This institutional mechanism will streamline 
fund disbursement through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT), enhance 
transparency, and reduce bureaucratic delays in life-saving interventions.  
                 Children are the worst affected by rare and genetic disorders, which 
often lead to developmental delays, disability, and early mortality. This Bill 
mandates no denial of treatment  to any child based on financial incapacity, 
upholding Article 21 of the Constitution and India’s obligations under the 
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. Furthermore, the Bill 
ensures access to inclusive education, rehabilitation, and s upport services 
under existing laws like the Right to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009.  
                    Given the lack of a single statutory body to oversee rare and life -
threatening diseases, this Bill proposes a Governing Council and designat ed 
Centres of Excellence to provide quality care and monitor treatment outcomes. 
With technological tools like a national online registry and a grievance 
redressal mechanism, this  Bill aims to ensure accountability, patient dignity, 
and effective public h ealth response. In light of India’s growing genetic and 
metabolic disease burden, this legislation is both urgent and necessary to 
provide equitable health justice and a safety net to vulnerable families across 
the country. 
                   Hence, this Bill. 
SANJAY SETH. 
 
  
  

9 
 
 
 
 FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM  
 Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the medical entitlements of persons 
diagnosed with rare and life -threatening diseases, including access to free 
diagnosis and treatment, access to medicines, assistive devices, gene or cell 
therapy and surgical interventions at designated Centres of Excellence as well 
as transport allowance and attendant compensation for hospital visits exceeding 
fifty kilometers from the usual place of residence. Clause 5 provides for the 
constitution of the Treatment of Rare and Life-threatening Diseases Fund to be 
utilised for financing the treatment of rare and life -threatening diseases, post-
treatment rehabilitation, capacity building and infrastructure enhancement of 
the designated Centres of Excellence and for budgetary allocation by the 
Central Government from the Consolidated Fund of India thereto. Clause 7 
provides for the constitution of a Governing Council to administer the Fund, 
the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service 
of Members other than ex- officio Members of the Governing Council.  The 
clause also provides that the Central Government shall appoint such number of 
officer and staff to assist the Governing Council in the discharge of its functions 
and for the salary and allowances payable to  them as well as their other terms 
and conditions of service.  Clause 8 empowers the Central Government to 
provide adequate funds to the Governing Council. Sub- clause (3) of clause 10 
provides for the establishment and maintenance of a national web- based 
platform to track diagnosis, treatment and fund disbursement. 
              The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 
  
  

10 
 
 
 
 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION  
   Clause 13 empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Act.  Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the 
Central Government to make such provisions through an order for removing 
any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. 
   As the rules or orders will relate to matters of procedural and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 
 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
__________
_ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the identification, free medical treatment, and financial assistance and 
support to persons suffering from rare and life-threatening diseases,  
for the establishment of a statutory Treatment of Rare and 
 Life-threatening Diseases Fund and to provide 
 for its governance structure, and for matters 
 connected therewith or 
 incidental thereto. 
___________ 
(Shri
 Sanjay Seth, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS―PMB(E)―057―10.02.2026. 