1
Bill No. LXIII-F of 2010
ORIGINAL    
THE  PRASAR  BHARATI  (BROADCASTING
CORPORATION OF INDIA) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2011
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
RAJY A SABHA  ON 8TH DECEMBER , 2011
LOK SABHA ON  20TH DECEMBER , 2011)
ASSENTED  TO
ON 8TH JANUARY, 2012
ACT NO. 6 OF 2012

2
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
THE  PRASAR  BHARATI  (BROADCASTING  CORPORATION
OF INDIA) AMENDMENT BILL, 2011
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF  PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India)
Amendment Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), for section 11, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘11. (1) All officers and employees recruited for the purposes of Akashvani or
Doordarshan before the appointed day and in service in the Corporation as on the 1st
day of April, 2000, shall be on deemed deputation to the Corporation with effect from
the 1st day of April, 2000, and shall so continue till their retirement.
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 11.
Status of
officers and
employees.
25 of 1990.
Bill No. LXIII-F of  2010

(2) All officers and employees recruited during the period on or after the
appointed day till the 5th day of October, 2007, shall be on deemed deputation to the
Corporation with effect from the 1st day of April, 2000 or the date of their joining
service in the Corporation, whichever is later and until their retirement.
Explanation.— For the purposes of sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), “officers and
employees recruited” means officers and employees recruited either under the proviso
to article 309 of the Constitution or in accordance with the regulations made under the
Act, but shall not include persons engaged or appointed on daily wages, casual,
ad hoc or work charged basis.
(3) The officers and employees referred to in sub-section (1) and sub-section (2)
shall be entitled to the pay and all other benefits as admissible to an employee of the
Central Government:
Provided that such officers and employees shall not be entitled to any deputation
allowance.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Corporation shall have the disciplinary and supervisory powers and full
co
ntrol on the officers and employees referred to in sub-section ( 1) and sub-section ( 2),
including the power to transfer them from one place, post or media to another, and to
suspend, initiate disciplinary proceedings and impose major or minor penalties:
Provided that the power to impose major penalties of compulsory retirement,
removal or dismissal from service shall be exercised by the Central Government.
(5) All officers and employees recruited after the 5th day of October, 2007 shall
be officers and employees of the Corporation and shall be governed by such conditions
of service as may be specified in the regulations.
11A.  (1) The provisions of section 11 shall not apply to officers and employees
of the Indian Information Service, the Central Secretariat Service or any other service
borne on any cadre outside Akashvani or Doordarshan, who have been working in
Akashvani or Doordarshan before the appointed day or in service in the Corporation
after that day.
(2) The terms and conditions of service in the Corporation of officers and
employees referred to in sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
11B. (1) All posts in the erstwhile Akashvani and Doordarshan  other than the
posts borne on the strength of the cadres referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall be
deemed to have been transferred to the Corporation with effect from the 1st day of
April, 2000.
(2) All matters relating to the posts borne on the strength of the cadres of the
Indian Information Service, the Central Secretariat Service or any other cadre outside
Akashvani or Doordarshan, in so far as such posts are concerned with the Corporation,
shall be determined in such manner and on such terms and conditions as may be
prescribed.’.
3. In section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), for clause (f), the following
clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
"(f) the terms and conditions of service in the Corporation of officers and
employees under sub-section ( 2) of section 11A;
(ff) the manner and the terms and conditions subject to which  matters relating
to the posts borne on the strength of the cadres of the Indian Information Service, the
Central Secretariat Service or any other cadre outside Akashvani or Doordarshan
shall be determined under sub-section (2) of section 11B;".
Amendment
of section 32.
Section 11
not to apply
to certain
officers and
employees.
Transfer of
posts of
Akashvani and
Doordarshan to
Corporation.
3

4. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(d) the conditions of service of officers and employees under sub-
section (5) of section 11;";
(ii) clause (e) shall be omitted.
Amendment
of section 33.
4

A
BILL
further to amend the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990.
————
(As passed by the Houses of  Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—3797LS(S3)—11-01-2012.