1
THE RIGHT TO DIGITAL LITERACY BILL, 2022
A
BILL
 to provide for a Digital Literacy Curriculum in all educational institutions to make the
youth digitally literate and for matter connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called Right to Digital Literacy Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in relation to a State, Government of that
particular State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Curriculum" means the Digital Literacy Curriculum formulated under
section 3;
Short title and
commencement.
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH  DECEMBER, 2022
Definitions.
5
10
Bill No. LXII of  2022

2
(c) "data privacy" means empowering individuals to make their own decisions
about who can process their data and for what purpose;
(d) 'data protection" means keeping data safe from unauthorized access;
(e) 'digital" means regularly updating and cleaning electronic devices, using
passwords that follow security protocols, organizing the files stored on the device,
optimizing setting etc;
(f) "digital literacy" means the knowledge, skills and attitudes that allow individuals
to be both safe and empowered in an increasingly digital world;
(g) "disinformation" means false information deliberately spread to deceive
people;
(h) "educational institutions" means all schools and colleges in the territory of
India;
(i) "impact assessment" means a holistic evaluation to understand the extent to
which the Curriculum has penetrated into the lives of children and young adults and
has enabled them to use the internet safely;
(j) "misinformation" means incorrect or misleading information;
(k) "Online Financial Fraud" means the act of obtaining financial gain through
profit-driven criminal activity, including identity fraud, ransomware attacks, email and
internet fraud, and attempts to steal financial account, credit card, or other payment
card information;
(l) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(m) "sextortion" means a form of online abuse, wherein the cybercriminal makes
use of various channels like instant messaging applications, short messaging service,
online dating applications, social media platforms, porn sites etc., to lure the users into
intimate video or audio chats and makes them pose nude or obtains revealing pictures
from them;
(n) "social media etiquette" means treating others with respect online, personal
information, images, or videos of anyone not to be shared without consent etc.; and
(o) "virtual digital asset" shall have the same meaning as defined under sub-
section (c) of section 3 of the Finance Act, 2022.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall, within six months from the date of
commencement of this Act formulate a Digital Literacy Curriculum by notification in the
Official Gazette for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) From such date, as the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, the Curriculum shall be adopted in all educational institutions.
(3) The appropriate Government shall take all measures to ensure that the Curriculum,—
(a) is designed after a preliminary diagnostic review of the local context and due
consultations with concerned stakeholders in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) includes content relating to data protection, data privacy, social media
etiquette, digital hygiene, misinformation, disinformation, online fiancial fraud,
sextortion, virtual digital assets and any other relevant subject that the appropriate
Government may decide;
(c) is framed on a grade-by-grade basis for all educational instititions; and
(d) is revised at such requisite intervals of time, as may be prescribed by the
appropriate Government to keep pace with the changing technological landscape.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Digital
Literacy
Curriculum.
6 of 2022.

3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall take measures to address the human resource
requirements for implementation of the Curriculum by planning, developing, implementing
and regularly updating educational and training programs in collaboration with institutions
of higher education and training.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure the appointment of such number of
teachers with such qualifications, as may be prescribed for teaching the Curriculum in
educational institutions.
(3) The appropriate Government shall make efforts to incorporate international best
practices in digital literacy in the curriculum.
5. The appropriate Government shall take all measures to ensure effective co-ordination
between services provided by concerned Ministries and Departments of that Government
such as those dealing with Information Technology, Education, Finance, Home Affairs,
Women and Child Development for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall design an impact assessment mechanism to
evaluate the efficiency of the Curriculum.
(2) The appropriate Government shall conduct an impact assessment as per clause (1)
at five year intervals in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the first impact assessment shall be conducted after five years of the
implementation of the Curriculum.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments, from time to time, for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
8. (1) The appropriate Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both  Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
9. The provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
Appropriate
Government
to take
measures as
to address
human
resource
requirement,
training, etc.
Co-ordination
within
appropriate
Government.
Impact
assessment.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
Act to have
overriding
effect.

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
As of March 2022, there are a total of 82 crore internet subscribers in India according
to the "Indian Telecom Services Performance Indicato r Report" released by Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI). Since the Covid-19 pandemic made remote working
and remote learning the norm, the world has witnessed a surge in dependence on the internet.
Hence, social media platforms have become mainstream vehicles for civic participation. As a
result, invasions of privacy, increasing surveillance, digital financial transactions are just
some of the complex issues that face us today.
As per NITI Aayog, "Most of the internet users are in urban educated classes. This
situation reflects that majority of the Indians still remain unfazed by the information technology
revolution. With such a disparity in digital access and literacy, it is hard to aspire for inclusion
and equity. India is expected to have the largest working age population, which requires
rapid job creation. Digital literacy becomes a crucial medium of communication with global
citizens".
Even though children are seemingly adept at using digital tools, this does not mean
that they are digitally literate. Digital literacy encompasses awareness of digital rights,
balanced use of technology, digital emotional intelligence, digital safety and security and
civic digital self-expression. School going children can be extremely vulnerable to cyber
bullying, phishing, online scams, malware and the like. Besides, children need to be sensitised
to the perpetual nature of the internet and the perils of posting personally identifiable
information online. Children and young adults need to be digitally literate even when they
are offline since their schooling, societal conditioning and future job opportunities largely
depend on their understanding of and participation in the digital ecosystem.
This Bill assumes greater significance since India does not have a Data Protection law
yet. At the same time, it is only a first step towards our goal of a digitally literate India. Various
challenges to mainstreaming digital literacy include low-quality technological infrastructure,
cost of infrastructure needed for the use of Information and Communications Technology
(ICT), lack of online content in local languages and that related to everyday life, lack of
understanding of the decision makers, lack of evidence based information and a lack of
sufficient regulation in relation to privacy and transparency. We must look at digital literacy
as one part of the solution and not the panacea.
Notably, the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child, in 2014, advised
member governments (including India) to include digital literacy in their national school
curriculums. Countries like Scotland, Australia, Netherlands already have a digital literacy
framework in place. Even though the National Education Policy, 2020 envisages digital literacy
as a part of the curriculum framework for school and adult education, it does not define the
same. This Bill seeks to incorporate a rights based approach to digital literacy and citizenship.
The thrust to Digital India must be accompanied by an adequate legislative response to the
opportunities and threats presented by the internet.
The bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
DEREK O' BRIEN.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appropriate Government to take measures as
regard to human resource development and training by appointing teachers for imparting
education on Digital Literacy Curriculum. Clause 7 of the bill provides that the Central
Government shall provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the bill. The bill,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore would be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
  to provide for a Digital Literacy Curriculum in all educational institutions to make the
youth digitally literate and for matter connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Derek  O' Brien,  M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1791RS(S3)—12-12-2022.