THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2.  After article 50 of the Constitution, following article shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘50A. The State shall endeavour to achieve a balanced growth and development
of areas within the jurisdiction of States and Union territories  by enacting an appropriate
law to provide that no development funds are be allotted or spent in a village, tehsil,
district, Assembly or Parliamentary Constituency, disproportionately at the cost of
other areas.’’
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Insertion of
new article
50A.
Bill No. LXII of 2012
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012
Balanced
Development
of all regions.
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Central Government, as also various State Governments, spend crores of rupees
annually on various developmental schemes. However, there is no provision in the
Constitution or in any other enactment for a fair and equitable distribution of public money
in different revenue Districts, Parliamentary or Assembly Constituencies. As a result, many
a time, Ministers in-charge of the respective Ministries are found to be allocating funds
disproportionately in their respective constituencies and in a manner that hardly any funds
remain for allocation in remaining areas. Representatives of the people, whether they are
Members of Parliament or Members of State Legislatures have to suffer the ire of the public
who remain ignorant about regional imbalance resorted to by persons. On account of some
specific project coming up in any area, a large chunk of funds may be needed. But, a proper
explanation should be given on the imbalance occurring on account of investments in such
national or State level projects. It is therefore felt that there should be a statutory enactment
or a provision in the Constitution of India which will ensure a fair amount of regional balance.
It is therefore proposed that the state shall endevaour to achieve a balance growth and
development of the areas within the jurisdiction of State and Union Territories by enacting
an appropriate law to provide that no development funds are allotted or spent in a village,
tehsil, district, Assembly or Parliamentary Constituency, disproportionately or arbitrarily at
the cost of other areas.
Hence this Bill.
SHANTARAM   NAIK
2

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri Shantaram Naik, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND— 3957RS (S3)—07-12-2012.