1
THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CREDIT GUARANTEE
CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee
Corporation Act, 1961.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called The Deposit Insuarance and Credit Guarantee Corporation
(Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Deposit Insuracne and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961, (hereinafter
referred to as principal Act), in section 4 for sub-section (1)] the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
47 of 1961.
Short title and
commencemnt.
Bill No. LXIII of 2019
5
Amendment
of Section 4.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019

2
"(1) The authorised capital of the Corporation shall be determined by the Central
Government, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, which may be increased from time to
time."
3. In section 16 of the principal Act,—
(a) In sub-section (1),
(i) for the second proviso the following shall be substituted, namely:—
"Provided that the total amount payable by the Corporation to any one depositor in
respect of his or her deposit in that bank, in the same capacity, and in the same right shall
extend to the entire amount of the deposit, including both principal and interest amount held
by the depositor as on the date of liquidation or cancellation of the bank's license, or the date
on which the scheme of amalgamation, merger or reconstruction comes into force."
(ii) the third proviso shall be omitted.
(b) In clause (b) of sub-section (4), for the words "one thousand and five hundred
rupees, or as the case may be, the amount fixed by the Corporation under the third
proviso", the words "amount fixed under the second proviso" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of Section 16. 5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Deposit Insuarnce and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) was set up to
insure bank deposits that are payable in India in the event of a bank failure.
Under the present Act, a depositor's hard earned money stored in a bank is only
insured till the upper limit of Rs. 1,00,000 by the Corporation for the amount held by the
depositor in the same capacity  and same right as on the date of liquidation or cancellation
of  bank's license or the date on which the scheme of amalgamation, merger, or reconstruction
comes into force. This amount has not been revised since 1993 by the Corporation.
This does not provide the depositor with adequate safeguards in case of a bank
failure. Poor regulation and management of banks, and fraudulent lending practices therefore
leave the depositors as the primary victims of bank's failure. They have little immediate
recourse for the recovery of their hard earned money.
This Bill intends to increase the liability of the Corporation to the entire amount lost by
the innocent depositor on account of the failure of a bank. Additionally, it aims to improve
the financial accountability of India's banking regulatory infrastructure by indirectly
increasing the responsibility and liability of the Reserve Bank of India, which is subscribed
to the entire share capital of the Corporation.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
DR. AMAR  PATNAIK
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND CREDIT GUARANTEE CORPORATION ACT, 1961
(47 OF 1961)
* * * * *
4. (1) The authorised capital of the Corporation shall be one crore of rupees but the
Central Government may, in consulation with the Reserve Bank, increase such capital from
time to time, so however, that the total authorised capital shall not exceed fifty crores of
rupees.
* * * * *
16. (1) Where an order for the winding up or liquidation of an insured bank is made,
the Corporation shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be liable to pay to every
depositor of that bank  in accordance with the provisions of section 17 an amount equal to
the amount due to him in respect of his deposit in that bank at the time when such order is
made: Provided that the liability of the Corporation in respect of an insured bank referred to
in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section (13) or clause (a) or clause (b) of
section 13C shall be limited to the deposits as on the date of the cancellation of the registration:
Provided further that the total amount payable by the Corporation to any one depositor in
respect of his deposit in that bank in the same capacity and in the same right shall not exceed
one thousand and five hundred rupees:
Provided further that the Corporation may, from time to time, having regard to its
financial position and to the interest of the banking system of the country as a whole, raise,
with the previous approval of the Central Government, the aforesaid limit of one thousand
and five hundred rupees.
* * * * *
(4) In this section,
* * * * *
(b) "specified amount" means one thousand and five hundred rupees or as the case
may be the amount fixed by the Corporation under the third proviso to sub-section (1).
* * * * *
Captial of
Corporation.
Liability of
corporation in
respect of
insure
deposits.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee
Corporation Act, 1961.
—————
(Dr. Amar Patnaik, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4337RS(S3)—11.12.2019.