As INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024 
 Bill No. LXII of 2023 
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
2023 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:– 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
10 
2. (1) In section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act),
(i) after clause (tb), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(tc) "false information" includes  information that is either verifiably false,
defamatory or of such a nature as to not be verifiable;
Amendment of 
section 2

2 
(td) "family" includes any persons related by blood or marriage or 
adoption;”; 
(ii) after clause (za), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(zaa) "physical violence" includes assault, simple hurt, grievous hurt,
kidnapping, abduction, attempt to murder and murder;”;
(iii) after clause (zf ), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(zfa) "sexual assault" means rape, molestation or any act which violates the
bodily integrity of a woman;";
(iv) after clause (zg), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(zga)  "threat"  means  any  expression through word,  sound,  gesture  or
any audio-visual communication whatsoever of an intention to cause harm,
alarm, intimidation or harassment or for incitement of harm, alarm,
intimidation   or harassment by any  person;";
(v) after clause (zh), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(zi) "woman" means any female regardless of age.”.
5 
10 
15 
Insertion of 
new section 
66G. 
Punishment for 
threatening a 
woman to 
express her 
opinion etc. 
3. After section 66F of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"66G. (1) The following acts shall be considered punishable offences, when 
committed against a woman, with the intention to intimidate or discredit her or 
force her to express a certain view, opinion or observation, or to force her to 
state any view, opinion or observation or to force her to refrain from expressing 
a certain view, opinion or observation:— 
(a) threat of physical violence against a woman, her family or her
property;
(b) threat of sexual assault;
(c) threat to reveal personal information including, but not limited to,
her location, place of work and any other relevant detail which
may be used to harm her physically or mentally;
(d) threat to spread false information about her;
(e) threat to question a person's citizenship or imputation of
disloyalty to India; 
(f) threat of false prosecution; and
(g) abuse based on religion, caste or sexuality.
(2) The offences referred to in section 66G (1) shall be cognizable and non-
bailable and shall be punishable in the following manner:
(i) For the first offence, the person shall be punishable with a maximum
punishment of three years or with a fine of upto fifty thousand rupees.
(ii) For the second offence, the person shall be punishable with a
maximum punishment of seven years and with a fine of upto four lakh
rupees.
(iii) For the third and subsequent offences, the person shall be punishable
with a maximum punishment of ten years and with a fine of upto ten
lakh rupees:
Provided that the offence under section 66G shall be compoundable at the 
discretion of the victim. 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

3 
5 
(3) If any threat punishable under section 66G is carried out by the person
making such threat or any other person incited by such person, the punishment
shall be ten years imprisonment and with a fine of upto ten lakh rupees.
(4) Any amount imposed as fine under this section shall be paid to the victim as
compensation.”.
2  of 1974 
10 
15 
20 
25 
4. In the principal Act, after, section 67B, the following new section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“67BA. (1) Any person who is the victim of any offence under sections 66E, 66G, 
67, 67A or 67B of this Act or a police officer investigating the same, shall have the 
right to approach the jurisdictional Magistrate for grant of an injunction against the 
accused, or any other person, company, organisation or entity for deletion of the 
offensive text, image, audio, video or other format and for prohibition from storing, 
retransmitting or repeating the offensive text, image, audio, video or other format, as 
the case may be. 
(2) The Magistrate shall grant the injunction without notice to the accused if
he is satisfied that prima facie, a case of an offence under sections 66E,
66G, 67, 67A and 67B of this Act exists.
(3) The order of the Magistrate under sub-section ( 2) shall also be served
upon any person, company, organisation or entity in conformity with the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder for compliance.
(4) Any application under sub-section (1) shall be decided on the same day:
Provided that for reasons to be recorded, the Magistrate may dispose of the
application within seven days. 
(5) The injunction under sub-section (2) may be granted at the instance of the
victim or of the investigating officer.
(6) Any order passed under this section shall be subject to revision in
accordance with section 397 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.”
Insertion of 
new section 
67BA. 
Grant of 
injunctions 
under section 
66E, 66G, 67, 
67A  and 67B. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
This Bill seeks to ensure the physical, social, religious, cultural, psychological 
and economic safety and well-being of women, particularly women who are targeted 
for reason of their religion, caste, economic status, social status or occupation. 
Women’s autonomy of free speech and action is often curtailed by threats, abuse and 
actions designed to make women feel insecure and uncomfortable in the public 
sphere, particularly on the internet. Those who would seek to silence women is this 
manner use their purported anonymity to further their nefarious intentions. This is 
driven, at least in part, by a misapprehension that the law will not catch up with them. 
2. This Bill, while being mindful of the fact that freedom of speech is a
fundamental right, recognises that free speech amounting to abuse interferes with the 
fundamental right to freedom of speech for others. Persistent abuse and creation of 
insecurity leads to actionable wrongs not only against the individual but leads to 
deterioration of public order. The need is to ensure that attempts to silence women 
are adequately punished. Further, an effective and easy mechanism has to be 
available to women to ensure that offensive material is scrubbed quickly and 
effectively from the internet. Mere punishment of the offender does not protect the 
victim, who may be subject to distress due to the continued existence or 
transmission of abusive material against her. As such, the facility of obtaining an 
order of scrubbing such material from the internet is a very necessary one for 
women, who are so targeted on the internet, social media or other digital fora. 
3. Hence, this Bill.
DEREK O’ BRIEN 

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend amend the Information Technology Act, 2000. 
(Shri Derek O' Brien, M.P.) 
RS–P&PS–PMB(E)–048–05.02.2024 