Bill No. LXII of 2019
THE  ELDER PERSONS (CARE AND PROTECTION)  BILL,  2019
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Guiding Principles.
CHAPTER  II
P
ROTECTION OF RIGHTS
4. Right of the Elder Citizens.
5. Role of appropriate Government.
CHAPTER  III
SOCIAL SECURITY, ECONOMIC SELF SUFFICIENCY, HOUSING AND AWARENESS
6. Social Security and Awareness.
7. Economic self-sufficiency.
8. Housing for the elderly.
9. Public Awareness.
CHAPTER  IV
S
ENIOR PERSONS FUND
10. Senior Persons Fund.
CHAPTER  V
EDUCATION
11. Education.
CHAPTER  VI
RIGHT OF CAREGIVERS
12. Rights of caregivers.
CHAPTER  VII
NA TIONAL AND STATE COMMISSIONS
13. National Commission for elder Care and Selection Committee.
14. Terms of office.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019

15. Resignation and Removal.
16. Vacancy.
17. Salary and Allowances.
18. Meeting of the National Commission.
19. Secretary to the Commission.
20. Functions of National Commission.
21. Annual Report.
22. State Commission for Elder Care.
23. Terms of Office.
24. Resignation and removal.
25. Vacancy.
26. Salary and allowances.
27. Meeting of the State Commission.
28. Secretary to the Commission.
29. Functions of the State Commission.
30. Annual Report.
CHAPTER  VIII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
31. Offences and Penalties.
CHAPTER  IX
MISCELLANEOUS
32. Central Government to provide funds.
33. Act to supplement other laws.
34. Immunity from prosecution.
35. Power to remove difficulties.
36. Power to make rules.
C
LAUSES
(ii)

Bill No. LXII of 2019
THE ELDER PERSONS (CARE AND PROTECTION)
BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to facilitate the development of a holistic national policy to ensure preservation of
rights and provision of specialised care to senior citizens for their welfare and
development to be undertaken by the State and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by  Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Elder Persons (Care and Protection) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires;
(a) 'abuse' includes the infliction of physical, emotional and psychological harm;
deprivation of essential goods and services, or neglect of basic needs for a respectable
life;
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10

2
(b) 'appropriate Government' means;
(i) in relation to the Central Government or any establishment wholly or
substantially financed by that Government, or a Cantonment Board constituted
under the Cantonments Act, 2006, the Central Government;
(ii) in relation to a State Government or any establishment, wholly or
substantially financed by that Government, or any local authority, other than a
Cantonment Board, the State Government.
(c) 'barrier' means any factor including attitudinal, cultural, economic, institutional,
political, religious, social or structural factors which hampers the full and effective
participation, of an elder person in society;
(d) ''caregiver" means a person or entity who has the responsibility to care for an
elder person whether voluntarily or by any contract against receipt of payment or
otherwise or by the formulation of any law of the appropriate Government and includes
a family members or any person or entity employed with the full consent of the elder
person, immediate family and/or the appropriate Government;
(e) "Constitution" means the Constitution of India;
(f) 'disability' means long term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairment
which, in interaction with barriers, hinders an elder person's full and effective
participation in society equally with others;
(g) 'discrimination" means any distinction, exclusion, restriction on the basis of
ageing which is the purpose or effect of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment
or exercise on an equal basis  with others of all human rights and fundamental freedoms
in the political, economic, social cultural, civil or any other field and includes all forms
of discrimination and denial of reasonable accommodation;
(h) "elder care", means all activities undertaken by the caregiver, fiduciary,
appropriate Governments or any person or entity for the welfare of elder persons
including but not limited to nutritional, emotional, psychological, physical and financial
welfare;
(i) "exploitation", including financial exploitation, means the illegal, unauthorized
and fraudulent use of the resources of an elder person by any person including but
not limited to caregivers and fiduciaries for the person's benefit, whether monetary or
otherwise and/or deprivation of the elder persons' right and agency to access the
resources to avail of basic needs;
(j) "fiduciary" means a person or entity entrusted with the legal responsibility to
make decisions on behalf of the elder person with the full consent of the elder person,
immediate family or appropriate Government;
(k) "National Commission" means the National Commission for Elder Care
constituted under section 13 of this Act;
(l) "elder person" means a person who is sixty years of age or above;
(m) "State Commission" means the State Commission for Elder Care constituted
under section 22 of this Act.
3. The appropriate Government shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and any
other law for the time being in force, take necessary steps to secure for elder persons—
(a) respect for the inherent  right to life, dignity, and individual autonomy;
(b) life free from abuse, neglect, and exploitation for elder persons;
(c) freedom from discrimination in all aspects of life, including, but not limited to,
employment, access to education, accommodations, and other facilities;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Guiding
Principles.
41 of 2006.

(d) right to participate in education and training programs as well as social,
economic, cultural, and political life;
(e) right to work; and
(f) right to just compensation and employment conditions suitable to their needs.
CHAPTER  II
PROTECTION OF RIGHTS
4. The appropriate Government shall,—
 (i) ensure protection of the right to equality and non-discrimination for elder
persons as per Article 15 of the Constitution;
(ii) take necessary steps for elder persons to enjoy the right to life with dignity
enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution; and
(iii) take steps to enable the basic welfare of elder persons including but not
limited to their right to be respected.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall take all necessary measures to protect elder
persons from abuse or exploitation at the hands of caregivers, family members, fiduciaries or
any other person or entity;
(2) Any officer of the appropriate Government who receives a complaint from a person
or entity or finds out about any instance of elder abuse or exploitation shall be responsible
for—
(i) identification and transfer of the case to authorities responsible for
handling it;
(ii) the authority in sub-clause (i) sub-section (2) shall be responsible towards
the elder person and/or their fiduciary for—
(a) informing them about their rights to protection and liberty,
(b) introducing them to any organisation, whether private or any
appropriate Government organisation, working towards protection and/or
rehabilitation of elder persons,
(c) acquainting them with the relevant juridical authorities with the
appropriate mandate to hear their case,
(d) provision them opportunities to access legal services without barriers,
(e) assisting them in filing a complaint as per provisions in the Indian legal
system:
Provided that none of the responsibilities in clause (ii) of sub-section (2) shall exempt
the authority of their obligation to proceed with law upon recognition of a cognizable offence.
CHAPTER  III
S
OCIAL SECURITY, ECONOMIC SELF SUFFICENCY, HOUSING AND AWARENESS
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall formulate and implement policy measures to
ensure the enforcement of the objectives of this Act as described in section 3;
(2) The appropriate Government shall take necessary steps to ensure that elder persons
have an adequate standard of living and to that effect, shall take steps to,—
(i) identify, produce, procure and provide medicines and healthcare facilities
specially required by elder persons;
(ii) ensure barrier free access for elder persons, wherever possible, to healthcare
services;
Rights of the
Elder persons.
Protection
against abuse
or
exploitation.
Social Security
and
Awareness.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
3

4
(iii) provide basic amenities to elder persons who do not have access to the
same; and
(iv) identify, rescue and rehabilitate elder persons who have been abandoned
by their fiduciaries or are facing abuse or exploitation.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall facilitate economic self-sufficiency among
elder persons and ensure their financial inclusion within society;
(2) In accordance with sub-section (1), the appropriate Government shall—
(i) assist elder persons, especially those without any family or caregiver, to
utilise banking facilities,
(ii) simplify the provision of information and access to health and insurance
schemes to elder persons,
(iii) help elder persons to avail interest free loans for healthcare services,
(iv) inform elder persons about investment opportunities and asset management,
(v) monitor income from pensions and advice measures to increase it wherever
necessary, in order to match the rising prices of goods and services,
(vi) create an environment for elder persons to participate in remunerative
economic activity and provide adequate funds for the same including incentivising
employers to hire elder persons with experience in specialised fields.
8.(1) The appropriate Government shall take measures to provide residential facilities
to elder persons who are abandoned or deprived of the same;
(2) The housing facilities shall be modelled after elder-friendly construction guidelines
which may be prescribe with emphasis on developing elder communities for elder persons to
live and participate in.
9. (1) The appropriate Government shall be responsible for designing programmers to
spread awareness in the community about the hurdles faced by elder persons;
(2) The awareness campaign shall include but not the limited to easily interpretable
information on diseases prevalent in elder persons, sensitisation of the younger generation
towards the needs of the elderly, rights of folder persons including the right to respect and
life with dignity, economic opportunities for elder persons in society and promotion of the
value of elder persons in social activities;
(3) The appropriate Government shall also establish and operate a National helpline
for provision of information or emergency assistance to elder persons and generate awareness
about the same;
(4) In accordance with sub-section (3), local emergency help centres shall be
constituted to address the calls of elder persons and provide immediate assistance as and
when required according to rules laid down by the State Commission.
CHAPTER IV
E
LDER PERSONS FUND
10. (1) The appropriate Government of each district shall establish and maintain a
Elder Persons Fund with financial assistance from the Central and State Government and
voluntary contributions from citizens;
(2) The Elder Persons Fund shall be utilised for financing district level awareness
programmes, organising community events for elder persons to participate in, provide loans
to elder persons to engage in remunerative economic activity, providing financial assistance
to avail of medical emergencies, assisting elder persons who cannot afford basic goods and
services or for any other purpose deemed to be necessary by the appropriate Government in
accordance with the objective of this Act.
Economic
Self-
sufficiency.
Housing for
the elder
persons.
Public
Awareness.
Elder Persons
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
CHAPTER  V
EDUCATION
11. (1) The appropriate Government shall take all necessary steps to provide for
education and reskilling opportunities for elder persons;
(2) The Central or the State funded universities shall provide accessible opportunities
for elder persons to pursue and complete education in any of the courses offered at the
institution;
(3) The appropriate Government shall identify core skills to increase  employability
and design reskilling programmes to increase employment among elder persons; and
(4) There shall be adequate safeguards against discrimination in the hiring process of
elder persons once trained in the skilling programme.
CHAPTER  VI
R
IGHTS OF CAREGIVERS
12. (1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the rights of caregivers are
preserved in the process of providing care to elder persons;
(2) The National helpline and local help centre services in sub-sections (3) and (4) of
section 9 shall be extended to caregivers to report instances of abuse or exploitation from the
elder person, their friends and family or any fiduciary of the same;
(3) There shall be specially trained staff at each local emergency help centre to
sensitively handle the complaints of minor caregivers;
(4) The salaries for the staff and rules for appointment of staff under the sub-section (3)
shall be decided by the appropriate Government.
CHAPTER  VII
N
ATIONAL AND STATE COMMISSIONS
13. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a body to be called
the National Commission for Elder Care to exercise the powers conferred upon and to perform
the functions assigned to it, under this Act;
(2) The National Commission shall consist of the following members, namely,—
(a) a Chairperson, who is an eminent person with reputable service in the field of
elder person caregiving and welfare;
(b) a Vice-Chairpeson, who is distiguished individual with recognised service in
the field of medicine and healthcare and shall be the interim Chairperson in the event
of vacancy or incapacity of the Chairperson of the National Commission until such
time that a new Chairperson is appointed to the position;
(c) five representatives from the following categories—
(i) Senior Citizen's Association;
(ii) Pensioner's Association;
(iii) Non-Government Organisation working for elder persons;
(iv) Elder person from the transgender community;
(v) Elder person from the community of persons with disability.
(3) Fifty percent of the nominees under sub-clauses ( b) to (c) of sub-section ( 2) of
shall be female;
(4) The Chairperson and Members of the National Commission shall be appointed by
the President after obtaining the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of—
Education.
Rights of care-
 givers.
National
Commission
for Elder Care
and Selection
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(a) the Prime Minister—Chairperson;
(b) the Speaker of the House of the People—Member;
(c) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People—Member;
(d) the Chairman of the Council of States—Member;
(e) the Leader of the Opposition in The Council of States—Member; and
(f) the Chief Justice of India, or any other Justice of Supreme Court nominated
by the Chief Justice on his behalf.
(5) No appointment of a Chairperson or a Member shall be invalid merely by reason of
any vacancy in the Selection Committee;
(6) The Selection Committee shall for the purposes of selecting the Chairperson and
Members of the National Commission and for preparing a panel of persons to be considered
for appointment as such, constitute a Search Committee consisting of at least seven persons
of standing and having special knowledge and expertise in the matters relating to elder care,
disability rights, healthcare, policy making, psychology, law and management or in any
other  matter which, in the opinion of the Selection Committee may be useful in making the
selection of the Chairperson and Members of the National Commission:
Provided that not less than fifty per cent. of the members of the Search Committee
shall be from amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes,
Other Backward Classes, Minorities and women.
(7) The selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure in a transparent manner
for selecting the Chairperson and Members of the National Commission;
(8) The term of the Search Committee referred to in sub-section ( 6), the fees and
allowances payable to its members and the manner of selection of panel of names shall be
such as may be prescribed.
14. (1) The members of the National Commission shall hold office for a term of four
years from the date on which they enter upon their office;
(2) The members shall be eligible for a one-year extension to their term subject to
recommendations of the Selection Committee.
15. (1) Any Member of the National Commission may, by notice in writing addressed
to the President, resign their office;
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1) of section 15, any Member of the
National Commission shall only be removed from their office by order of the President on the
grounds of proven misbehaviour or incapacity after thorough inquiry following due procedure;
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (2) of section 15, the President may, by
order, remove from office any member as the case may be if the member:—
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) engages in employment during their office tenure that adversely affects the
National Commission and/or its functioning; or
(c) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for any offence.
16. (1) In the event of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson
of the National Commission due to any reason, the President may, by notification, authorise
any two members to take up their responsibilities until the appointment of new members to
fill such vacancy;
(2) If the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson are unable to discharge their functions',
the President may, by notification, authorise any two members to discharge their functions
until resumption of their duties.
Term of
office.
Resignation
and Removal.
V acancy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
17. The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the members shall be such as may be prescribed.
18. (1) The National Commission shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson
may think fit;
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the National
Commission shall have the power to lay down regulations establishing its own procedure;
(3) All orders and decisions of the National Commission shall be authenticated by the
Secretary or any other officer of the National Commission duly authorised by the Chairperson
in this behalf.
19. (1) The Central Government shall make available to the National Commission an
officer of the rank of an Additional Secretary to the Government of India who shall be the
Secretary to the National Commission;
(2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the
National Commission may appoint such other administrative and technical officers and
staff, as it may consider necessary;
(3) The salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other staff
appointed under sub-section (2) of section 19 shall be such as may be prescribed.
20. The National Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions,
namely:—
(a) identify, suo-moto, or on a representation received, provisions of any laws,
policies, programmes and procedures, which are inconsistent with this Act, and
recommend necessary corrective steps;
(b) monitor developments in fields relating to elder persons including but not
limited to medicine, healthcare and economic opportunities;
(c) undertake research and collect, maintain and furnish information and data
pertaining to various aspects of the lives of elder persons including but not limited to
information about effectiveness of insurance and pension schemes, cost of living
across the country for elder persons, violations of rights of elder persons, etc.;
(d) inquire, suo-moto or on a complaint received from any person regarding any
violation of rights of elder persons for which the Central Government is the appropriate
Government and pursue the matter via due procedure;
(e) periodically review the provisions of this Act vis-a-vis international
developments and make recommendations for updating them as and when necessary
to accommodate said developments in the field;
(f) regularly liaison with stakeholders including individual and/or organisations
working in the field of elder rights and elder care to understand the evolving nature of
the field;
(g) monitor disbursement of funds for and implementation of the provisions of
this Act including awareness campaigns and national and state helplines and other
such programmes intended for the benefit of elder persons;
(h) recommend concerned authorities including Departments of the Central
Government to undetake any such policy or programme that may be beneficial for
elder persons as deemed by the Commission:
Provided that the authorities must respond within a period of two months from
the date of receipt of the recommendation regarding acceptance of said
recommendations or rejection with reasons as the case may be;
Salary and
Allowances.
Meetings of
the National
Commission.
Secretary to
the National
Commission.
Functions of
National
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(i) monitor, make recommendations to and review the work of State
Commissions as established by section 22 of this Act.
21. (1) The National Commission shall submit an annual report to the Central
Government and may submit special reports on any matter of urgent importance over and
above the annual report;
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual and special reports of the
Commision to be laid before each House of Parliament, along with a memorandum of action
taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations of the National Commission, and the
reasons for non-acceptance of the recommendations, if any.
22. (1) Every State Government may constitute a State Commission for Elder Care to
exercise the powers conferred upon and to perform the functions assigned to a State
Commission under this chapter.
(2) The State Commision shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson, who is an eminent figure with reputable service in the field of
elder person caregiving and welfare;
(b) a Vice-Chairperson, who is a distinguished individual with recognised service
in the field of medicine and healthcare and shall be the interim Chairperson in the event
of vacancy or incapacity of the Chairperson of the State Commission until such time
that a new Chairperson is appointed to the position;
(c) five representatives from the following categories—
(i) Senior Citizen's Association;
(ii) Pensioner's Association;
(iii) Non-Governmental Organisation working for elder persons;
(iv) elder person from the transgender community;
(v) elder person from the community of persons with disability.
(3) Appointments to all positions shall be made by the appropriate Government on the
recommendation of a Selection Committee as may be prescribed by the State legislature of
each state within six months of the date of commencement of this act.
23. (1) The members of the State Commission shall hold office for a term of four years
from the date on which they enter upon their office;
(2) The members shall be eligible for a one year extension to their term subject to
recommendations of the selection Committee.
24.(1) Any Member of the State Commission may, by notice in writing addressed to
the Governor, resign their office;
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 24, any Member of the State
Commission shall only be removed from their office by order of the Governor on the grounds
of proven misbehaviour or incapacity after thorough inquiry following due procedure;
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (2) of section 24, the Governor may, by
order, remove from office any member as the case may be if the member:—
(a) is adjusted an insolvent; or
(b) engages in employment during their office tenure that adversely affects the
State Commission and/or its functioning; or
(c) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for any offence.
Annual
Report.
State
Commission
for Elder
Care.
Term of
office.
Resignation
and removal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
25. (1) In the event of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson
due to any reason, the Governor may, by notification, authorise any two members to take up
their responsibilities until the appointment of new members to fill such vacancy;
(2) If the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the State Commission are unable to
discharge their functions', the Governor may, by notification, authorise any two members to
discharge their functions until resumption of their duties.
26. The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the members shall be such as may be prescribed.
27. (1) The State Commission shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson
may think fit;
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the State
Commission shall have the power to lay down regulations establishing its own procedure;
(3) All orders and decisions of the State Commission shall be authenticated by the
Secretary or any other officer of the State Commission duly authorised by the Chairperson
in this behalf.
28. (1) The State Government shall make available to the State Commission an officer
of the rank of Secretary to the State Government of India who shall be the Secretary to the
State Commission;
(2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the State Government in this behalf, the
State Commission may appoint such other administrative and technical oficers and staff, as
it may consider necessary;
(3) The salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other staff
appointed under sub-section (2) of section 28 shall be such as may be prescribed.
29. (1) The State Commission shall perform the functions laid down in section 20—
(i) in clause (h) of section 20;
(ii) in references to Central Government shall be construed to refer to State
Governments for the purpose of difining the functions of the State Commission;
(2) the State Commission shall be responsible for operating state emergency helplines
and establishing local help centres for elder persons as laid down by this Act;
(3) The State Commission shall consult with and report to the National Commission
suo-motu or on request of the National Commission on matters pertaining to the field of elder
care.
30. (1) The State Commission shall submit an annual report to the State Government
and may submit special reports on any matter of urgent importance over and above the
annual report;
(2) The State Government shall cause the annual and special reports of the Commission
to be laid before one or more houses of the State Legislative Assembly as the case may be,
along with a memorandum of action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations
of the Commission, and the reasons for non-acceptance of the recommendations, if any.
CHAPTER  VIII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
31. (1) Whoever knowingly obstructs the implementation of the provisions laid down
in this Act or aids and abets or incites such obstruction or restricts the scope of the provisions
or performs any activity deemed to be an offence against elder persons under this Act or any
other law shall be liable to be punished with imprisonment of not less than six months
extendable upto two years or a fine of not less than rupees twenty thousand extendable upto
rupees two lakh or with both;
Vacancy.
Salary and
allowances.
Meetings of
the State
Commission.
Secretary to
the
Commission.
Functions of
the State
Commission.
Annual
Report.
Offences and
Penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(2) Where any offence as described in sub-section ( 1) has been committed by an
establishment, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was the appointed
head or was directly in charge of, and was responsible to the establishment for the conduct
of its business, as well as the establishment, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence, and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) and ( 2) shall render any such
person liable to any punishment as highlighted in sub-section ( 1) if they prove that the
offence was committed without their knowledge or that all due diligence was exercised to
prevent the commission of such offence.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
32. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law,
provide adequate funds, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
33. The provisions of this Act or the rules made there under shall be in addition to and
not in derogation of any other legislation, rules, orders or instructions made with respect to
elder persons.
34. No suit procecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for
anything which is done in good faith or intended to be done under this Act or any rule there
made under.
35. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provisions consistent with
the Act for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of a year from
the date of commencement of this Act;
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before both the Houses of
Parliament when in session and in the first week of the session immediately preceding the
date of the order when not in session.
36. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out
the provisions of this Act subject to its provisions after consultation with relevant
stakeholders as identified by them;
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament, while it is in session and has been
passed with or without modifications or rejected by both the Houses:
Provided that any rule made under this Act when the Parliament is not in Session shall
be presented before both the Houses of Parliament in the first week of the immediate
successive session with consent required from each House for the rule to be accepted with
or without modifications or rejected due to lack of consent thereof;
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two
Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Immunity
from
prosecution.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been a significant shift in demographic patterns across the world in the
21st Century with people leading far longer lives than the previous generation. In India, the
population share of persons aged over 60 has been increasing at an increasing rate over the
last few years and is expected to do so in the coming decades as well. With the increased life
expectancy, empirical studies show that the youthful demographic bulge, considered a
demographic dividend, would transform into a gerontological bulge as the population of 60+
and 80+ people will increase by 326% and 700% respectively by the year 2050. Besides, the
fast changing social matrix is increasingly impacting adversely the care, dignity and
independence of the elders.
On the global front, the situation of older persons was highlighted for the first time at
the World Assembly on Ageing in 1982 in Vienna wherein International Plan of Action on
Ageing was adopted. It served as an International blueprint for development of policies and
programmes on ageing. Later, the United Nations Principles for Older persons were adopted
by General Assembly Resolution 46-91 of 16th December, 1991. With the adoption of the
Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing in 2002 during the second world assembly on
ageing, consistent efforts are being made to build a society for all ages.
The well being of older persons was enshrined in Indian Constitution much before it
was raised in the international forum. Article 41 of the Indian Constitution enjoins that "the
State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make effective provision
for securing the right to work, to education and to public assistance in cases of unemployment,
old age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases of underserved want."
However, the focus on caring for the elderly has been inadequate with little attention
given to creating environments for the development of elderly people. With their children
migrating to metropolitan cities seeking jobs, parents are often left without company and
support in their old age. India lacks dedicated government departments dealing with the
various facets of ageing including providing accessible healthcare services, redressal systems
and financial opportunities. Furthermore, old age is seen as a burden in many households
with senior members being cast out of their homes or left in institutions for the elderly away
from their family.
This Bill seeks to rewrite the narrative surrounding ageing in Indian society by
proposing the development of a positive outlook on ageing. It facilitates protection and
preservation of rights of elderly citizens of the country and provides for the sensitization of
the population at large about the challanges faced by the elders in our community. Economic
opportunities for older persons are also stressed upon as financial security is crucial in old
age with increasing costs of medical expenditure. The formation of national and state level
commissions for the elderly allows for streamlining provision of services, addressing
complaints and improving the standard of living for elderly citizens. Rights of caregivers
working for the elderly are also incorporated within the Bill. The superlative societal value of
our senior citizens cannot be ignored as we take strides towards becoming a global
superpower in the coming years.
Hence this Bill.
DEREK O'BRIEN
11

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 9 of the Bill provides for setting up of a National Helpline for the Elderly and
local emergency help centres from providing assistance to elderly. Clause 10 provides for
setting up of a Senior Persons Fund. Clause 12 provides for salary for staff appointed for
local emergency help centres. Clause 13 provides for setting up of a National Commission
for Elder Care. Clause 17 provides for salaries, allowance to be paid to the members of
National Commission of Elder Care. Clause 19 provides for salaries, allowance, and for
administrative and technical staff of the National Commission for Elder Care. Clause 32
makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds to carry out the
provisions of the Bill.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
not possible at present to quantify the funds that may be involved.
12

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 empowers State Commission for elder care to frame rules regarding setting up
of local help centers. Clause 12 gives rule making power regarding appointment of staff for
local emergency center to appropriate Government. Clause 17 provides for rules regarding
salaries, allowance, and terms and conditions of service for members of National Commission
for Elder Care. Clause 18 gives the National Commission the power to lay down regulations
regarding its own functioning. Clause 19 provides for rule making power regarding salaries,
allowance, and terms and conditions or service for administrative and technical staff of the
National Commission for Elder Care. Clause 22 empowers State Governments to lay down
rules for appointment of a selection committee. Clause 26 Provides for rules regarding salaries,
allowance, and terms and conditions of service for members of State Commissions for Elder
Care. Clause 27 gives the State Commissions the power to lay down regulations to regarding
its own functioning. Clause 28 provides for rule making power regarding salaries, allowance,
and terms and conditions of service for administrative and technical staff of the State
Commissions for Elder Care. Clause 36 empowers the appropriate Government to frame rules
by notification in the Official Gazette. to carry out the provision of the Bill.
The rules to be framed by the Government pertain to matters of administrative detail
only, which cannot be laid down in the Bill itself. The delegation is, therefore, normal in
character.
13

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to facilitate the development of a holistic national policy to ensure preservation of rights
and provision of specialised care to senior citizens for their welfare and development
to be undertaken by the State and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Derek O'Brien, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4329RS(S3)—11.12.2019.