AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No, LXII of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
Bu

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

follows: —

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.
2. For article 120 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,

5 namely:—

“120. Business in Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English :
Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the
House of the People, or person acting as such, as the case may be, shall—

(i) permit a member to give notice under different class of business
in accordance with the Rules of procedure framed under article 118, in
any of the languages specified in the Eighth Schedule;

Short title.

Substitution of
new article for
article 120.
Languages in
which
Business in
Parliament to
be transacted.


(it) permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in
Hindi or in English to address the House in one of the languages specified
in Eighth Schedule;

(iii) cause all business transacted in Parliament translated into
all languages specified in the Eighth Schedule and circulate them to
members; and

(iv) make available simultaneous interpretation facilities in all
languages specified in the Eighth Schedule if and when any member
addresses the House either in Hindi or in English or in any other
language.”


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present all business in Parliament as per the provisions of article 120 of the
Constitution is transacted either in Hindi or in English. The presiding officer of cither
House of Parliament, that is, the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the
House of the People as the case may be, may permit any member who cannot adequately
express himself in Hindi or in English to address the House in his mother tongue. In such
a case, however, there is no provision either in the Constitution or in the Rules of Procedure
and Conduct of Business in cither House of Parliament for simultaneous translation of the
Member’s speech into Hindi or English. The result is that the member's speech is not
intelligible to his colleagues in the House and he remains outside the mainstream of
Parliamentary proccedings and his speech cannot make any impact or any effective
contribution to the Parliamentary business howsoever useful his speech, may be. In the
interest of healthy Parliamentary tradition, it is desirable that whatever a member speaks
should be rendered into Hindi, English and other national languages listed in the 8th
Schedule of the Constitution.

Also, at present members are required to table notices under different provisions of
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha either in
English or in Hindi. Members who are not well versed in either language, are deprived
from participating meaningfully in the debates.

With‘a view to develop sound parliamentary system and to afford and opportunity to
members to participate in the debates and function as true Parliamentarians, it is proposed
that—

(i) simultancous/interpretation facilities should be provided in all languages
mentioned in the Eighth Schedule; and

(ii) members may be permitted to table notices in all languages specified in
the Eighth Schedule.

Hence the Bill.

KARNENDU BHATTACHARJEE


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The Bill seeks to provide for simultaneous interpretation and also translation facility
in all languages specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution. It also enables members
to table notices in those languages.

This will involve some expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect
of appointment of interpreters, translators, etc. It is likely that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees two crore is to be involved.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved
for making necessary arrangements in Parliament for simultaneous interpretation and
making available translation in all languages.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *

120. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Part XVII, but subject to the provisions of
article 345 business in Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English:

Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of the
People, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may permit any member who
cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or in English to address the House in
his mother-tongue.

(2) Unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, this article shall, after the expiration
of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution, have effect as if
the words or in English were omitted therefrom.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution.

(Shri Karnendu Bhattacharjee, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4561RS—13-11-2000.