THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In section 279 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as the Code) for the
words "with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both" the words "with imprisonment
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 279.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 30TH  NOVEMBER, 2007
Bill No. LXII of 2007

2
of either description for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which may extend
to five thousand rupees and for second or subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees" shall
be substituted.
3. In section 304A of the Code for the words "with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years or with fine, or with both" the following shall be
substituted, namely:—
"with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees.
Provided that if it is proved that the rash or negligent act was committed under
the influence of alcohol, the punishment shall not be less than three years but may
extend to five years and the fine shall not be less than one lakh rupees but may extend
to five lakh rupees.
Provided further that notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 the offence under
this section shall be non-bailable."
Amendment
of section
304A.
20 of 1974.
59 of 1988.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is horrible but true that not a single day goes without, a report in the newspaper
about a mother or school child or a poor man crushed by a bus or some vehicle or other. Rash
and negligent driving claims more than 60,000 innocent lives across the country every year.
The blue line buses in the Capital city have become killer buses and are running amok on the
streets of Delhi. These buses more often than not, are engaged in a race with each other
trying desperately to stay ahead so that they can take more passengers. The drivers of these
buses are always under stress as they run against time to cover maximum distance or trips
during the day and in the process end with causing fatal accidents. Call centres’ cab drivers
are another culprits on the road as with a view to reaching on time during odd hours they
drive these cabs at a very high speed resulting in accidents. Even the incidents of drunken
driving in urban areas are rising menacingly. Drunken bus drivers and youngsters behave as
monster behind the steering as if there is no law to check them and rightly so in view of the
weak provisions of law which hardly act as a deterrent.
When a vehicle mows down a person, the police starts a case under section 279 and
304A of the IPC which pertain to rash and negligent driving and causing death due to same.
The offences under these sections are bailable offences and within hours of the accident the
person is free and within a day or two he is again behind the wheel as if nothing has
happened. Even the period of punishment under these sections is very less and that too is
rarely awarded. IPC was enacted in the year 1861 when there were hardly any motor vehicles
in the country. The absurdity of the law can be gauged from the fact that if you can drive and
kill somebody, the offence is bailable and if you steal Rs. 10 from some one it is a non-bailable
offence under IPC. Therefore, the present position of law does not act as deterrent for the
offenders.
Recently, the Supreme Court while considering the increasing number of vehicular
accidents resulting in death of a large number of innocent people has favoured that
punishment under 304A for two year is grossly inadequate.
Therefore, it is high time that amendment be made in sections 279 and 304A of IPC by
prescribing stringent punishment besides making offence under 304A non-bailable.
Hence this Bill.
MAHENDRA MOHAN
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
* * * * *
279. Rash driving or riding on a public way—Whoever drives any vehicle, or rides, on
any public way in a manner so rash or negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to
cause hurt or injury to any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees or with both.
* * * * *
2[304A. Causing death by negligence—Whoever causes the death of any person by
doing any rash or neglegent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both].
* * * * *
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
————
(Shri Mahendra Mohan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5051RS(S-5)—30-11-2007.