AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LXTI of 2000
THE CONTROL OF POPULATION BILL, 2000
A

Bit
to provide for population control and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu & Kashmir.

(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2 In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—‘appropriate Government”
means in the case of a State, the Government of that State and in other cases, the Central
Government.

3. It shall be duty of the Central GoVernment to encourage, promote and motivate
small family norms with a view to ensuring a decline in birth rate and to control the rising
population in the country.

Short title
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.

Government
to promote
‘small family


Facilities in
case of
sterilization
after one
child.

Population
control to be
a compulsory
subject in
secondary
education.

Maximum
age for
marriage.
Government
‘employees to
undertake not
to procreate
more than
‘one child.

Penalty.

Over-riding
effect of the
Act.

Power to
make rules.

4. If either husband or wife having only one child on the date of commencement
of this Act, voluntarily undergoes sterilization, the appropriate Government shall
provide the couple with the following benefits, namely :—

@ free education including higher education to such child;

(ii) suitable employment to such child after he/she completes his/her
education; and

(ii) such other benefits as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.

5. In order to create an awareness of the dangers of the galloping population the
appropriate Government shall introduce population controlas a compulsory subject in all
educational institutions for all children from ninth to twelfth class.

6. No marriage shall be solemnized betwecn a male who is less than twenty seven years
of age, and a female who is less than twenty two years of age.

7.(1) Any person who is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union or of State
or in any undertaking or organization under the control of the Central Government or the
State Government, as the case may be, and who has only one living child.or who has not
procreated any child or who is unmarried on the date of Commencement of this Act, shall
give an undertaking that he shall not procreate more than one living child.

(2) Any person violating the provisions of sub-section (/) shall be subject to such
disciplinary action as may be determined by the appropriate Government.

8. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 5 shall be punished with
simple imprisonment for not less than five years and with fine which shall be not less than
rupees twenty thousand.

9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force.

10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to give effect to the provisions of this Act.

20

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Rapid increase in the population has given rise to many socio-economic problems
like poverty, food and housing shortage, unemployment, environmental degradation, etc.
We are the second highest populous country after China. If the present trend continues, it
will not be possible for us to tackle the socio-economic problems which would be beyond
control due to population explosion. It is, therefore, imperative that certain effective steps
should be taken to check the increasing growth of our population. Since our resources are
limited, proper upbringing of children is possible only if the size of the family is limited.
Despite existence of various birth control measures and various family planning programmes,
the problem of over population still remains.

The Bill, therefore, seeks to promote sterilization voluntarily among the eligible couples
having one child, and also provides for cettain measures like fixing the minimum age for
marriages, promoting small family norms, introduction of population control subject in the
school curricula for promoting small family norms in the future generation.

KARNENDU BHATTACHARJEE


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain benefits to be given to those who undergo
sterilisation voluntarily. Clause 5 provides for introduction of compulsory subject relating to
population control in all educational institutions. The Central Government shall have to
incur some expenditure for implementing the provisions of this Bill in respect of Union
Government and the Governments of Union territories, The State Governments will incur
expenditure in respect of their State our of their respective consolidated funds. The Bill,
therefore, will involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees hundred crore out of
the Consolidated Fund of India.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

VA


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for population control and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri KarnendwBhattacharjee, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4562RS—13. 11.2000.