AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. LXIII of 2025 
THE BREAST CANCER (AWARENESS, EARLY 
DETECTION AND DIAGNOSIS) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
t o create mass awareness among the people of all walks of life about 
breast cancer and the need to detect, diagnose and prevent breast   
cancer among females, to provide free screening including  
 mammography for all women across the country, and  
 provide advanced state-of-the-art treatment, free  
 of cost  for those diagnosed with breast cancer  
 and  for all  matters  connected therewith  
 or  incidental thereto. 
     BE it enacted  by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of  the Republic   of 
 India as follows:— 
5 
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Breast Cancer (Awareness, Early Detection
and Diagnosis) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
c
ommencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. I n this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 
(b) "breast cancer" means a disease in which cells in the breast
begin to grow out of control to form a lump; 
(c) "free medical treatment" includes supply of medicines, access
to laboratory and laboratory tests, medical therapy and other medical 
procedures, as may be required, free of cost to breast cancer patients;  
(d) "prescribed" means as prescribed by rules made under this
Act; and 
(e) "screening" means procedures for detection and diagnosis of
breast cancer including mammography or x-ray of the breast or other 
tests as may be required. 
5 
10 
A
wareness 
programmes. 
 3. (1) The Central Government shall take such steps, as it may consider
necessary, for the purpose of creating awareness amongst the general
public about the symptoms, prevention, early detection, and treatment
of breast cancer through the means of mass media including print,
electronic, and social media and shall organise workshops, seminars,
health camps, and such other awareness programmes throughout the
country, as it may deem fit, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall issue necessary directions to the State
Governments, from time to time, for effectively implementing the steps
under sub-section (1).
15 
20 
P
rovision for 
free medical 
screening. 
 4. The appropriate Government shall make arrangements, in such manner
as may be prescribed, for providing free medical screening for all
women in both urban and rural areas under their territorial
jurisdiction, with the aid of local authorities to diagnose cases of breast
cancer.
25 
Provision for 
free medical 
treatment. 
 5. The appropriate Government shall provide free medical treatment to
every woman diagnosed with breast cancer in Government hospitals, or
such other public health institutions, as may be identified and notified
in such manner and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.
30 
Constitution of 
National 
Executive 
Committee. 
 6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a National Executive Committee for the purposes of
coordination, oversight, and implementation of the provisions of this
Act and for performing such other functions, as may be prescribed.
(2) The National Executive Committee shall be headed by the Minister of
Health and Family Welfare in the Government of India, who shall be the ex-
officio Chairperson thereof.
(3) The Committee shall consist of the following Members, to be
nominated by the Central Government, in such number and manner as
may be prescribed,—
(a) representatives from amongst eminent oncologists,
surgical oncologists, medical professionals, and researchers in the 
field of cancer diagnosis and treatment; and 
    (b) representatives of reputed non-governmental 
organisations actively engaged in breast cancer awareness and 
patient support in the field.    
(4) The Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare shall be the ex-officio Member-Secretary of the National
Executive Committee.
35 
40 
45 
50 

3 
5 
10 
15 
(5) The National Executive Committee shall meet at least once in every six
months at such time and place as may be decided by the Chairperson and
shall submit an annual report to the Central Government on its activities
during the previous calendar year along with the status of implementation of
the provisions of this Act.
(6) The Central Government shall cause the report referred to in sub-section
(5) to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of
Parliament.
(7) The Central Government may appoint, such number of officers and
other employees to the National Executive Committee, as it may
consider necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this
Act.
(8) The term of office of, the salaries and allowances payable to, and
other terms and conditions of service of, the Members of the National
Executive Committee other than the Member-Secretary and the officers
and other employees appointed under sub-section (7), shall be such as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
20 
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropr iation made by
Parliament by law on this behalf, provide adequate funds, from time to
time, to the National Executive Committee for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
Central 
G
overnment to 
provide funds. 
25 
30 
35 
40 
4
5 
50 
8. ( 1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a State Executive Committee in all States and Union
territories, for the purposes of coordination, oversight, and
implementation of the provisions of this Act in the State or Union
territory concerned and for performing such other functions, as may be
prescribed.
(2) The State Executive Committee shall be headed by the Minister in-
charge of the Ministry/Department of Health and Family Welfare in the
appropriate Government, who shall be the ex-officio Chairperson thereof.
(3) The State Executive Committee shall consist of the following members,
to be nominated by the appropriate Government, in such number and
manner as may be prescribed—
(a) representatives from amongst eminent oncologists,
surgical oncologists, radiologists, medical professionals, and 
researchers in the field of cancer diagnosis and treatment in the 
State or Union territory, as the case may be; and     
(b) representatives of reputed non-governmental organisations
actively engaged in awareness, prevention, or treatment of breast 
cancer in the State or Union territory, as the case may be.     
(4) The Secretary in the Department of Health and Family Welfare in the
appropriate Government, shall be the ex-officio Member-Secretary of the
State Executive Committee.
(5) The State Executive Committee shall meet at least once in every six
months at such time and place as may be decided by the Chairperson and
shall submit an annual report on its activities during the previous calendar
year along with the status of implementation of the provisions of this Act to
the appropriate Government and to the National Executive Committee.
(6) The appropriate Government, shall cause the report referred to in sub-
section (5), to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each
House of Parliament or as the case may be before each House of the State or
Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two Houses and before the
Legislature of the State or the Union territory, where it consists of only one
House.
C onstitution   of 
State  Executive 
Committees. 

4 
 
(7)  The appropriate Government may appoint, such numbe r of officers 
and other employees to the State Executive Committe e, as it may 
consider necessary for the efficient discharge of i ts functions under this 
Act.  
(8)  The term of office of, the salaries and allowances  payable to, and 
other terms and conditions of service of, the Membe rs of the State 
Executive Committee other than the Member-Secretary  and the officers 
and other employees appointed under sub-section (7) , shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Sharing of 
financial 
responsibilities. 
   9. (1)  The Central Government and the State Governments s hall, have 
concurrent responsibility for providing funds for t he effective 
implementation of the provisions of this Act.  
(2)  The Central Government shall prepare the estimates  of capital and 
recurring expenditure for the implementation of the  provisions of the 
Act. 
(3)  The Central Government shall provide to the State Governments, as 
grants-in-aid of revenues, such percentage of expen diture referred to in 
sub-section (2)  as it may determine, from time to time, in consult ation 
with the State Governments. 
(4) The State Governments shall, after taking into consideration, the 
sums provided by the Central Government and its oth er resources, be 
responsible to provide funds for implementation of the provisions of this 
Act.  
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 
 10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law in this regard for the time being in force or any 
other instrument having effect by virtue of any suc h law and in case of any 
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall hav e overriding effect on the 
provision of any such to the extent of such inconsistency. 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
Power  to  
make  rules. 
 
11. (1)  The appropriate Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as so on as may be after it is 
made, before  each House of Parliament while it is session for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one sessio n or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of t he session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions af oresaid both Houses agree 
in making any modifications in the rule of both the  Houses agree that the 
rules should not be made, the rules shall thereafte r have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect as the case may be ; so, however that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without pre judice to the validity of 
anything previously done under the rule. 
(3) Every rule made by a State or Union territory Gover nment with 
Legislature under this Act shall be laid, as soon a s may be after it is made, 
before each House of the Legislature of that State or Union territory, as the 
case may be, where it consists of two Houses, or be fore the Legislature of 
the State or Union territory, where it consists of only one House. 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
 12. (1)  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the p rovisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provision s of this Act, as may 
appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 
            Provided that no such orders shall be m ade after the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2)  Every order made under this section shall be laid,  as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
     

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 B reast cancer is the leading cause of cancer in women around the 
world, accounting for one quarter of all female cancers. Breast cancer deaths 
in the South-East Asia region are expected to increase to 64 per cent. by 
2040. Breast cancer among women in India has seen a rapid rise in the last 
decade and according to the Indian Council of Medical Research, 2.12 lakh 
new cases of breast cancer were reported in the year 2023 alone. With the 
incidence rising in the early thirties and twenties and peaking at ages fifty to 
sixty-five years, Breast cancer is the most common cancer in India, 
accounting for 29 per cent. of all female cancers, with an estimated 252,108 
cases by October 2025. It is estimated that 28 women in 100 are likely to 
develop breast cancer during her lifetime. 
     Due to the lack of awareness among masses about breast cancer and 
Breast Self-Examination methods, it is usually diagnosed at an advanced 
stage, where the treatment becomes ineffective and very expensive. Recent 
trends also show that younger women in the country are also exposed to the 
risk of breast cancer. 
     The Bill proposes that the Centre and State Governments should 
work together to provide free diagnosis and medical treatment to women 
affected by breast cancer and help combat this grave disease by creating 
mass awareness amongst the people about breast cancer and the need to 
detect it at an early stage. 
 Hence, this Bill. 
 KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU. 

6 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 3 provides that the Central Government shall take all necessary 
steps for creating awareness about breast cancer amongst the general public 
through mass media and arrangement of workshops, seminars etc. Clauses 4 
and 5 provide for free medical screening for and treatment of breast cancer 
respectively for all women Clauses 6 and 8 provide for the constitution of 
National and State Executive Committees, including their composition, 
appointment of officers and employees thereto, payment of salaries and 
allowances to the Members other than the Member-Secretary and their other 
terms and conditions of service.  Clause 7 provides that the Central 
Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, provide 
funds to the National Executive Committee for carrying out the provisions 
of the Bill.  Clause 9 provides that the Central and State Governments shall 
have concurrent responsibility in providing funds for the effective 
implementation of the provisions of this Bill and that the Central 
Government shall provide as grants-in-aid of revenues to the State 
Governments, such percentage of expenditure as it may determine, from 
time to time, in consultation with the State Governments. 
    The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees two 
thousand crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum. A 
non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crores is also likely to be 
involved. 

7 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION  
C lause 11 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 12 of the Bill 
empowers the Central Government to make such provisions through an 
order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the 
provisions of the Bill.  
   As the rules or orders will relate to matters of procedural and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
______________ 
A 
BILL 
to create mass awareness among the people of all walks of life about 
 breast cancer and the need to detect, diagnose and prevent breast   
cancer among females, to provide free screening including  
 mammography for all women across the country, and  
 provide advanced state-of-the-art treatment, free  
 of cost  for those diagnosed with breast cancer  
 and  for all  matters  connected therewith  
 or  incidental thereto. 
______________ 
(Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu, M.P.) 
 RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–349–08.12.2025. 