AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. LXIII of 2024 
THE FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY AND BUDGET 
MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT)  
 BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management 
Act, 2003. 
           BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of 
 India as follows:— 
    5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Management (Amendment) Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment of   
section 2. 
2. In section 2 of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management
Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), clause ( bb)
s
hall be omitted.
39 of 2003. 
Omission of 
section 4. 
3. Section 4 of the principal Act shall be omitted.

3 
STATEMENT OF O BJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 4 of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 
2003 (39 of 2003) inserted through Part XV of the Finance Act, 2018 (13 of 
2018), apparently, interferes with the finances of the States by—       
(i) imposing a Net Borrowing Ceiling (NBC) on the States in the manner
deemed fit by the Central Government, which limits borrowings from
all sources including open market borrowings;
(ii) further reducing the Net Borrowing Ceiling by including aspects into
the “borrowing” of the States which, otherwise, are not “borrowings” as
contemplated under article 293 of the Constitution by—
(a) by
 deducting liabilities arising from the Public Account of the
States to arrive at the NBC; and
(b) by deducting the borrowings by State owned enterprises where the
principal and/or interest is serviced out of the budget or where
such borrowings are made to finance schemes announced by the
States, to arrive at NBC.
(iii) imposing conditions in the exercise of powers under article 293(3) read
with a rticle 293(4) which has the effect of curtailing the exclusive
constitutional powers of the States.
The a bove  provision stands in the way of fiscal federalism as it restrains
the budgetary decisions of the State Governments.  The  proposed a mendment 
seeks to ensure that control of State finances are not done by the Central 
Government. 
      The task of c ontrolling the Public Debt of the States falls within the 
exclusive domain of the States under List II of the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution.  The wide definition of ‘general Government Debt’ as provided in 
Section 2 (bb) of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) 
Act, 2003, introducing the concept of combined debt of the Central Government 
and State Governments and  the endeavour to ensure that it does not exceed sixty 
per cent under fiscal management principles, is apparently ultra vires the 
Constitution.  It  is therefore proposed to omit clause (bb) of section 2 and also 
section 4 from the FRBM Act, 2003, in order to uphold the values of fiscal 
federalism. 
  Hence, this Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
A.A. RAHIM 

4 
A
NNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM 
THE FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY AND BUDGET MANAGEMENT ACT, 
2003 
39 OF 2003 
* *            *     *   *        
 Definitions 2 (bb) “general Government debt” means the sum total of the debt of the 
Central Government and the State Governments, excluding inter-
Governmental liabilities; 
* *            *     *   *         
Fiscal   management 
principles. 4[ (1) The Central Government shall, — 
(a) take appropriate measures to limit the fiscal deficit upto three per
cent. of gross domestic product by the 31st March, 2021;
(b) endeavour to ensure that—
(i) the general Government debt does not exceed sixty per cent.;
(ii) the Central Government debt does not exceed forty per
cent., of gross domestic product by the end of financial year
2024-2025;
(c) not give additional guarantees with respect to any loan on security of
the Consolidated Fund of India in excess of one-half per cent. of gross
domestic product, in any financial year;
(d) en deavour  to ensure that the fiscal targets specified in clauses (a) and
(b) ar e not exceeded after stipulated target dates.
(2) T he  Central Government shall prescribe the annual targets for
reduction of fiscal deficit for the period beginning from the date of
commencement of Part XV of Chapter VIII of the Finance Act, 2018 (13
of 2018), and ending on the 31st March, 2021:
      Provided that exceeding annual fiscal deficit target due to ground 
or grounds of national security, act of war, national calamity, collapse of 
agriculture severely affecting farm output and incomes, structural 
reforms in the economy with unanticipated fiscal implications, decline 
in real output growth of a quarter by at least three per cent. points below 
its average of the previous four quarters, may be allowed for the 
purposes of this section.  
(3) Any deviation from fiscal deficit target under sub-section (2) shall not
exceed one-half per cent. of the gross domestic product in a year.
(4) The Central Government shall, in case of increase in real output
growth of a quarter by at least three per cent. points above its average of
the previous four quarters, reduce the fiscal deficit by at least one-quarter
per cent. of the gross domestic product in a year.

5 
(5) Where the fiscal deficit is allowed to vary from the target prescribed
under the proviso to sub-section (2) or deviation is initiated under sub-
section (4), a statement explaining the reasons thereof and the path of
return to annual prescribed targets under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be, before both the Houses of Parliament.]
* *            *     *  *

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management 
Act, 2003. 
___________ 
(Shri A.
A. Rahim, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–073–10.02.2025 