AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA S ABHA
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2026
BILL No. LXIV  of 2025 
THE CLIMATE RESILIENT AGRICULTURE AND 
 FARMERS PROTECTION BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to formulate the National Mission for Climate Resilient Agriculture 
 to mitigate the impact of climate change on agricultural 
 productivity and ensure justice for farmers and for 
 matters connected therewith and 
 incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: — 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Climate Resilient Agriculture and
Farmers Protection Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, 
commencement 
and duration. 

2 
(3) It shall cease to have effect on t he expiry of five years from the date
of notification in the Official Gazette, except as respects things done or
omitted to be done before such cesser of operation of this Act, and section
6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon such cesser of
operation of this Act as if it had then been repealed by a Central Act.
Provided that the Act may be extended beyond the period of five 
years by an order of the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette. 
 
5 
 
10 of 1897. 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in relation to a State,
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 
(b
) “cl
imate change” refers to a change of climate which is
attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the 
composition of the global atmosphere and which is in addition 
to natural climate variability observed over comparable time 
periods; 
(c
) “ Cl
imate R esilient Agriculture” means the
incorporation of adaptation, mitigation and other practices in 
agriculture which increases the capacity of the system to respond 
to various climate-related disturbances by resisting damage and 
recovering quickly
; 
(d) “Climate Resilient Villages” means such villages, as
identified and notified by the appropriate Government , where 
climate resilient technologies and practices are implemented to 
help farmers adapt to climate change and extreme weather; 
(e) “Climate Vulnerable Districts” means those districts as
may be identified by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) as highly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate 
change, categorised as ‘Very High’ or ‘Highly’ vulnerable, for 
the purpose of prioritising climate resilience interventions and 
support;  
(f) "Digital General Crop Estimation Survey" means 
a
n
ationwide initiative aimed at precisely assessing crop yields 
across a variety of crops, utilising a meticulously crafted survey 
methodology rooted in the principles of crop cutting 
experiments;  
(g) " Mission” means the National Mission for Climate
Resilient Agriculture to be formulated by the Central 
Government under section 5; and 
(h) “prescribed” means as prescribed by rules made under
this Act. 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
35 
 
40 
Recognising 
climate 
change as a 
threat to 
agriculture. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall acknowledge climate change as an
urgent, ongoing, and multifaceted threat to agricultural productivity, food
security, and the livelihood of farming communities.
(2) I t shall be the duty of the Central Government to prioritise climate
resilience in agriculture as an essential component of national agricultural
planning and rural development.
 
45 
Obligation 
for Climate 
Resilient 
Agriculture. 
4. (1) The Central Government shall undertake measures to strengthen
Climate Resilient Agriculture with a view to ensuring the continued
livelihood and dignity of farmers.
(2) The Central Government, shall endeavour to protect the environment
from the adverse impacts of climate change, in such manner as may be
 
50 

3 
prescribed and in accordance with the provisions of any other law in this 
regard for the time being in force or any other instrument having effect by 
virtue of any such law. 
 
5 
10 
15 
5. (1) The Central Government shall formulate the National Mission for
Climate Resilient Agriculture with the objective of sustainably using
existing natural resources to the optimal level through crop and livestock
management, soil and water conservation, agroforestry etc. to achieve
long-
term higher agricultural productivity and farm incomes under
climate variabilities.
(2) The Central Government may, through the Indian Council of
Agriculture Research or any such competitive authority, as it may deem
fit, from time to time, identify the Climate Vulnerable Districts in
predominantly agricultural districts of the country.
(3) The appropriate Government may consider aligning their existing
programmes and schemes with the principles of C limate Resilient 
Agriculture in the districts identified as climate vulnerable under sub -
section (2). 
National Mission 
for Climate 
Resilient 
Agriculture. 
 
20 
25
6. (1) The Central Government shall promote Climate Resilient
Agriculture by focusing on areas such as improved crop seeds, 
livestock development, and fish culture enhancement, through 
climate change-linked schemes and programmes. 
(2) The appropriate Government, shall implement the Mission by
specific interventions, taking into account regional and local
conditions and climate vulnerability, such as the development and
expansion of Climate Resilient Villages and Climate Resilient Coastal
Fishermen Villages, seasonal crop plan
ning, distribution of
subsidised climate resilient seeds, and organisation of awareness and
t
raining drives for farmers.
Promotion of 
improved 
crop seeds, 
livestock, and 
fish culture. 
 
30 
35 
7. (1) To enhance irrigation practices, efforts shall be undertaken by the
appropriate Government to improve water use efficiency in current 
agricultural and harvesting methods  by utilising and encouraging 
farmers to adopt climate- effective indigenous and traditi onal 
practices. 
(2) Every State Government shall adopt and initiate measures to secure
existing water sources for irrigation by implementing the rejuvenation of 
dried water bodies in the identified Climate Vulnerable Districts through 
the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme or 
through such other programmes or initiatives as they may deem 
appropriate.  
Improvement of 
water use 
efficiency and 
irrigation 
management. 
 
40 
 
45 
8. To ensure crop security and enhance the adaptability of agricultural
crops, initiatives shall be undertaken by the State Governments, with 
the support of and coordination with the Central Government, for 
effective and climate- responsive pest management, with a view to 
promoting sustainability an d reducing risks arising from changing 
climatic conditions, including the development and implementation 
of climate -responsive pest surveillance systems and eco -friendly 
control practices. 
Climate 
responsive pest 
management. 
 
50 
9. The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures to  promote
and encourage farmers to adopt improved farm practices, which shall 
include, but not be limited to,–––   
(i) traditional, localised methods and innovative techniques,
aimed at enhancing toler ance to climate change and reducing 
reliance on conventional energy and resource -intensive inputs; 
and 
Promotion of 
improved farm 
practices. 

4 
(ii) the promotion of solar-powered pumps, micro-irrigation
systems, and zero-tillage equipment. 
Nutrient 
management. 
10. (1) The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures to align
the ongoing schemes and programmes, with nutrient managemen t
practices to improve soil and crop nutrient status and promote sustainable
and eco-friendly farming systems.
(2) T he appropriate Government shall adopt such measures including, but
not be limited to, the five R principle , namely, Right source, Right rate,
Right time, Right place, and Right combination and Integrated Nutrient
Management by combining chemical fertilisers with organic inputs to
ensure optimal use and minimise waste under centrally or state-sponsored
s
chemes, taking into account regional agro -climatic conditions and local
ecological factors.
 
5 
 
10 
Credit 
support for 
Climate 
Resilient 
Agriculture. 
11. (1) The appropriate Government shall facilitate timely and adequate credit 
support through such agencies, as may be prescribed, to increase the
accessibility of small and marginal farmers in Climate V ulnerable
Districts to adopt 
Climate Resilient Agriculture practices.
(2) T
he support mechanisms under sub-section (1) may include, but shall
not be limited to, multi-channel credit policy involving Self Help Groups
and Micro- Finance institutions, and improving the health of the rural
financial institutions in the Climate Vulnerable Districts where the Credit-
Deposit ratio is low.
(3) T
he Central and State Governments shall initiate programmes to
enhance financial literacy amongst farmer communities in Climate
Vulnerable Districts.
 
15 
 
20 
25 
Agricultural 
insurance for 
climate risks. 
12. (1) The appropriate Government may review the existing agricultural
insurance framework, and make necessary modifications, as deemed fit,
to comprehensively address and provide coverage for a decline in crop
production and related risks arising from the impac ts of climate change,
thereby enhancing the resilience and financial security of farmers.
(2) The Central Government shall make specific provisions for addressing
c
limate-related risk coverage for farmers, thereby compensating for the
declining crop productivity.
(3) The appropriate Government shall, based on regional
requirements and vulnerability assessments, adopt and implement
insurance initiatives aimed at providing effective climate-related risk
coverage to farmers, thereby enhancing their adaptabilit
y a nd
financial protection against climate-induced crop losses.
 
30 
 
35 
Strengthening 
agricultural 
markets. 
13. (1) The appropriate Government shall take necessary measures to improve 
current agricultural market mechanisms by supporting forward an d
backwards linkages in agricultural value chains to facilitate the promotion
and adoption of climate -resilient agricultural practices, ensuring better
integration of climate risk considerations into market access, pricing, and
post-harvest loss prevention.
(2)  The measures under sub -section (1) may include, but shall not be
limited to, access to markets, infrastru cture for storage and food
processing adapted with irradiation technology, and direct market
linkages for farmers through institutional and digital platforms, taking
into account regional disparities, agro -
climatic conditions, and local
needs.
 
40 
 
45 
50 
Access to 
climate and 
agro-advisory 
information. 
14. (1) To improve accessibility and dissemination of information,  the
appropriate Government  shall develop and strengthen hyperlocal
weather forecasting and agro -climatic advisory services to support
informed decision -making by farmers in Climate Vulnerable

5 
5 
Districts, with the objective of enhancing preparedness and adaptive 
capacity in the face of climate variability. 
(2) Such information referred to in sub -section (1) may, include but
shall not be limited to, data derived from advanced scientific
platforms such as the Digital General Crop Estimation Survey,
satellite data, and remote sensing technologies in a highly localised
manner, and shall be made accessible to farmers through appropriate 
digital, institutional, and community-based dissemination channels.
 
10 
 
15 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
15. (1) The Central Government shall, under the Mission, establish an
Index-Based Cash Transfer mechanism to provide annual financial 
assistance as a timely and minimum income security net for farmers 
affected by adverse climatic events in Climate Vulnerable Districts. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall—
(a) develop district -level climate indices based on local
weather patterns, crop vulnerability, and historical climatic data 
to assess the risk of crop loss; 
(b) establish automated, mobile -enabled cash transfer
systems linked to Aadhaar -enabled bank accounts  or digital 
wallets, to disburse payments when predetermined climatic 
thresholds are exceeded; 
(c) use satellite technology, remote sensing, and
meteorological data for real-time monitoring of climate impacts 
on crops and for the verification of eligibilit y under the Index -
Based Cash Transfer mechanism; 
(d) notify eligible farmers through mobile-based alerts and
ensure transparent and timely disbursal of compensation; and 
(e) establish a robust grievance redressal mechanism to
address disputes or delays related to the cash transfer process 
under the Index-Based Cash Transfer mechanism. 
Post-harvest 
crop security 
and 
compensation. 
35 
16. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide such sums of money to the 
State Governments, as may be necessary for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act. 
Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 
17. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act to carry out the purposes 
of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before the Legislature of that State,
where it consists of one House, or where it consists of two Houses, before
both Houses of the State Legislature.
Power to make 
rules. 

6 
Act to have 
overriding 
effect.
18. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
the provisions of any other law in this reg ard for the time being in force
or 
any other instrument having effect by virtue of any such law and in case
of any inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding
effect on the provision of any such law to the extent of such inconsistency.
 
5 

7 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 India’s agriculture sector is facing an unprecedented crisis due to the accelerating 
impacts of climate change. Between 2019 and 2024, nearly 80 per cent. of Indian farmers 
suffered crop losses resulting from adverse climatic events. In 2024 alone, 3.2 million 
hectares of cropland were affected by extreme weather events. In 2021, 5.04 million 
hectares were similarly impacted by hydro-meteorological calamities, causing significant 
agricultural losses. 
2. According to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), 310 out of
651 districts in India have been identified as climate  vulnerable, with 109 districts 
classified as ‘very high’ and 201 as ‘highly’ vulnerable. However, only 448 Climate 
Resilient Villages have been implemented in 151 districts —covering merely three 
villages per district—despite India having approximately 6.64 lakh villages. 
3. E
xisting programmes like the National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture,
under the National Action Plan on Climate Change, do not fully address the long -term 
and systemic impacts of climate change. Their coverage is limited, interventions 
scattered, and budgetary allocations inadequate. The Committee of Estimates (2024–25) 
has expressed concern over the neglect of many climate vulnerable regions due to 
financial constraints, despite the existential risks posed to agricultural livelihoods in these 
areas. 
4. The current insurance framework, including the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima
Yojana, does not sufficiently address the gradual decline in crop productivity caused by 
long-term climatic changes. There is no legal guarantee or statutory obligation to support 
farmers against persistent environmental stressors. The National Bank for Agricultural 
and Rural Development (NABARD) has noted the limited efficacy of crop insurance as 
a standalone remedy. The Bill seeks to mainstream climate justice for small and marginal 
farmers by formulation of a National Mission for Climate Resilient Agriculture to 
mitigate the impact of climate change on agricultural productivity and full- fledged 
involvement and support of both the Central and State Governments to undertake 
necessary measures for the effective implementation of the objectives of the Mission.  
 Hence, this Bill. 
R
ENUKA CHOWDHURY. 

8 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
       Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall take necessary 
measures to strengthen Climate Resilient Agriculture. Clause 6 of the Bill provides that 
the Central Government shall promote Climate Resilient Agriculture and the appropriate 
Government shall implement the National Mission for Climate Resilient Agriculture by 
expansion of Climate Resilient Villages and  Coastal Resilient Coastal Fishermen 
Villages.  Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the rejuvenation of dried water bodies in 
Climate Vulnerable Districts by the appropriate Government to improve water use 
efficiency, irrigation management and ensure water security. Clause 8 of the Bill provides 
for climate responsive pest management.  Sub-clause (3) of Clause 12 of the Bill provides 
that the appropriate Government shall adopt and implement insurance initiatives aimed 
at providing effective climate-related risk coverage to farmers.  Clause 14 provides th at 
the appropriate Government shall develop and strengthen hyperlocal weather forecasting 
and agro-climatic advisory services to support informed decision -making by farmers in 
Climate Vulnerable Districts.  Clause 15 of the Bill provides for the establishm ent of an 
Index-Based Cash Transfer mechanism to offer annual financial assistance to farmers in 
Climate Vulnerable Districts affected by adverse climatic events. Clause 16 provides that 
the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Government for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 
        The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure both of recurring and non -
recurring nature.  At this stage, while the exact expenditure cannot be determined, it is 
estimated that the implementation of the Index- Based Cash Transfer mechanism will  
involve a recurring expenditure of approximately   sixty thousand crore rupees per annum, 
benefitting around 6 crore farmers.  Additionally, a non- recurring capital expenditure of 
approximately 18,707.97 crore rupees is expected in the first year for infra structure 
related to Climate Resilient Villages, Coastal Resilient Coastal Fishermen Villages, and 
water body rejuvenation efforts.  

9 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
        Clause 17 of the Bill empowers empowers the appropriate Gover nment to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  
        As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power 
is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
to formulate the National Mission for Climate Resilient Agriculture 
 to mitigate the impact of climate change on agricultural 
 productivity and ensure justice for farmers and for 
 matters connected therewith and 
 incidental thereto. 
___________ 
(Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS―PMB(E)―143―16.03.2026. 