AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. LXIV of 2024 
THE CRIMINAL LAWS (REPEAL) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to repeal the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 and the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Laws (Repeal) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and 
commencement. 
5 2. The enactments specified in the Schedule are hereby repealed to the extent
mentioned in the fourth column thereof.
Repeal  of 
certain 
enactments. 
10 
3. The repeal by this Act of any enactment shall not affect the validity,
invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already done or suffered, or any
right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred, or any
remedy or proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or
from any debt, penalty, forfeiture, obligation, liability, claim or demand, or
Savings. 

 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any indemnity already granted, or punishment incurred in respect of any 
offence committed against any enactment so repealed or the proof of any past 
act or thing; nor affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in 
respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or 
punishment as aforesaid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Revival  of 
operation  of 
previous 
enactments. 
 4. The repeal of the enactments specified in the Schedule to this Act shall, with 
immediate effect, restore and revive the operation of the Indian Penal Code, 
1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872, as they stood prior to their repeal by the said enactments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 of 1860. 
 
 
 
2 of 1974. 
 
 
 
 
1 of 1872. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
3 
 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 2) 
 
REPEALS 
 
 
Year Act No. Short Title Extent of repeal 
 
2023 45 The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 The whole 
2023 46 The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 The whole 
2023 47 The Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 The whole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS), the Bharatiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita 
(BNSS), and the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam (BSA) were passed by the Lok 
Sabha on 20 th December 2023, and by the Rajya Sabha on 21 st December 2023. 
These legislations received the assent of the Hon‘ble President on 25 th December 
2023 and came into effect on 1 st July 2024. The promulgation of these laws 
represents a significant shift in India‘s legal framework, as they replaced the Indian 
Penal Code (IPC) 1860; the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) 1973; and the 
Indian Evidence Act 1872. 
The Union Government has hailed these laws as a modernization of India's 
legal system, yet both the process of their passage and their content have sparked 
significant concern, as no meaningful debate was held in Parliament, despite their 
profound implications for India's criminal justice framework. To add to the 
concerns, no substantial pre-legislative consultation within the public domain was 
conducted prior to the Bills being introduced in Parliament. At the core of the 
concern are the ambiguously worded provisions, a substantial expansion of police 
powers, broader discretion in arrests and investigation, extended remand periods, 
infringement of federal principles, etc. These Acts appears to diminish judicial 
oversight while bolstering state authority without adequate checks and balances. The 
vague nature of several clauses are likely to grant the Government broad latitude, 
stoking fears of arbitrary enforcement and casting the ominous shadow of a police 
state.  
Instead of implementing the recommendations of several Law Commissions 
for the betterment of the criminal justice system, these Acts have made superficial 
changes to the criminal laws of India. They do not adequately address the systemic 
delays and inefficiencies in the judicial process, such as slow trials, overcrowded 
prisons, and case backlogs. Despite claims of breaking from colonial legacies, these 
new criminal laws largely perpetuate the colonial-era philosophy. While the names 
of the laws have been Indianized and certain procedural updates made, the core 
structure—centered on state authority and punitive justice —remains largely 
unchanged. It represents a cosmetic revision of colonial-era codes, with some 
regressive modifications. Perhaps the most significant alteration has been the 
renumbering of the sections. 
The absence of adequate stakeholder consultation has further deepened these 
concerns. The Pre-Legislative Consultation Policy of 2014 mandates that draft 
legislation or key points in a brief note shall be made publicly available for at least 
thirty days. However, the draft versions of these Bills apparently were not released 
to the public. Although the Bills were referred to the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs, many of the Committee's recommendations seems to 
have been disregarded. The hurried passage of these Bills, with minimal input from 
neutral experts, civil society, and marginalized communities, reflects a concerning 
neglect of democratic participation in shaping legal reforms. 
These legislations have raised significant concerns for expanding the powers 
of law enforcement agencies, potentially leading to misuse and violations of civil 
liberties. Despite longstanding issues of alleged custodial torture and police brutality 
in the Indian criminal justice system, the new laws fail to include sufficient 
provisions addressing these concerns. The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 
allows police to detain individuals for up to 15 days intermittently during the first 40 

 
 
5 
 
or 60 days of a 60 or 90  day judicial custody period. This means a Magistrate may 
order that an accused person can be transferred from judicial custody back to police 
custody at any point beyond the first 15 days of arrest, even if judicial custody has 
already been granted. This staggered approach to police custody complicates bail 
applications, as courts will be more reluctant to grant bail during the entire remand 
period if the police have not exhausted all 15 days of custody. This practice 
contradicts Supreme Court guidelines, which generally stipulate that police custody 
should be confined to the first 15 days of remand.  
Another key indication that the new criminal laws aim to concentrate power 
in the hands of the police is seen in Section 172 of the BNSS, which mandates that 
all individuals must comply with the lawful directions of a pol ice officer. This 
section further stipulates that any person who resists, refuses, ignores, or disregards 
such directions may be taken into custody by the police officer and either presented 
before a Magistrate, or released in petty cases within 24 hours. Notably, this 
provision lacks any accompanying safeguards to protect citizens from potential 
abuse of this authority, effectively granting police officers broad discretion without 
corresponding accountability. This absence of checks arms the police with 
significant impunity and immunity from action in cases of wrongful use of their 
powers. It is to be read with the fact that Section 175(4) of the BNSS introduced 
new restrictions on the powers of Magistrates in ordering investigation against 
public servants arising from the discharge of their official duties. This new sub -
section stipulates that a Magistrate can order an investigation into such complaints 
only upon the compliance of two conditions: (a) after receiving a report containing 
the facts and circums tances of the incident from the superior officer of the accused 
public servant, and (b) after considering the response of the public servant as to the 
situation that led to the incident. A similar safeguard protecting police officers from 
accountability is found in Section 223 of the BNSS, which deals with Complaints to 
Magistrates. While the main body of Section 223 of BNSS reproduces Section 200 
of the CrPC regarding the examination of complainants, a crucial addition by way of 
Section 223(2) significantl y impacts a citizen's ability to seek redress for abuse of 
power by public officials even through the Courts of law. This new sub -section 
conditions the Court's ability to take cognizance of a complaint against a public 
servant by requiring (a) that the ac cused public servant be given an opportunity to 
explain the circumstances leading to the alleged incident, and (b) that a report on the 
facts be obtained from the superior officer of the accused. In practice, it is 
notoriously difficult to secure an admiss ion of wrongdoing from a public servant or 
an impartial report from a superior officer. Section 175(4) and section 223(2) of 
BNSS effectively codify this systemic administrative reluctance, creating a legal 
barrier that prevents citizens from approaching t he Courts with complaints of abuse 
of power by public officials.  
Section 436A of the repealed  Code of Criminal Procedure provided that any 
individual detained for a period amounting to half of the maximum sentence for the 
alleged offence —except where th e death penalty is a potential punishment —was 
entitled to be released on bail, with or without sureties. While section 479 of BNSS 
retains this provision, it introduces new significant restrictions. The new provision 
further excludes two key categories fro m its application: (i) offences punishable by 
life imprisonment, and (ii) cases where investigations, inquiries, or trials for multiple 
offences or more than one case are pending. These exclusions significantly narrow 
the scope of the provision, potentiall y disqualifying a large number of undertrial 
prisoners from receiving mandatory bail. Given that charge sheets often include 

 
 
6 
 
multiple offences, this change will disproportionately affect undertrial prisoners, 
further contributing to prolonged detentions without trial. 
The BNSS also permits the use of handcuffs in a wide range of situations, 
contradicting established rulings of the Supreme Court and guidelines set by the 
National Human Rights Commission. The Supreme Court has held that handcuffing 
is inhuman e, unreasonable, arbitrary, and in violation of Article 21 of the 
Constitution. It also held that in rare cases where handcuffs are necessary, the 
escorting authority must provide recorded reasons for their use, and under no 
circumstances can an undertrial  prisoner be handcuffed without judicial consent. 
However, these crucial safeguards have been disregarded in the new law, effectively 
undermining protections against the arbitrary use of handcuffs. 
Additionally, while the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendm ent) Act, 2005 
introduced section 311A in the erstwhile  CrPC empowering Magistrates to obtain 
handwriting or signature specimens from arrested individuals, the BNSS expands 
this authority. Under the new provisions, Magistrates can now also collect finger 
impressions and voice samples from individuals who are not even under arrest (Sec. 
349). This expansion comes at a time when the constitutional validity of the 
Criminal Procedure (Identification) Act, 2022 —which allows for broader data 
collection from criminals and accused persons—is under judicial scrutiny before the 
Delhi High Court. 
The new criminal laws significantly reduce judicial oversight, particularly in 
areas such as pre -trial detention. For instance, increased reliance on video 
conferencing for c ourt appearances, while aimed at improving efficiency, could 
compromise the fairness and transparency of judicial processes. This shift raises 
concerns about the potential infringement on fundamental rights, especially for 
marginalized communities, who may  lack access to digital infrastructure or the 
resources to defend themselves in this new system.  
Section 273 of the repealed  CrPC, which required that evidence be taken in 
the physical presence of the accused, has been altered in Section 308 of the BNSS. 
The new provision also allows for the accused‘s presence via audio-video electronic 
means, effectively undermining the right to a free and fair trial. This seriously 
infringes on the accused person‘s right to mount proper and effective defence. For 
those unable to secure bail, the requirement for physical presence in Court was a 
crucial safeguard, allowing accused individuals to meet with their lawyers and 
family members, and to actively engage in preparing their defence against the 
charges. By replacing this with audio -video conferencing, these critical rights are 
eroded, amounting to a serious violation of Article 21 of the Constitution. 
The Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam's focus on electronic evidence has also 
sparked serious concerns about data privacy and the risk of increased state 
surveillance. The lack of robust  safeguards for handling electronic evidence raises 
the potential for manipulation and selective targeting of individuals or groups. 
Questions have been raised about how this electronic evidence will be collected, 
authenticated, and utilized in Court, with  many fearing that the absence of clear 
protocols could undermine justice and due process. 
Several provisions in the new laws, particularly those addressing cybercrime, 
terrorism, and offences  against the state, are ambiguously worded, leaving them 
vulnerable to broad interpretation. Such vague definitions could be misused by 
authorities to target individuals based on subjective criteria, resulting in arbitrary 

 
 
7 
 
enforcement. This approach risks overcriminalization, leading to overcrowded 
prisons and dispropo rtionately affecting marginalized communities that are more 
vulnerable to state actions. The combination of expanded police powers and broad 
legal provisions creates significant potential for misinterpretation and misuse.  
Moreover, the inclusion of organi zed crime and terrorism into the general 
criminal law framework overlaps with existing special laws, such as the highly 
criticised Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (UAPA). This redundancy 
may create confusion and lead to inefficiencies in enforce ment. A crucial question 
arises as to why there is a push for a general law when specialized laws are already 
in place. Integrating laws pertaining to terrorism and organized crime into the 
ordinary penal framework could also result in significant ambiguit y regarding legal 
procedures and jurisdiction. Provisions of the UAPA that address terrorism, 
punishments for terrorist acts and for recruiting individuals for terrorist activities 
have largely been replicated in Section 113 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,  2023. 
This duplication could lead to prosecution for the same offence under two different 
laws by two separate agencies —the National Investigation Agency and local state 
police—thereby exacerbating confusion. 
Similarly, the offence of sedition has been retained in Section 152 of the BNS 
with an overly broad and vague definition, effectively making it more stringent and 
contravening the spirit of the Supreme Court's directions on this matter. Terms such 
as "subversive activities" and "separatist activities"  remain undefined, apart from 
leaving it unclear how to assess what constitutes encouragement of "feelings" related 
to separatist activities or what actions might endanger the sovereignty, unity, or 
integrity of India. Given these imprecise and sweeping pr ovisions, Section 152 is 
highly susceptible to misuse and abuse. In a vast and diverse country like India, 
raising grievances on behalf of different castes, communities, or groups could easily 
be interpreted as promoting separatist tendencies by these vagu e provisions. The 
reach of the new provision is extensive and could encompass a wide range of 
activities that the State may label as encouraging subversive or separatist sentiments, 
or threatening the nation's sovereignty and integrity. For instance, a cas te group 
advocating for its rightful share of reservation benefits, educational quotas, or 
development funding may find itself accused of fostering separatist feeling. This 
shift clearly aims to suppress and silence democratic voices by criminalizing non -
violent protests, agitation, and citizen campaigns against government policies. 
Section 152 can be weaponized against any form of democratic dissent or assertion.  
Reflecting the overarching theme of the new laws that empower the police 
and state with extens ive authority from the moment of arrest until the conclusion of 
a trial, the BNSS introduces a provision for the seizure, attachment, and distribution 
of property pending trial. Under Section 107 of the BNSS, a police officer 
investigating a case may appro ach the jurisdictional Court for attachment if they 
have reason to believe that any property belonging to the accused is derived from or 
obtained—directly or indirectly —as a result of criminal activity. Sections 107(5) to 
(7) stipulate that if the Court be lieves that issuing a notice would thwart the intent of 
the attachment or seizure, it may issue an ex parte  interim order for the direct 
attachment or seizure of the property in question. Moreover, it also provides that if 
the Court or Magistrate determine s that the attached or seized property constitutes 
proceeds of crime, the Court shall direct the District Magistrate to distribute such 
proceeds to the affected parties within 60 days. It is crucial to note that these 
significant powers can be exercised so lely based on accusations from police 

 
 
8 
 
officials, even before giving the accused the opportunity for a fair trial to establish 
their innocence or guilt.  
Similarly, the new laws grant police arbitrary powers in cases where the 
prescribed jail term is less t han seven years. Police can refuse to file FIRs for crimes 
punishable by imprisonment between three to seven years and can take a 14 -day 
period to assess the validity of allegations. This discretion has been introduced 
despite several Supreme Court rulings  mandating police to register FIRs 
immediately upon receiving complaints from victims, aimed at curbing corruption. 
The Supreme Court's ruling in Lalita Kumari vs. State of  Uttar Pradesh underscored 
the necessity of immediate FIR registration based on the  substance of a complaint, 
effectively ending the prior practice of police delaying or avoiding case 
registrations. The introduction of new twin preconditions in Section 173(3) of the 
BNSS—requiring prior permission from the Deputy Superintendent of Police  for 
preliminary inquiries or investigations  and granting police discretion to conduct 
preliminary inquiries before filing an FIR—directly contradicts these Supreme Court 
directives. The implications of such a mechanism are manifold. The BNSS 
delineates ar ound 100 different offences with imprisonment terms ranging from 
three to seven years, thereby bestowing upon investigating officers unchecked 
discretion to determine whether a prima facie case exists warranting immediat e FIR 
registration. These offenc es e ncompass theft, cheating, criminal breach of trust, 
dishonestly receiving stolen property, rioting with a deadly weapon, and exploitation 
of trafficked persons, among others. Previously, it was the exclusive domain of the 
criminal Courts to ascertain the e xistence of a prima facie case after reviewing all 
material evidence. By empowering police officers to make this determination at such 
an early stage —merely upon receiving information —the risk of power abuse 
becomes evident. This alteration threatens to re vive previous challenges faced by 
complainants in seeking redress, heightening the potential for misuse of authority.  
Furthermore, the aforementioned provision has detrimental effects on 
individuals accused of an offence as well. The requirement for a prel iminary inquiry 
prior to the registration of an FIR creates confusion for potential accused 
individuals, who are not even aware whether they are an accused or not. It is a 
fundamental tenet of criminal law that investigations only begin following the 
registration of an FIR. Under the new criminal laws, individuals can be summoned 
to respond to police notices without even being aware of the specific allegations 
against them. Since no FIR exists at the time of the preliminary inquiry, there is no 
obligation t o provide a copy of it to such individuals, which undermines the 
safeguards established by the Supreme Court in Youth Bar Association of India vs. 
Union of India and Others, which mandates that a copy of the FIR must be provided 
even before the stage of Se ction 207 of the CrPC. This new preliminary inquiry 
requirement resembles a key aspect of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 
2002, regarding the status of the individual receiving notices or summons: is the 
individual being summoned as an accused or a s a witness? This situation may 
compel individuals to provide information without being confronted with the 
incriminating evidence against them, which raises significant constitutional 
concerns, particularly the right against self -incrimination enshrined i n Article 20(3) 
of the Constitution. 
Similarly, the BNSS has introduced an apparently  troubling new provision in 
Section 356, which pertains to the ‗inquiry, trial, or judgment in absentia of 
proclaimed offender.‘ This section allows for the trial of indiv iduals declared as 

9 
‗proclaimed offenders‘—those who have absconded to evade trial —when there is no 
immediate prospect of their arrest. Under this provision, the absence of the accused 
is considered a waiver of their right to be present during the trial, enabling the Court 
to proceed as if the individual were present and to deliver a judgment accordingly. 
This provision represents a significant violation of fundamental principles of 
criminal justice, particularly the principle of ‗ audi alteram partem, ‘ which asserts 
that no one should be punished without having the opportunity to be heard. 
Particularly concerning is the proviso to Section 356(7), which stipulates that no 
appeal against a conviction shall be entertained after the lapse of three years from 
the date of the judgment, if the accused was tried in absentia. This raises a grave 
question: What if a death sentence or imprisonment for life has been imposed, and 
the accused voluntarily appears before the Court after the three-year period? Such an 
individual would be deprived of any opportunity to present their version of events or 
prove their innocence by mounting a defence —something that only the accused 
individual can do effectively. 
Another key issue is with the mandatory Zero FIR registration- filing o f 
complaints regardless of jurisdiction- which leads to procedural ambiguity; 
particularly regarding actions after an FIR is filed. While Zero FIRs enable victims 
to file complaints outside jurisdictional limits, potential misuse could arise, such as 
complainants filing FIRs in distant locations to harass the accused, allowing 
unwarranted enquiry by out- of-jurisdiction police, etc. Moreover, the law is unclear 
about the time frame for transferring such cases to the appropriate jurisdiction, 
potentially leading to delays and miscarriages of justice. 
Furthermore, these laws have faced criticism for undermining India‘s federal 
structure. Section 477 of the BNSS, which grants the State Government the authority 
to remit or commute sentences for certain types of offences or investigation by 
central agencies under other central Acts, has undergone a subtle yet significant 
change that challenges the core principles of federalism enshrined in the Indian 
Constitution. Section 477 of the BNSS is almost a verbatim reproduction of Section 
435 of the repealed CrPC, with one notable alteration - the original provision in 
CrPC allowed the State Governments to exercise those powers after ―consultation 
with the Central Government,‖ which has now been changed to ―concurrence wit h 
the Central Government‖ This shift from ‗consultation‘ to ‗concurrence‘ 
fundamentally undermines the federal principles inherent in the Indian Constitution. 
This change is not merely cosmetic; it reflects a broader pattern in the BNSS aimed 
at centralizing authority within the police and concentrating power with the Central 
Government. Criminal law falls under the Concurrent List, which permits both the 
Union and the States to legislate. However, the centralized nature of these new laws 
restricts the States' ability to tailor criminal laws to their unique contexts and 
challenges.  
Similarly, Section 226 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita addresses "attempt to 
commit suicide to compel or restrain exercise of lawful power" - introducing a new 
provision in India‘ s penal law. This provision has the potential to effectively 
criminalize even those individuals who engage in hunger strikes as a form of civic 
protest, imposing penalties of up to one year of simple imprisonment. From the era 
of Mahatma Gandhi and the Satyagraha Movement, hunger strikes have been 
recognized as a legitimate, non-violent method for articulating democratic demands. 
Historically, non-violent and democratic forms of protest have been viewed as valid 
expressions of dissent in India. However, Section 226 now criminalizes this 

 
 
10 
 
essential aspect of democratic protest, framing it as a criminal act. This shift is likely 
to deter citizens from exercising their fundamental rights to organize, express 
dissent, and challenge government schemes and policies. 
The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita has entirely omitted Section 377 of the Indian 
Penal Code, which pertains to "unnatural sex." It is important to note that the 
Supreme Court had earlier read down Section 377 IPC in the landmark case of 
Navtej Singh Johar vs. Union of India (2018), decriminalizing consensual same -sex 
relations between adults. However, the Court maintained that Section 377 could still 
be invoked in cases of non -consensual sexual activity involving adults, acts of 
bestiality (sexual intercourse w ith animals), etc. The complete removal of Section 
377 IPC from the BNS creates a legal void concerning the protection of adults and 
animals from unnatural sexual violence.  
The gravity of these issues cannot be overstated. They also pose a significant 
threat to the delicate balance between state authority and individual freedom. The 
changes introduced by the new Criminal Acts undermine crucial legal protections, 
erode accountability mechanisms, and curtail legitimate forms of dissent and protest, 
among others. As lawmakers, we have a profound responsibility to respond to these 
pressing concerns. The proposed Bill seeks to address these critical issues by 
repealing the new criminal laws and reinstating the Indian Penal Code (IPC), the 
Code of Criminal Proced ure (CrPC), and the Indian Evidence Act. This restoration 
is essential not only for safeguarding the rights of individuals but also for preserving 
the foundational principles of justice and equity that underpin our legal system. We 
have to reaffirm our com mitment to a just and humane society where the rule of law 
prevails over arbitrary authority.  
Hence, this Bill. 
 
 JOHN BRITTAS 

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to repeal the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 and the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023. 
(Dr. John Brittas, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—087–10.02.2025. 