AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LXIV of 2001

THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR NATURAL DISASTER
MANAGEMENT BILL, 2001
A
BILL

to provide for the establishment of a Commission for Management of National Natural
Disasters and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —

1. (7) This Act inay be called the National Commission for Natural Disaster Man- Short _ title
agement Act, 2001. extent and
‘commencement.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with’ immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:— Definitions.

(a) “Commission" means the National Commission for Natural Disaster Man-
agement constituted under section 3 of this Act.


(9) "disaster" means a natural disaster arising from an earthquake, cyclonic
storm, floods, famines, droughts and such other calamitiés affecting a large area
including the devastation caused by big fires or any other calamity so proclaimed
by a notification by the Central Government or the Commission;

(० "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

Constitution of 3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette es-
aNationdl Com- tablish a Commission to be known as the National Commission for Natural Disaster
mission
aster Manage- Management.
‘ment. (2) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at Hyderabad in Andhra
Pradesh.
(3) The Commission on shall consist of the following:—

(i) One Chairperson who shall be one of the Chief Minister of disaster prone
States, chosen by rotation for a period of five years by the Chief Ministers of such
States;

(ii) Union Finance Minister and Union Agriculture Minister;
(iii) Finance Minister and Agriculture Minister of all disaster prone States;
(iv) One Member of Parliament from each disaster prone State.

Functions of 4, (1) The Commission shall carry out or any of the following functions: —

the Commis-

sion and regula- (०) to lay down a National Policy 10 Natural Disaster Management;

ti f the

functions, ° (b) to provide for schemes and plans for management of national natural dis-

aster and measures to be taken in anticipation of such calamities and damage con-
trol measures to minimize and mitigate the destruction and devastations resulting
therefrom;

(c) to provide for management of relief and rehabilitation of the victims;
(d) to maintain a Disaster Management Fund.

(2) The Commission shall have the power to regulate the functions enumerated in
sub-section (1) and for matters connected therewith.

Secretariat of 5. (1) The Commission shall have a Secretariat consisting of such officers, employ-
Commission. ges and establishment, as may be prescribed.

(2) The conditions of service, emoluments and other perks of the officers and em-
ployees shall be such, as may be prescribed from time to time.

Funds of the 6. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time, after due appro-

Commission. _ priation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, adequate funds for the purposes
of this Act.

Annual Reports 4. The Commission shall submit an annual Report, in such form and in such man-

ofthe Commis- ner, as may be prescribed, of its activities of managing natural disaster to the President of

son. India who shall cause the Report to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

Power to make 8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
tales. to carry out the purposes of this Act.

20

25

30

35


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Cyclones, Earthquakes, Floods, Droughts and other natural calamities have been
causing massive devastations and disasters, without any forecast or warning. Cyclones are
followed by Super-cyclones and earthquakes of greater intensity which hit different parts
of the country. The recent earthquakes in Gujarat which turned several towns, cities and
villages in and around Bhuj into heaps of rubble, put the casualities roughly over a lakh.

Floods and droughts hit different parts of the country perennially with ever increas-
ing severity, magnitude often beyond measure.

Since Independence, number of earthquakes, floods and droughts continued to de-
stroy the crops, properties and large number of people become of such disasters. There is
no proper agency go look after these calamities and the States have to always depend on
the Centre for help and assistance. The earthquake of Gujarat has felt a need of having a
permanent Commission which will be provided with powers to manage such disasters in
future. This Commission will immediately go into the details of the disaster and. provide
all kinds of help and assistance to the affected people without waiting for any Govern-
ment. This Commission will be an autonomous body and can manage the disasters at their
own level without consulting or indulgence of any Government. Hence, there is a need to
have a permanent body for managing such disasters.

Hence this Bill.
RUMANDLA RAMACHANDRAIAH


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a National Commission for Natural
Disaster Management, and Clause 6 envisages setting up of a disaster Management Fund.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees two crore per annum from the Consoli-
dated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of Legislative Power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL .

to provide for the establishment of a Commission for Management of National Natural
Disasters and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

(Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3186RS—31.10.2001.