AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024
Bill No. LXIV of 2023 
THE MATERNITY BENEFIT FOR WOMEN IN THE UNORGANISED 
SECTOR BILL, 2023
A 
BILL 
to provide state-sponsored maternity benefits to women working in the unorganised sector by 
establishing a National Maternity Benefit Welfare Board, Maternity Benefit Fund etc.,  
and for maters connected therewith and incidental thereto. 
         BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:– 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maternity Benefit for Women in the
Unorganised Sector Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, and 
commencement. 
10 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appropriate Government" means the Government governing the territory
in which the woman undergoes her delivery, miscarriage or medical
termination of pregnancy which shall be in the case of a State, t he
Government of that State; in the case of a Union Territory, the Union
Territory Administration and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Definitions. 

2 
(b) ―Board‖ means the National Maternity Benefit Welfare Board established
under section 10 of the Act;
(c) ―child‖ includes a still-born child;
(d) ―delivery‖ means the birth of a child;
(e) ―employer‖ means a person or an association of persons, who has engaged
or employed a woman to work at a workplace either directly or otherwise for
remuneration;
(f) ―Fund‖ means the Maternity Benefit Fund established under section 12 of
the Act;
(g) ―maternity benefit‖ means the payment referred to in section 4 of the Act;
(h) ―medical termination of pregnancy‖ means the termination of pregnancy
permissible under th e provisions of Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act,
1971;
(i) ―miscarriage‖ means expulsion of the contents of a pregnant uterus at any
period prior to or during the twenty -sixth week of pregnancy but does not
include any miscarriage, the causing of whi ch is punishable under the Indian
Penal Code;
(j) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(k) ―unorganised sector‖ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the
Code on Wages, 2019.
(l) ―wages‖ means all remuneration paid or payable in cash to a woman
working at a workplace, in respect of her employment or engagement or of
work done in such employment or engagement and includes:
(i) such cash allowances (including dearness allowance and hous e rent
allowance) as a woman is for the time being entitled to;
(ii) incentive bonus; and
(iii) the money value of the concessional supply of food grains and other
articles,
but does not include: 
(i) any bonus other than incentive bonus;
(ii) over-time earnings and any deduct ion or payment made on account
of fines; and
(iii) any gratuity payable on the termination of service;
(m) ―woman‖ means a woman self -employed or employed, whether directly
or through any agency and entitled for wages at any workplace in the
unorganised sector including a worker in the organised sector who is not
covered by any of the Acts mentioned in Schedule II to Code on Wages, 2019;
5 
10 
15 
20 
25
30 
35 
34 of 1971. 
45 of 1860. 
29 of 2019. 
29 of 2019. 

3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(n) ―work‖ means any physical or other labour performed by a woman 
contributing to the economy at any given point o f time, including but not 
limited to subsidiary status activity, seasonal economic activity, engagement 
in informal establishments, and self -employed roles such as tailoring, 
processing agricultural produce, livestock care, and domestic labour; and  
 
(o) ―workplace‖ means any place where women engage in work at any given 
point of time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
3. (1) No woman shall be knowingly engaged at any workplace during the six 
weeks immediately following the day of her delivery, miscarriage, or medical 
termination of pregnancy. 
 
(2) No woman, already employed or engaged at any work place, shall work 
during the six weeks immediately following the day of her delivery, 
miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy. 
 
(3) No pregnant woman shall, on a request being made by her in this behalf, 
be required to do during the period specified in sub -section (4), any wor k 
which is of an arduous nature or which involves long hours of standing, or 
which in any way is likely to interfere with her pregnancy or in the normal 
development of the foetus, or is likely to cause her miscarriage or otherwise to 
adversely affect her health. 
 
(4) The period referred to in sub-section (3) shall be: 
 
(a) the period of one month immediately preceding the period of six 
weeks, before the date of her expected delivery; 
 
(b) any period during the period of six weeks for which the pregnant 
woman does not avail leave of absence. 
 
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, the expression ―any work of 
arduous nature‖ shall mean any work which involves or requires strenuous 
physical or mental effort or is difficult and tiring in nature. 
 
 Prohibition of 
employment or 
engagement of 
women at any 
workplace 
during certain 
periods of 
maternity. 
29 of 2019. 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
4. (1) Every woman working at a workplace, and registered under this Act 
as per the provisions of section 9, shall be entitled to the payment of 
maternity benefit from the appropriate Government, at the rate of the 
average daily wage for the period of her actual  absence, that is to say, the 
period immediately preceding the day of her delivery, the actual day of 
her delivery and any period immediately following that day: 
 
Explanation.- For the purpose of this sub -section, the ―average daily wage‖ 
means the average of the woman’s wages payable to her for the days on which 
she has worked during the period of two calendar months immediately 
preceding the date from which she absents herself on account of maternity, the 
minimum rate of wage fixed or revised under the Co de on Wages, 2019, 
whichever is the highest. 
 
(2) No woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit unless she has worked at a 
workplace for a period of not less than thirty days in the twelve months 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to 
payment of 
maternity 
benefit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
immediately preceding the date of her expected delivery: 
Explanation.- For the purpose of this sub -section, the days on which a woman 
has actually worked at a workplace, the days for which she has been laid off 
or was absent from duty during holidays declared under any law for the time 
being in force to be holida ys with wages, during the period of twelve months 
immediately preceding the date of her expected delivery, shall be taken into 
account. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Notice of claim 
for maternity 
benefit and 
payment 
thereof. 
 5. (1) Any woman working at a workplace and entitled to maternity benefit 
under section 4 of the Act, may give notice, in writing at any hospital, wholly 
or partially managed by the appropriate Government, or Anganwadi Centre 
stating that her maternity benefit a nd any other amount to which she may be 
entitled under this Act may be paid to her or to such person as she may 
nominate in the notice and that she will not work at any workplace during the 
period for which she receives maternity benefit. 
 
(2) In the case of a woman who is pregnant, such notice shall state the date 
from which she will be absent from work, not being a date earlier than eight 
weeks from the date of her expected delivery. 
 
(3) Any woman who has not given the notice when she was pregnant may 
give such notice as soon as possible after her delivery. 
 
(4) On receipt of the notice, the appropriate Government, through a nodal 
agency, as may be established by the appropriate Government in such manner 
as may be prescribed, shall disburse the amount of maternity benefit within 
seventy-two hours of production of the said notice: 
 
Provided that a woman who has given the notice has also produced her 
Maternity Benefit Card, as provided under sub -section (2) of section 9, to 
avail the requisite payment. 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
Payment of 
maternity 
benefit in case 
of death of a 
woman. 
 6. If a woman entitled to maternity benefit under section 4, dies before 
receiving such maternity benefit, the appropriate Government shall pay 
such benefit to the person nominated by the woman in the notice given 
under sub-section (1) of section 5 and in cas e there is no such nominee, to 
the caregiver of the child born to such woman. 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
Crèche facility  7. Every woman  shall have the right to avail common crèche facility run by the 
appropriate Government, and municipality in the vicinity of their workplace. 
  
Dismissal for 
absence during 
pregnancy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. When a woman absents herself from work in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act, it shall be unlawful for her employer to discharge or dismiss her 
during or thereafter on account of such absence or to give notice of discharge 
or dismissal on such a day that the notice will expire during such absence, or 
to vary to her disadvantage any of the conditions of her service. 
 
 
35 
 
Registration for 
availing 
maternity 
benefit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. (1) Every woman shall be required to be registered for the purpose of availing 
benefits under the Act. 
 
(2) A woman shall make an application for registration along with an identity 
proof in such form and manner, as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government, and such worker shall be provided with a unique Maternity 
Benefit Card, which may be produced at any no dal agency in the country, as 
 
40 
 
 
 

5 
5 
defined under sub-section (4) of section 5: 
Provided that the system of electronic registration maintained by the 
appropriate Government shall also provide for self -registration by any 
such worker in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
(3) A registered woman shall be eligible to avail the benefits under the Act.
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
10. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a National Maternity Benefit Welfare Board, for the purposes of
carrying out the welfare measures under the Act.
(2) The National Maternity Benefit Welfare Board shall be th e nodal
authority,-
(a) to collect and to expend the proceeds of contribution collected
under Maternity Benefit Fund, as provided under section 12 of the
Act;
(b) to take any relevant measures for effective implementation of the
Act; and
(c) responsible fo r any other duty as may be assigned to it by the
Central Government, from time to time.
(3) The Board shall be comprised of a Chairperson and such number of
members, as may be prescribed.
(4) The qualifications and experience, term of office, salaries,
remuneration and other allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and members of the Board, shall
be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Board shall have its head office in New Delhi with offices in the
capital city of each State and Union Territory, as may be prescribed.
(6) The Board may appoint such other officers and employees, as it
considers necessary, for the efficient discha rge of its functions under this
Act.
(7) The qualifications and experience, terms and conditions of service
including salary and allowances of the officers and employees of the
Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
National 
Maternity 
Benefit Welfare  
Board. 
35 
40 
11. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up a toll -free call centre or helpline
or such facilitation centres as may be considered necessary, from time to time,
to perform any or more of the following functions, namely:––
(a) to disseminate information on the available maternity benefits under
the Act, and other available social security schemes for women;
(b) to facilitate filing, processing and forwarding of application forms for
registration of women;
(c) to assist beneficiaries under the Act in the registration process;
Helpline, 
facilitation 
centre, etc., and 
awareness 
measures. 

6 
 
(d) to facilitate enrolment of the registered beneficiaries; 
(e) to assist beneficiaries in submission of notice of claim for maternity 
benefit and obtaining the requisite amount. 
 
(2) The appropriate Govern ment shall promote awareness of the benefits 
available under the Act by conducting education and information campaigns 
to raise awareness of maternity benefits amongst the targeted beneficiaries.  
 
(3) The appropriate Government shall publish information in  public domain, 
annually, regarding: 
(a) the number of beneficiaries under the Act; 
(b) the number of registered women under the Act; 
(c) the data on the condition of physical infrastructure of the appropriate 
Government for supporting the beneficiaries;  
(d) the total amounts disbursed by the appropriate Government under the 
Act; and 
(e) the total number of complaints instituted, pending, resolved, and 
withdrawn before courts, under the Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
Maternity 
Benefit Fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a Fund to be called the Maternity Benefit Fund, for the 
purposes of implementing the provisions of this Act. 
 
(2) The Central Government, shall from time to time, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, contribute such 
sums of money and/or funds, as may be necessary, to the Fund for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 
(3) The Fund shall be under the control of the Central Government and 
there shall be credited thereto such contributions in the form of 1 per 
cent. of the average net profits from companies incorporated under the 
Companies Act, 2013, which engage in the provi sion of healthcare and 
pharmaceutical goods and services, and fulfill any of the following 
conditions in the preceding financial year: 
(a) has a net worth of more than Rupees 500 crores; 
(b) turnover of more than Rupees 1000 crores; 
(c) net profit of more than Rupees 5 crores. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 of 2013. 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
 13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 
 
  
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
 
 
 
 
14. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of 
this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder. 
 
 
 
 
 
35  

7 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
15. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 
(2) Every rule and every regulation made by the Central Government under 
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one sessi on or in two or more successive sessions and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the r ule or regulation 
should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule.  
 
(3) Every rule and every regulation made by the State Government under this 
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the 
State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or wh ere such Legislature 
consists of one House, before that House. 
 
 
 Power to make 
rules. 
  

8 
 
 STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 
           In India, maternity provisions encompass the rights of biological, commissioning, and 
surrogate mothers and are protected by labo ur laws and associated programs. The 
Constitution of India acknowledges maternity entitlements as part of its Directive Principles 
of State Policy, with a commitment to ensure maternity re lief. The Maternity Benefit Act, 
1961 (amended in 2017) provides various benefits, such as 26 weeks of paid leave for 
childbirth, crèches at workplaces, nursing breaks, paid leave for abortion/miscarriage, and 
paid leave for commissioning mothers and women adopting a child under three mon ths. The 
law also prohibits termination of employment due to pregnancy.    
 
 
However, the 2017 amendment mainly benefits women in formal employment and 
overlooks those in the informal sector. Eligibility criteria, such as workin g for a specific 
employer for a certain duration, exclude many women, even with formal employment, due to 
precarious work arrangements. The requirement has been reduced to 80 days in the 2020 
Social Security Code, but it still doesn't fully address the cha llenges faced by women workers  
employed in various sectors . Unfortunately, there is no available data on how many women 
utilize the provisions of the amended Maternity Benefit Act of 2017, and there is a lack of 
information about the functioning of worksite crèches provided under this A ct. A 2019 study 
on IT/ITES companies revealed that many employers were unaware of the 2017 amendment, 
and a significant number lacked worksite crèche facilities despite having more than 50 
employees. 
 
 
Various other labour legislations in India are linked to maternity benefits. However, it 
excludes many women, especially those in the informal sector, due to strict eligibility criteria. 
Sectoral labor laws like the Factories Act , 1948 and the Plantation Labo ur Act , 1951 are 
related to maternity benefits. Some other labor laws, such as the Beedi and Cigar Workers 
(Conditions of Employment) Act, 1966, and the Building and Other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996, offer consolidated  
maternity benefits, but the amounts vary across States. Implementation of these benefits is 
hindered by poor awareness, improper worker registration, and lack of government 
monitoring. 
 
 
The Unorganis ed Sec tor Workers Social Security Act, 2008 provides li mited 
maternity benefits, primarily through the Janani Suraksha Yojana  (JSY) scheme, which 
focuses on incentivizing institutional deliveries and does not offer wage compensation. While 
the JSY reaches many women, it has limitations and doesn't align with t he goals of a 
comprehensive maternity benefit scheme. The National Food Security Act, 2013, mandates 
cash provisions for pregnant women, but the Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana  Yojana 
(PMMVY), the scheme under this Act, has restrictions and offers a lower amo unt than 
specified. The newly passed Social Security Code, 2020, replaces the Maternity Benefit Act, 
1961, and other labo ur laws. While it offers progressive provisions for women in the formal 
sector, it doesn't adequately address the needs of women in the  informal sector, leaving it up 
to the  Central and State G overnments to notify and implement schemes with no clear 
commitments for these women. NFHS 5 data reveals a correlation between women's 
education and declining fertility rates. Women with no schooli ng have more children on an 
average than those with 12 or more years of schooling. Economic betterment is associated 
with lower fertility rates. However, government schemes for m aternal welfare in the 
unorganised sector, relying on meager cash transfers co nditional on institutional deliveries for 
 
  

9 
 
the first child only, seem incongruent with the higher  fertility rates among unorganis ed sector 
women, as indicated by public data. This discrepancy raises questions about the effectiveness 
of current maternal welf are initiatives. Complex paperwork, limited eligibility criteria, and a  
focus on women in established workplaces further restrict the scheme's reach. This approach 
contradicts WHO guidelines for a six -month period of exclusive breastfeeding, leading to 
difficult ch oices for women in the unorganis ed sector, and contributing to high infant 
mortality rates during the first birth.  
 
 
In India, there is a pressing need to address the issue of maternity provisions for 
women in the informal workforce. While states  like Telangana brilliantly set an example by 
providing maternity benefits of Rupees 30,000 for registered women workers, wives of 
registered male workers, and two daughters of the registered worker up to two deliveries, a 
lack of centralized legislation h as put the onus on uneven schemes disbursed by different 
States. Over 90 per cent. of women workers in the country are excluded from accessing wage -
linked maternity benefits despite national and international commitments. To tackle this 
problem, the bill takes into account several key considerations:  
 
 
1. Recognizing Unpaid Work: Women 's work, particularly in household activities like 
tailoring, fuel collection, agricultural processing, and care work, often goes unrecognized 
and unpaid. Maternity provisions should be universally defined to include all women, 
acknowledging their producti ve but unpaid contributions. The B ill defines work and 
workplace to encompass any physical work that a woman does which contributes to the 
economy.  
 
 
2. Inclusion of Informal Workers: Many women in the labo ur force work in informal jobs 
with low pay, irre gular employment, and play multiple roles. Improved registration and 
social security coverage are needed to include these women in maternity provisions.  
 
 
3. Redefining the Employer -Employee Relationship: The traditional employer -employee 
relationship does n't adequately apply to the informal workforce. The S tate should take 
primary responsibility for ensuring maternity provisions for all women and develop 
mechanisms for collecting employer contributions. A centralized maternity and childcare 
welfare fund has been suggested for this purpose. 
 
 
4. Uniform Wage -Linked Provisions: A consistent principle of providing wage -linked 
maternity provisions for at least six months should be applied to all women. In the formal 
sector, this means six months of paid leave, while in the informal sector, it shou ld be 
linked to minimum wages for six months.  
 
 
5. Registration: The provision of social security benefits relies on workers being officially 
enrolled in the program. It is crucial to assign local authorities, including labo ur boards, 
health departments, Anganwadi centers, district officers, and ASHA workers, with the 
responsibility of raising awareness, actively identifying eligible women, and assisting 
them in the registration proce ss as mandated by the law. The Bill  advocates for a unique 
Maternity Benefit Card upon registration, which is valid across S tates to address the issue 
of exclusionary measures that arise from migration.  
 
 

10 
6. Decentralized Distribution: The maternity benefit amount needs to be substantial and
regularly reviewed, moving away from tokenistic approaches. Integration with other laws,
such as the National Food Security Act 2013, should be considered, and a unified system
for distributing maternity benefits from various sources must be established.
Decentralizing the distribution syste m is crucial to ensure that benefits effectively reach
women at the grassroots level.
Mary Wollstonecraft, an 18 th-century feminist, presents two paths for women's 
citizenship: one emphasizing equality in the workforce, overlooking inherent differences,  and 
the other recognizing the value of unpaid domestic work. Despite policy advancements, 
women are often relegated to the private sphere, perpetuating their status as the "second sex." 
Contemporary feminist perspectives highlight marginalized women rejec ting the stigma 
around their work and asserting empowerment by preserving their valued skills. However, 
conditional cash transfer schemes may push women back to the private sphere during 
pregnancy or compel them to merge  private and public labor. The B ill advocates for 
celebrating pregnancy for women of all backgrounds and occupations, emphasizing the need 
to recognize women's dual roles as both careerists and mothers and their diverse contributions 
to the economy. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above-said objectives. 
K.R. SURESH REDDY 

11 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
         Clause 4  of the Bill  provides for the payment of maternity benefits t o the registered 
beneficiaries. Clause 6 provides for payment of maternity benefit in case of death of a  woman 
before receipt of maternity benefit . Clause 10 provides for establishment of the National 
Maternity Benefit Welfare Board  and appointment of a Chairperson and Members therein  along 
with other officers and employees as may be required . Clause 12 provides for the establishment 
of the Maternity Benefit Fund.  The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non -recurring 
and recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this juncture, it is 
difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 

12 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
      Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative 
power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
__________________ 
 A  
BILL 
to provide state-sponsored maternity benefits to women working in the unorganised sector by 
establishing a National Maternity Benefit Welfare Board, Maternity Benefit Fund etc., and for 
maters connected therewith and incidental thereto. 
___________________ 
(Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)-046-05.02.2024