AS INTRODUCED IN THE IRASYA-SABHA

Bill No, LXIV of 2000

THE PREVENTION OF COW SLAUGHTER BILL, 2000
A
BILL

To prohibit the slaughter of cow and its progeny to increase the milching and other livestock
of the nation and to respect the religious sentiments attached with the Cow of the
largest segment of the citizens of the country and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cow Slaughter Act, 2000;
(2) It extends to the whole of India;
(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires, “cow” includes a bull, bullock,
ox, heifer or calf.

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
any usage or custom or dietary habits to the contrary, no person shall slaughter or cause to
be slaughtered or offer or cause to be offered for slaughter any cow at any place.

Short title ex-
tent and Com-
mencement.

Definition.

Prohibition
of slaughter
of Cow.


Prohibition of 4. No person shall sell or offer for sale or cause to be sold beef or beef products in any

sale of beef. form,

Penalty. 5. Whoever slaughters a cow or sells beef or beef products shall be punished with
imprisonment which shall not be less than three years but may extend to ten years and with
fine-which shall not be less than rupces twenty five thousand but may extend to rupees one
lakh.

Central and 6. It shall be the duty of the Central and State Governments to establish such

State number of Gaushalas as may be required to keep stray and old cows therein and to look

Govern- . ith a ‘d medicinal lar basi

ments to set fter them and provide them with adequate fodder and medicinal care on regular basis.

up

Gaushalas

for stray and
old cows.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 48 of our Constitution enjoins upon the State to organise agriculture and
animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and take steps for preserving and improv-
ing the breeds and prohibiting the slaughter of cows and calves. This directive has been
given by the Constitution and more so cow is considered sacred as “Gaumata” by the
believers of the Hinduism as, according to Hindu mythology, cow is the mother of Lord
Vishnu. Religious sentiments of overwhelming section of the society are, therefore, also
attached with cow,

The origin of the demand for banning of slaughter of cow in our country, sought for
by several social and religious leaders from time to time, can be tracked back even in the
freedom movement of India from colonial British rule in the middle of 19th Century and
Acharya Vinobha Bhabc in the recent past. The freedom movement, known in the history as
the Namdhari or Kooka movement, launched by Guru Ram Singh at Bhaini Sahib, a village
in Ludhiana district, on Baisakhi day in 1858, under the shadow of the “Sepoy Mutiny”
was primarily aimed at religious and social reform. During the middle of January, 1872,
several participants of the Kooka movement were blown off from cannon mouth at
Malerkotla by the British officers for the offence of attacking the fort of Pathan Nawab and
demolishing of a cow slaughter house.

Morcover to increase व production, bullock power in rural parts and natural ma-
nure in the country it becomes necessary to ban cow slaughter completely throughout the
country.

Hence this Bill,
S. S. AHLUWALIA


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 6 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall establish required num-
ber of Gaushalas for providing shelter to stray and old cows. The Bill, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the consolidated fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
twenty crores may involve as recurring expenditure per annum,

A non recurring expenditure of rupees sixty crores may also be involved.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to prohibit the slaughter of cow and its progeny to inctease the milching and other
livestock of the nation and to respect the religious sentiments attached with the Cow of
the largest segment of the citizens of the country and for matters connected therewith

(Shri 5. Ahluwaha, M.P )

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4660RS—16-11-2000