1
THE ARCHITECTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Architects Act, 1972.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Architects (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Architects Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 6,—
(a) in sub-section (1), the words "or until his successor has been duly elected or
nominated, whichever is later" shall be omitted;
(b) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(6) The name and address of each member of the Council elected or
nominated under the provisions of sub-section  (3) of section 3 and sub-section
(4) of this section shall be notified by the Central Government in the Official
Gazette.".
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Amendment of
section 6.
20 of 1972.
Bill No. LXIV  of  2010
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE  RAJY A SABHA

2
3. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
"10A. (1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to
do in the public interest, issue, for reasons to be recorded and communicated to the
Council, such directions as it thinks fit.
(2) Without prejudice to the forgoing powers, such directions may include
direction requiring the Council—
(a)  to make or amend any regulation within such period as may be specified
in the direction:
Provided that if the Council fails or neglects to comply with such direction
within the period specified therein, the Central Government may make the
regulations or amend or revoke the regulations made by the Council, as the case
may be, either in the form specified in the order or with such modification thereof
as the Central Government thinks fit; and
(b)  to give priority to the work undertaken or to be undertaken by the
Council in such manner as the Central Government may think fit to specify in this
behalf.
10B. (1)  If the Central Government is of the opinion that the Council is unable to
perform, or has persistently made default in the performance of the duty imposed on it
by or under this Act or has exceeded or abused its powers, or has wilfully or without
sufficient cause, failed to comply with any direction issued by the Central Government
under section 10A, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
supersede the Council for such period not exceeding two years as may be specified in
the notification:
 Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section, the Central
Government shall give reasonable time to the Council to show cause why it should not
be superseded and shall consider the explanation and objections, if any, of the Council.
(2)  Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) superseding the
Council,—
(a)  all the members of the Council shall, notwithstanding that their term of
office has not expired as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as
such members;
(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this
Act, be exercised or performed by or on behalf of the Council shall, during the
period of supersession, be exercised and performed by such person or persons
as the Central Government may direct;
(c) all property vested in the Council shall, during the period of
supersession, vest in the Central Government.
(3)  On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification
issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government may—
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further period as it may
consider necessary:
Provided that the total period of supersession under this section shall not
exceed two years; or
(b) reconstitute the Council in the manner provided in section 3.".
Insertion of
new sections
10A and 10B.
Directions by
Central
Government.
Power to
supersede
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Architects Act, 1972 was enacted to provide for the registration of Architects and
for matters connected therewith.
2. The existing provision contained in the sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Architects
Act, 1972 provides  that an elected or nominated member shall hold office for a term of three
years from the date of his election or nomination or until his successor has been duly elected
or nominated, whichever is later. The office bearers of the Council of Architecture have also
been continuing beyond three years terms specified in the aforesaid Act by taking advantage
of this lacuna in the Act. It is proposed to omit the words "or until his successor has been
duly elected or nominated, whichever is later" in said sub-section (1) so that the office
bearers of the Council of Architecture  do not continue to hold the office beyond the period
of  three years on the ground that the successor  has not been duly elected or nominated.
3. It has come to notice that the Council of Architecture constituted under the Architects
Act, 1972 has exercised certain administrative and financial functions beyond those stipulated
in the said Act and also did not adhere to the advice of the Central Government in certain
cases. In view of this, it is proposed to confer power upon the Central Government to,—
(a) issue, in the public interest for reasons to be recorded in writing, directions to
the Council as it thinks fit which, inter alia, include directing the Council of Architecture
to make or amend regulations within the periods specified by the Central Government;
and
(b) supersede the Council of  Architecture  for period not exceeding two years in
case the Council is unable to perform, or has persistently made default in the
performance of the duty imposed on it by or under the Architects Act, 1972, or has
exceeded or abused its powers, or has wilfully or without sufficient cause failed to
comply with any direction issued by the Central Government.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; KAPIL  SIBAL
The 25th  August, 2010.
3

Terms of
office and
casual
vacancies.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM  THE  ARCHITECTS  ACT,  1972
( 20 OF 1972)
CHAPTER II
COUNCIL OF ARCHITECTURE
* * * * *
6.  (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, an elected or nominated member shall
hold office for a term of three years from the date of his election or nomination or until his
successor has been duly elected or nominated, whichever is later.
* * * * *
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Architects  Act, 1972.
————
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development)
GMGIPMRND—4378RS(S5)—30.08.2010.