5

AS INTRODUCED IN THE Raya SABHA

Bill No. LXIX of 2001

THE WELFARE OF HANDICAPPED AND MENTALLY RETARDED
CHILDREN BILL, 2001
A
BILL

to provide for the welfare of children who are born handicapped or mentally retarded
and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (1) This Act may be called the Welfare of Handicapped and Mentally Retarded
Children Act, 2001.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.


Handicapped
and mentally
retarded born
children to be
taken care of by
the Central
‘Government.

Powerto make
rules.

2

2. (1) The Central Government through the Central and State Social:Welfare
Boards shall take care of and bear all expenses towards the education, training for
employment and shelter of all children who are born handicapped or mentally
retarded.

(2) The Central Government shall make available adequate funds to the Central
Social Welfare Board for implementing the provisions of this Act.

(3) All the State Social Welfare Boards shall function in accordance with the
directions of the Central Social Welfare Board.

3. (7) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.

(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid before each House of the Parliament.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

There are a large number of children in India who are born either handicapped or
mentally retarded. The number of such children is increasing day by day due to lack of
nutritious food. These children are not properly looked after by the parents and are
neglected. Some of the parents even force them for begging. As such there is an urgent
need that all such children are maintained and looked after by the Government. It should
be the responsibility of the Government to take care of their proper upbringing, maintenance
and employment so that the handicapped children could also feel proud of themselves
like other children. The Bill seeks to achieve this objective. .

SURESH PACHOURI


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that all expenses for bringing up such children who
are born handicapped or mentally retarded and for their education, etc. will be born by
the Central Government by providing adequate funds at the disposal of Central and State
Social Welfare Boards. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve recurring
expenditure of about Rs. 50 crores from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of Rs. 10 crores is also likely to be incurred in this
connection.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delega-
tion of legislative power is of a normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the welfare of children who are born handicapped or mentally retarded
and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3219RS—06.1 1.2001.