AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bill No. LXIX  of  2025 
THE PRAVASI BHARATIYA KAUSHAL EVAM PRATIBHA 
PRERAK VIDHEYAK, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to pro
vide for the establishment of a statutory authority to mobilize 
the skills, talents, and resources of the Indian diaspora for 
national development, fostering knowledge transfer, 
investment, and innovation, and for matters 
connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of th e Republic 
of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) T h is Act may be called the Pravasi Bharatiya Kaushal evam Pratibha
Prerak Adhiniyam, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commence
ment. 

2
Definitions. 2. I n this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the Indian Diaspora Skills and Talent
Authority established under section 3; 
(b) “Committee” means the Monitoring and Evaluation Committee
to be set up by the Authority under section 11; 
(c) “Indian diaspora” or “diaspora” means Non-Res ident Indians
(NRIs), Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs), and Overseas Citizens of 
India (OCIs) residing abroad; 
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “Public- Private Partnership” means collaboration between the
Authority and private entities for diaspora engagement; 
(f) “skill mapping” means evaluation of the presence of skills,
knowledge and key qualifications as well as domain expertise for 
different sectors; and 
(g) “skill mobilisation” means the engagement of diaspora
expertise for knowledge transfer, investment, mentorship, and 
innovation. 
5 
1
0 
15 
CHAPTER II  
THE INDIAN DIASPORA SKILLS AND TALENT AUTHORITY 
Est
ablishment of 
the Indian 
Diaspora Skills 
and Talent 
Authority. 
3. ( 1)  The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an authority to be known as the Indian Diaspora
Skills and Talent Authority to exercise the powers conferred on, and to
perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to
the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold, and dispose of property,
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said
name sue or be sued.
(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
20 
2
5 
Composition  of 
the Authority. 
4. (1) The Authority shall consist of the following Members —
(a) a  person having at least twenty-five years of experience in
the field of public administration, diaspora engagement, or 
industry, to be appointed by the President of India by warrant 
under his hand and seal in consultation with the Central 
Government as Chairperson;  
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in th e Ministry
of External Affairs — Member ex-officio; 
(c) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry
of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship — Member ex-officio; 
(d) one eminent person, belonging to the Indian diaspora, who
is also a member of a global professional network, to be nominated 
by the Central Government in su ch manner as may be prescribed 
— Member;  
(e) two representatives from Indian industry associations such
as the Confederation of Indian Industry or the Federation of 
Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, to be nominated by 
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed  
— Members;  
30 
3
5 
40 
45 

3 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
(f)  one member having requisite expertise in the field  of data 
science and digital platforms, to be appointed by t he Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed — Member;  
(g)  one woman, belonging to the Indian diaspora with 
requisite expertise in the field of academia or tec hnology, to be 
appointed by the Central Government in su ch manner as may be 
prescribed — Member;  
(h)  one person representing an Indian diaspora welfare  
organization, to be nominated by the Central Govern ment in such 
manner as may be prescribed — Member; and 
(i)  one person, below forty years of age, representing young 
Indian diaspora professionals, to be appointed by t he Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed — Member. 
 Provided that Members other than ex-officio Members shall have 
at least fifteen years of relevant professional exp erience and a 
demonstrable record of contribution to diaspora eng agement or in their 
respective field, as may be prescribed. 
  Provided further that the Authority shall, as far  as practi cable, 
ensure gender and regional diversity in its composi tion, with at least 
one-third representation from each gender and adequate representation 
from different global regions. 
(2)   The Chairperson and non- ex-officio  members shall hold office for a 
term of three years, from the date of entering upon  their office , and shall be 
eligible for re-appointment for one more term not exceeding three years: 
Provided that such re- appointment shall be subject to the 
recommendation of a Search and Selection Committee constituted for the 
purpose with such composition and on the basis of t he performance review 
of the person being considered for re- appointment, to be conducted in such 
manner, as may be prescribed; 
Provided that no person shall hold office as the Ch airpers on or a 
Member for more than two consecutive terms. 
(3) 
The Central Government shall, from time to time, ap point such 
number of officers and staff to the Authority , as may be required to 
assist it in its efficient functioning, in such man ner as may be 
prescribed. 
(4)  
The method of recruitment and qualifications and ex perience for the 
officers and staff of the Authority as well as the salary and allowances 
payable to, and other terms and conditions of servi ce of the 
Chairperson, Members, officers, and st aff of the Authority shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 
(5)  The Authority shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 of 2023. 
 
45 
50 
5. The Authority shall, perform all or any of the foll owing functions, 
namely,— 
(a)  develop and maintain, in such form and manner as ma y be 
prescribed, a centralized Diaspora Database, includ ing therein 
registration of skills and professions of persons b elonging to the 
Indian diaspora via  Indian embassies or digital platforms , in 
compliance with the provisions of the Digital Perso nal Data 
Protection Act, 2023 and all relevant data privacy laws, rules and 
regulations, for the time being in force;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Powers and 
functions of  the 
Authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4
(b) design and administer transparent incentive programs,
including tax benefits, research grants, and housing subsidies, for 
diaspora professionals returning to the country, with publicly 
notified criteria and processes;  
(c) establish a digital platform for mentorship, collaboration,
and investment opportunities between diaspora and Indian 
stakeholders, in such form and manner as may be prescribed;  
(d) issue Diaspora Bonds, subject to compliance with the
provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; th e Securities and 
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; and the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, 1999 and all relevant rules and regulations, for the 
time being in force and ensure risk management, transparency of use, 
and investor protection;  
(e) facilitate reintegration programs, including skill
certification and professional placement for members of the Indian 
diaspora, returning to the country;  
(f) collaborate with international organizations and host countries
for mutual recognition of qualifications, re ferencing relevant 
international conventions and bilateral agreements;  
(g) promote public-private partnerships for sector- specific skilling
and innovation, with clear roles, obligations, and oversight 
mechanisms, and mandatory disclosure and management of conflicts of 
interest;  
(h) make policy recommendations for performance- based funding
for diaspora- led initiatives and other matters related to the effective 
implementation of this Act to the Central Government;  
(i) establish consular services for skill mapping and
certification; 
(j) issue guidelines for data integrity, grievance redressal, and
protection against recruitment malpractices; 
(k) periodically monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of all
incentive schemes and Public- Private Partnerships and publish its 
findings in the Annual Report; and 
(l) such other functions as may be required for implementing the
provisions of this Act or as are assigned to it by the Central 
Government, from time to time. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
2 of 1934. 
15 of 1992. 
42 of 1999. 
CHAPTER III 
REGISTRATION IN DIASPORA DATABASE 
R
egistration 
and data 
integrity. 
6. (1)  Every member of the Indian diaspora, shall, in such form and manner
and within such time, as may be prescribed, get his name and skills,
professional qualifications and such other particulars as may be specified,
registered in the Diaspora Database to be maintained by the Authority,
either through the diplomatic missions or embassies of India abroad or
through such secure digital platform as may be notified.
(2) Any person registered under sub-section (1) shall, subject to such
conditions as may be prescr ibed, be eligible for priority access to incentive
programs, professional networking, and reintegration support, in such
manner as may be prescribed:
40 
45 

5
2
2 of 2023. 
5 
10 
Provided that persons, who are not registered under sub-section (1) 
shall not be eligible for benefits under this sub- section and as prescribed by 
rules made under this Act. 
(3) All collection, storage, and processing of data under this Act shall
strictly comply with the provisions of the Digital Personal Data Protection
Act, 2023, and any other relevant law, rules and regulations, for the time
being in force.
(4) Whoever, for the purpose of registration under this section, furnishes,
false or misleading data to the Authority, shall be liable to such penalty as
specified under section 15, including exclu sion from incentive programs,
under sub-section (2).
CHAPTER IV 
INCENTIVES AND DIASPORA BONDS 
1
5 
20 
25 
7. (1) The Central Government shall, immediately after commencement of this
Act, notify transparent processes and criteria for the award of incentives
referred to under sub-section (1) of section 6, including but not limited to
financial benefits, housing subsidies, and research grants to eligible
applicants, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) All applications submitted for award of such incentives, in such form
and manner as may be prescribed, shall be processed by the Authority in a
time-bound and fair manner, with reasons for acceptance or rejection
thereof, to be communicated to the applicant in writing:
Provided that an applicant aggrieved by the decision of the 
Authority may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Authority as provid ed 
under section 16. 
(3) The Authority shall establish an online portal accessible to the general
public for tracking the status of incentive applications and appeals preferred
under section 16.
Incentive 
a
dministration. 
2 of 1934. 
15 of 1992. 
42 of 1999. 
30 
35 
40 
8. (1)  The Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central Government,
issue Diaspora Bonds in such form and manner and subject to such terms
and conditions as may be prescribed, for specific infrastructure and
innovation projects, under this Act as may be determined by the Authority,
in compliance with the provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999 and all relevant rules and regul ations
made thereunder, for the time being in force.
(2) The Authority shall ensure robust risk management, transparency in
investment utilization, and investor protection mechanisms, including
timely disclosure of project progress, financial statements an d such other
safeguards as may be prescribed.
Diaspora Bonds. 
CHAPTER V  
PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS AND INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION 
4
5 
9. (1) All Public- Private Partnerships undertaken for the purposes of this Act
shall be governed by a framework to be notified by the Authority, in such
form and manner, as may be prescribed, specifying the roles, obligations,
oversight, performance benchmarks and such othe r matters as may be
required.
P ublic-Private 
Partnerships. 

6 
 
(2)   Every party to a Public- Private Partnership shall, in such form and 
manner and within such time as may be prescribed, d isclose any actual or 
potential conflicts of interest, which shall be man aged as per the rules made 
under this Act.  
(3)  Every organization, which seeks to engage with the Indian diaspora for 
the purpose of investment or collaboration shall co mply with such standards 
as may be laid down by regulations made by the Auth ority in this regard.  
(4) The Authority shall, within at the end of each fin ancial year, publish an 
annual summary of all Public- Private Partnerships, including performance 
and compliance status, and such annual summary shal l form part of the 
Annual Report of the Authority. 
5 
10 
International 
collaboration and 
qualification 
recognition. 
 
10. 
 
(1) The Authority may, in consultation with the Central  Government, 
collaborate with Governments of other countries and  international 
institutions in accordance with diplomatic protocol s and Indian foreign 
policy, to facilitate diaspora engagement and mutua l r ecognition of 
professional and academic qualifications.  
(2)  The Authority shall develop and notify, in such for m and manner as may 
be prescribed, clear frameworks for such qualificat ion recognition, 
referencing relevant international conventions and bilateral agreements. 
15 
 
  CHAPTER VI 
 GOVERNANCE  AND  FINANCE  
20  
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
Committee. 
 
11. 
 
(1) The Authority shall set up, in such manner as may b e prescribed, an 
independent Monitoring and Evaluation Committee, co nsisting of Members 
of the Authority, to periodically review the effectiveness , transparency, and 
impact of all incentive schemes and Public-Private Partnerships.  
(2) The findings of the Committee constituted under sub -section (1)  shall be 
published in the Annual Report and made a vailable on the Authority’s 
website.  
25 
 
Funds of the 
Authority. 
 
12. 
 
(1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriati on made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums o f money to the 
Authority, as it may think fit, for carrying out th e purposes of this Act.  
(2)  The Authority may receive grants, donations, and ot her contributions, 
including consultancy income with the approval of t he Central Government, 
subject to compliance of the provisions of the Fore ign Contribution 
(Regulation) Act, 2010 and all applicable l aws, rules and regulations for the 
time being in force, as well as amounts accrued on account of monetary 
penalties imposed for offences under the Act.  
30 
35 42  of  2010. 
Audit of 
accounts. 
 
13. 
 
(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such  form as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller an d Auditor- General of 
India. 
(2) The accounts of the Authority, as audited and certi fied by the 
Comptroller and Auditor- General of India or any other person appointed by 
him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually by the Authority to the Central Government , which shall cause the 
same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is r eceived, before each House of 
Parliament. 
40 
45 
 
Annual report. 
 
 
 
 
14. (1) The Authority shall prepare at the end of every cal endar year, an annual 
report giving a true and full account of its activi ties during the previous 
year, detailing diaspora engagement outcomes, skill  mobilization trends, 50 
 

7
5
 
policy recommendations, annual summary of Public- Private Partnerships 
under sub-section (3) of section 9, findings of the Committee under sub-
section (2) of section 11 etc. in such form as may be prescribed and copies 
thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Go vernment shall, as soon as may be after its receipt, cause
to be laid before each House of Parliament, the annual report along with a
memorandum of action taken or proposed to be taken on the
recommendation(s) of the Authority and the reasons, if any, for non-
acceptance of the recommendation(s), made therein.
1 0 CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND APPEAL 
1
5 
20 
25 
30 
35 
15. (1) Any person or an entity found to have willfully provided false or
misleading data to the Authority or contravened or attempted to contravene
or abetted the contravention of any of the provisions of the Act or any rules
or regulations made thereunder, shall be liable to penalties which may
include,—
(a) exclusion from all incentive programs for a period not less
than three years, in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) a monetary penalty which may extend upto five lakh rupees in
the case of individuals   and fifty lakh rupees in the case of entities or 
organizations:  
Provided that the quantum of penalty to be imposed shall be 
determined by the Authority based on the nature and gravity of the 
offence or contravention, as the case may be, by rules made under t his 
Act. 
(c) blacklisting from participation in any incentive scheme or
programme under this Act for a period which may extend to ten years, 
in case of repeated or egregious violation. 
(2) No penalty shall be imposed under sub-section (1) without giving t he
accused party, —
(a) a written notice of the grounds on which the penalty is
proposed to be imposed; 
(b) a reasonable opportunity of being represented and h eard;
(c) without establishing beyond doubt the offence for which the
penalty is proposed to be imposed: 
Provided that the order imposing a penalty shall be a speaking 
order clearly recording in writing the reasons for imposition of the 
penalty. 
Penalty 
m
echanism. 
40 
45 
16. (1) Any person or entity aggrieved by an order, decision or action of the
Authority under this Act, may, prefer an appeal in such form and manner
and within such time as may be prescribed, to such Appellate Authority, as
may be established by the Central Gove rnment by rules made under this
Act, within such period from the date of filing of the appeal, as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the Appellate Authority may, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, extend the period of filing of appeal by such further period as 
may be prescribed. 
A ppeals. 

8 
 
(2)  The Appellate Authority shall, after giving the app ellant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and after making such in quiry as it deems fit, 
pass such speaking order thereon, as it considers a ppropriate, and every 
such order shall state clearly in writing the reaso ns therefor. 
(3)  The order of the Authority made under sub-section (2)  shall be final and 
shall not be called in question in any court or bef ore any other authority, 
save as otherwise provided in this Act or the rules  made thereunder. 
5 
Offences by 
companies. 
 
17. (1)  Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every person who at the time the offence was commit ted was in charge of, 
and was responsible to, the company for the conduct  of the business of the 
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against  and punished 
accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub- section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in th is Act, if he proves that 
the o ffence was committed without his knowledge or that Offences by 
companies, he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the c ommission of 
such offence.  
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),  where an offence 
under this Act has been com mitted by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or conn ivance of, or is 
attributable to, any neglect on the part of any dir ector, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manage r, secretar y or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the of fence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section,— 
(a)  “company” means anybody corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 
(b)  “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner  in the firm. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
 
Offences by 
society, trust and 
institutions. 
 
18. (1)  Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a society or 
trust or agency or institution, every person who at  the time the offence was 
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to,  the society or trust or 
agency or institution for the conduct of the busine ss of the society or trust or 
university, as well as the society or trust or agen cy or institution, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be lia ble to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub- section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in th is Act, if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he has exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such  offence.  
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),  where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a society or t rust or agency or 
institution and it is proved that the offence has b een committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, an y neglect on the part of any 
governors, vice- chancellor, directors, committee, trustees, registr ar or other 
officer, such governors, directors, committee, trus tees, registrar or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the of fence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
30 
35 
40 
45 
 

9
CHAPTER VIII 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
5
 
10 
15 
19. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority may, with the approval of the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all
matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purposes of
implementing the provisions of this Act.
(3) Every rule made  under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two o r
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make 
r
ules. 
20 20. No suit or prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the
Authority or its members for actions taken in good faith in pursuance of this
Act or of any rules or orders made thereunder.
Protection of 
a
ction taken  in 
good faith. 
21. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in force.
Act to override 
o
ther laws. 
25 
30 
22. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary
or expedient for removing such difficulty.
(2) Every order made under this section s hall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to remove 
d
ifficulties. 

10
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India has the largest diaspora population in the world, with over 18 million 
Indians living abroad, spanning diverse regions and professions from science, 
medicine, technology, education, and engineering to entrepreneurship, diplomacy, 
and the arts. In 2023 alone, the Indian diaspora contributed an estimated $119.5 
billion in remittances, making it a critical pillar of India’s economic resilience and 
foreign exchange stability. Yet, despite its vast size, influence, and goodwill, India 
currently lacks a str uctured national framework to map, coordinate, and mobilise 
the skills, expertise, and institutional capital of its global Indian community for the 
country’s developmental priorities.  
This Bill seeks to fill that policy void by establishing the Indian Diaspora 
Skills and Talent Authority, a statutory and autonomous institution mandated to 
identify, register, and engage diaspora professionals spread across various 
countries and sectors through a centralized digital Diaspora Database, structured 
incentive pr
ograms, and institutional partnerships. The Authority will serve as a 
single-window mechanism to enable strategic collaboration between diaspora 
individuals and Indian stakeholders, including government departments, 
Universities, startups, hospitals, think tanks, and civil society organizations.  
The Authority will also be empowered to facilitate return migration incentives 
for high-skill professionals, issue diaspora bonds for infrastructure and innovation 
financing, and launch fellowships, sabbaticals, and mentorship schemes that foster 
sustained engagement. These interventions shall be aligned with India’s long-
term 
national missions such as Viksit Bharat @2047, Make in India, Digital India, and 
Atmanirbhar Bharat, thereby contributing directly to economi
c growth, skill 
transfer, technology absorption, and global competitiveness.  
The design of this Authority draws inspiration from international best 
practices. Ireland’s “Global Irish Network”, China’s “Thousand Talents Plan”, and 
the Philippines’ “Balik Scientist Program” have all demonstrated that structured 
diaspora engagement enhances innovation ecosystems and accelerates national 
progress. Similarly, several states in India ( e.g., Kerala, Gujarat, Punjab) have 
shown localised success in engaging their diaspora, but a national platform is 
essential to scale these efforts and avoid fragmentation.  
Crucially, the Authority will recognise the diversity of India’s diaspora, across 
generations, geographies, professions, and aspirations, by offering customized  
modes of engagement, including virtual collaboration, short-term visits, long- term 
placements, and philanthropic or advisory roles. It will ensure data- driven 
planning, inter- ministerial coordination, and global outreach through India’s 
missions abroad.  
The Bill incorporates international best practices in data protection, financial 
regulation, and public- private partnership governance, and provides for robust 
compliance, grievance redressal, and transparency mechanisms to ensure that the 
mobilization of diaspora skills and resources is ethical, effective, and in the 
national interest.  
In an era of brain circulation rather than brain drain, the Indian diaspora is no 
longer just a sentimental asset but a strategic force multiplier for India's rise as a 
global knowledge power, economic powerhouse, and diplomatic leader. 
Harnessing their ex pertise systematically and ethically is no longer optional, it is 
imperative.  
Hence, this Bill. 
SATNAM SINGH SANDHU.  

11
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Indian Diaspora 
Skills and Talent Authority whereas clause 4 provides for the composition of the 
Authority, the appointment of officers and staff to assist the Authority, the salaries 
and allowances payable to as well as other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson, Members and officers and staff thereof. Clause 5 sets out the 
functions of the Authority, including inter alia development and maintenance of a 
centralized Diaspora Database, designing and administering of inventive programs, 
establishment of a digital platform for  mentorship, collaboration and investments 
opportunities between diaspora and Indian stakeholders, f acilitation of 
reintegration programs including skill certification and professional placement for 
returning diaspora, establish consular services for skill mapping and certification. 
Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall make available adeq uate 
funds to the Indian Diaspora Skills and Talent Authority, as may be deemed 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolida ted Fund of India. Though it is not 
possible at this stage to determine the exact expenditure likely to be incurred, an 
initial outlay of five hundred crore rupees is estimated for non- recurring 
expenditure towards infrastructure, digital platforms, and da tabase setup. A 
recurring expenditure of one hundred and fifty crore rupees per annum is expected 
as recurring expenditure for operations, incentive programs, and international 
collaborations. 

12  
 
  MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION   
  Clause 19 empowers the Central Government to make r ules and the Authority, 
with the approval of the Central Government, to mak e regulations for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. Clause 22 provides that the Central Government may 
make such order or gi ve such direction, as may be necessary, for removin g any 
difficulty to give effect to the provisions of this  Bill.  
As the orders or rules or regulations relate to the  matters of procedural and 
administrative details only, the delegation of the legislative power is of a normal 
character. 
 
  
      
 
 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a statutory authority to mobilize 
the skills, talents, and resources of the Indian diaspora for 
national development, fostering knowledge transfer, 
investment, and innovation, and for matters 
connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
____________ 
(Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–063–10.02.2026.