THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)
Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette.
2. (1) In section 309 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973,
(a) in sub-section ( 1) for the words "as expeditiously as possible" the words
"within one year" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (1) after the existing proviso following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No.  LXIX  of 2012
Amendment
of Section 309
of Act 2 of
1974.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA ON
THE 22ND FEBRUARY, 2013
5
10

2
"Provided further that no such adjournment shall be granted more than
three times to a party during hearing of the suit.".
(c) in sub-section (2) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided again that penal cost be imposed against the party who seeks
and obtains adjournment during the trial which shall include the expenses incurred
by the opposite party as well as the Court, the expenses of the witnesses who
have come for giving evidence and or rupees five lakh per adjournment after the
maximum permissible limit of adjournments under sub-section (1) of section 309
has been exhausted."
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has one of the highest court cases backlog which is seriously threatening
the democratic setup and undermining the common law justice system. Number of
cases are piling up every year to the point that there are 2,79,53,070 cases pending in
various courts by the end of March, 2011. The right to speedy and a fair trial has been
held as a fundamental right by the Honorable Supreme Court but sadly, the situation
has not improved. The Malimath Committee which was formed in the year 2000 suggested
that the adjournments should not be used as a tool for delaying the justice by the
Courts and recommended penal imposition to the party which demands adjournments.
The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 grants a maximum of three adjournments. The
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 mandates that the verdict of a case should be pronounced
within three to five months. There is no limit to adjournments in criminal cases and this
leads to delaying the case by filing frivolous adjournments. The Bill seeks to amend the
section 309 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
Hence this Bill.
PRAKASH JAV ADEKAR
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  CODE  OF  CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE , 1973
(2 OF 1974)
* * * * * *
309. (1) In every inquiry or trial, the proceedings shall be held as expeditiously as
possible, and in particular, when the examination of witnesses has once begun, the same
shall be continued from day to day until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined,
unless the Court finds the adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be necessary
for reasons to be recorded:
Provided that when the inquiry or trial relates to an offence under sections 376 to 376D
of the Indian Penal Code, the inquiry or trial shall, as far as possible, be completed within a
period of two months from the date of commencement of the examination of witnesses.
(2) If the Court, after taking cognizance of an offence, or commencement of trial, finds
it necessary or advisable to postpone the commencement of, or adjourn, any inquiry or trial,
it may, from time to time, for reasons to be recorded, postpone or adjourn the same on such
terms as it thinks fit, for such time as it considers reasonable, and may by a warrant remand
the accused if in custody:
Provided that no Magistrate shall remand an accused person to custody under
this section for a term exceeding fifteen days at a time:
Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance, no adjournment or
postponement shall be granted, without examining them, except for special reasons to
be recorded in writing:
Provided also that no adjournment shall be granted for the purpose only of
enabling the accused person to show cause against the sentence proposed to be
imposed on him.
Provided also that—
(a) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except where
the circumstances are beyond the control of that party;
(b) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court, shall
not be a ground for adjournment;
(c) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his pleader is not
present or the party or his pleader though present in Court, is not ready to
examine or cross-examine the witness, the Court may, if thinks fit, record the
statement of the witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit dispensing with the
examination-in-chief or cross-examination of the witness, as the case may be.
Explanation 1.—If sufficient evidence has been obtained to raise a suspicion
that the accused may have committed an offence, and it appears likely that further
evidence may be obtained by a remand, this is a reasonable cause for a remand.
Explanation 2.—The terms on which an adjournment or postponement may be
granted include, in appropriate cases, the payment of costs by the prosecution or the
accused.
* * * * * *
4
PowePower to
postpone or
adjourn
proceedings.
45 of 1860.

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
—————
(Shri Prakash Javadekar, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4968RS(S4)—22-02-2013.