Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In article 324 of the Constitution, after clause ( 6), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(7) The Election Commission shall not allot any symbol to National Party,
State Party or otherwise, any symbol which represents National flower, National
Animal or bird or any symbol, which is connected with religious belief of any
community, under any Order issued by the Commission,”.
Amendment
of article 324.
Bill No. LXIX of 2016
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 10TH MARCH, 2017

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Allotment of symbols is done under the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment)
Order 1968, and the Election Commission is deemed to have such powers under article 324
of the Constitution of India. In fact, strangely, even substantive matters like deciding
matters related to a split in political parties, is also decided under the said Order, namely,
para 15 of the Order.
However, allotment of symbols is an equally important aspect related to elections.
But, it is unfortunate that religious symbols and symbol symbolises national flower, are
allotted to a National Parties.
There is a need to review the allotment and the Commission should be free and fair in
dealing with the matters. Considering that India is a highly religious minded country and its
people are religious to core, Commission, in all fairness, should not give any scope for the
misuse of the symbol.
Further, the symbol is not only used and misused as a religious symbol, but, it was
also adopted as a logo of BRICS Summit 2016 held in Goa, recently. By convention, during
each summit different logo is adopted. Procedure adopted in choosing the sybmol was that
applications or suggestions were invited from the members of public, and, one of the
applicants submitted a proposal of lotus, which was accepted by the relevant authorities of
the summit, which included Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS).
In fact, one of the election symbols of the host country, could not have been the logo
of an International Summit. In Goa, the State, which is going to the polls soon, Lotus was
prominently displayed in every nook and corner of the State.
Hence this bill.
SHANTARAM  NAIK
2

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Shantaram Naik, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4925RS(S3)—10-03-2017.