AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. LXIX of 2023 
THE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS OF 
EMPLOYEES) BILL, 2023 
A 
BILL 
to protect the rights of employees in relation to the use and implementation of artificial 
intelligence in workplaces and regulate the use of and ensure transparency in the 
implementation of artificial intelligence technologies at workplaces and for  
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Artificial Intelligence (Protection of Rights of
Employees) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in relation to a State, Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Definitions. 

2 
(b) ―AI Algorithm" means a set of computational instructions or rules that
enable machines to learn and analyze data and make  decisions based on that
knowledge to autonomously perform tasks, typically requiring human
intelligence such as recognizing patterns, understanding natural languages,
problem solving and decision-making;
(c) ―AI implementation" means utilising and integrating  artificial intelligence
technologies in tasks and work processes within the workplace;
(d) ―Artificial Intelligence (AI)" means the simulation of human intelligence
processes by machines, especially co mputer systems,  which are designed to
operate with varying levels of autonomy, and which can, for explicit or
implicit objectives, generate outputs such as predictions, recommendations, or
decisions influencing real or virtual environments;
(e) ―Data Privacy" means safeguarding sensitive and personal information and
ensuring that individuals have control over and can make their own decisions
about the collection, use, and storage of their personal data and the authority
who can process such data and the purpose therefor, and includes
implementing measures to prevent unauthorized access or misuse of sensitive
and personal data;
(f) ―employee‖ means any person, who is employed or engaged for wages or
remuneration, in any kind of work, manual or otherwise, in connection with
the work of an organization, entity, establishment or agency, either in the
government or private sector;
(g) "Employer" means any office, organization, entity, establishment or
agency, either in the government or private sector  ;
(h) "Equality Impact Assessment" means a holistic evaluation aimed at
understanding the extent to which the introduction or utilization of AI
technologies, including AI algorithms, in a workplace adversely affects or has
the potential to adversely affect i ndividuals or groups based on factors such as
race, gender, ethnicity, or other protected characteristics;
(i) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules or regulations made under this Act;
and
(j) ―workplace‖ includes the premises and physical and technological
infrastructure  of any office, organization, entity, establishment or agency, either
in the government or private sector, where and through which an employee
performs tasks or jobs related thereto.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
Duties of 
appropriate 
Government in 
AI 
Implementation. 
3. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to take all necessary measures
to ensure that AI implementation by any employer adheres to the following, in
such form and manner as  may be prescribed –
(a) ensure transparency in  AI implementation withi n the workplace by
furnishing comprehensive documentation elucidating the purpose, requirement,
functionality, and ramifications thereof on employees, their jobs and other
relevant stakeholders;
40 

3 
5 
10 
15 
(b) mitigation of biases in AI algorithms that may adversely affect employees'
rights or opportunities by regular conduct of performance audits and impact
assessment, as specified in section 5, and the application of bias -mitigation
techniques;
(c) upholding employees' right to refuse tasks or decisions solely base d on AI
generated processes if they feel it violates their rights or ethical standards and the
right to review high -risk decisions made by AI processes, affording them the
opportunity to challenge choices or decisions adversely impacting their
employment;
(d) providing adequate training and up -skilling opportunities for employees
affected by AI implementation to ensure they can effectively adapt and engage
with the technology; and
(e) protection of employees’  rights during AI implementation, including dat a
privacy,  and confidential handling of personal information,  in compliance with
the provisions of the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 and other such
related laws and regulations for the time being in force.
20 
4. The appropriate Government shall ensure that -
(a) employers must obtain explicit and informed consent, in writing in such
form and manner as may be prescribed, from employees before AI 
implementation within the workplace which directly affect their work or rights 
adversely, and 
(b) in cases, where de emed consent is used, employers must provide clear
information and avenues to the employees to either opt -out or seek modification 
of their consent.  
Appropriate 
Government 
to take 
measures in 
obtaining 
consent . 
25 
30 
5. The appropriate Government shall design and conduct an equality impact
assessment, of any employers’ AI implementation process within the
workplace,  to ensure fairness, non -discrimination, and compliance with
established rules and regulations, at five -year intervals, in such manner as
may be prescribed:
         Provided that the first equality impact assessment shall be conducted 
immediately after five years of implementation of the Act. 
Equality 
Impact  
Assessment. 
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments,
from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Central 
Government to provide 
funds. 
35 
40 
7. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules and regulations for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each  House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
Powers to 
make rules. 

4 
following the session or the successive sessio ns aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or regulation or both the Houses agree that 
the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,  as the case may be; 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 
(3) Every rule and regulation made by the State Government under this Act shall
be l aid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State
Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such State Legislature
consists of one House, before that House.
5 
10 

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The impact of artificial intelligence (AI) on the workforce has been a topic of 
concern for many years. A recent survey conducted by Randstad, which was shared 
exclusively with ET, revealed that Indian employees are more concerned about losing their 
jobs to AI than their counterparts in the US, UK, and Germany. Similarly, a Microsoft report 
found that 74% of Indian employees are worried about losing their jobs to AI. As AI 
becomes increasingly integrated into the workplace, laws must adapt to protect workers' 
rights. As workplaces evolve, employees are facing new challenges in maintaining their 
autonomy and privacy. The lines between work and home life have become increasingly 
blurred, and the amount of data collected from workers has grown substantially with little 
transparency as to how it is being used. Clear guidelines are needed to address issues such as 
remote work, impact assessments, and accountability for AI-driven decisions.  
2. One of the main issues with AI is the potential for perpetuating biases in the data on
which the system is trained, resulting in discrimination in hiring, promotions, and overall
performance evaluations. This issue has led to a need for laws that address algorithmic bias
to ensure fair and equitable treatment of employees. However, the disproportionate
representation within training data is a significant concern, which results in AI systems
incapable of making unbiased decisions. In one of the most high-profile cases, one
conglomerate had to discontinue an AI tool designed to screen job candidates' resumes. The
tool had learned and replicated the disproportionate hiring trends in male-dominated
industries, resulting in it downgrading applications from women.
3. Furthermore, the intricate nature of AI algorithms complicates the identification of
biases within the data, creating challenges in comprehending their impact on decision-
making processes. An industry report found that while there is a growing reliance on AI in
business operations, there is also a parallel rise in apprehensions regarding data bias. Despite
acknowledging data bias, many organisations are in the nascent stages of addressing it. Steps
taken to combat bias include education, transparency, and training. Yet, there remains a
consensus among industry respondents that more needs to be done to understand and
mitigate data bias effectively.
4. To address these issues, governments must act to spur innovation in trustworthy AI.
They must also foster accessible AI ecosystems with digital infrastructure technologies an d
mechanisms to share data and knowledge. Finally, people must be equipped with the skills
for AI, and workers must be supported to ensure a fair transition.
5. The Bill seeks to lay down comprehensive guidelines to combat data bias in AI
implementation within workplaces, including the need for transparency in algorithms,
mandatory training, and the adoption of practices to detect and rectify biases within datasets.
Addressing data bias will not only enhance the ethical and equitable use of AI but will als o
protect against potential risks stemming from biased algorithms, such as adverse business
decisions and legal repercussions.
6. In conclusion, the impact of AI on the workforce cannot be ignored. As AI becomes
integral to various decision making processes within organisations, this Act serves as a
critical step toward ensuring fair and unbiased practices in workplaces. It emphasises the
critical need for a more inclusive and comprehensive approach to AI development, requiring
diverse participation and technical training to manage datasets and algorithms without bias,
thereby ensuring an equitable and ethical AI-driven future in the workplace.
Hence, the Bill. 
MAUSAM B NOOR

6 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall design and 
conduct an Equality Impact Assessment of the AI implementation process within the 
workplace of any employer at five-year intervals from the enactment of this Act.  Clause 7 
provides for financial assistance to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of 
this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure both of recurring and 
non
-recurring nature. However, at this stage,  it is not possible to estimate the actual 
expenditure likely to be involved.  

7 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules and 
regulations for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

RAJYA SABHA 
________ 
A 
BILL 
to protect the rights of employees in relation to the use and implementation of artificial 
intelligence in workplaces and regulate the use of and ensure transparency in the 
implementation of artificial intelligence technologies at workplaces and for  
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
__________ 
(Shrimati Mausam B Noor, M.P.)
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–017–10.02.2025.