Short title,
extert and
commencement.
THE  ELECTRICITY  (COMPULSORY  SUPPLY  TO  KATRAS  AND
DENSELY  POPULATED  SETTLEMENTS)  BILL,  2007
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory supply of electricity to the katras and densely populated
settlements located in the metropolitan cities and major cities of the country and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Electricity (Compulsory Supply to Katras and Densely
Populated Settlements) Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
Bill No. LXIX of   2007
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 30TH  NOVEMBER, 2007
Definitions.
5
10

2
(b) “densely populated settlements” means such settlements which are declared
as densely populated settlements by the appropriate Government for the purposes of
this Act.
(c) “residential or commercial areas” means densely populated areas located in
metropolitan cities and major cities of the country;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall ensure that sixty per cent of the total electricty generated
under its territorial jurisdiction, including the electricity generated by the foreign
companies, shall be supplied to the katras and densely populated settlements located in the
metropolitan cities and major cities.
(2) The appropriate Government shall determine the quantum of electricity to be
supplied to the metropolitan cities and major cities within its territorial jurisdiction in
such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that in the katras and densely populated settlements the supply of electricity
to the citizens living below poverty line shall be at half of the prescribed rate for six hour in
a day.
4. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Supply of
electricity to
katras and
densely
populated
settlements.
Power to make
rules.
15
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There is an acute shortage of electricity in the katras and densely populated settlements
located in he metropolitan cities and major cities of the country. The citizens living in the
katras and densely populated settlements have to face a lot of difficulties due to the shortage
of electricity. During summer the situation becomes the worst. Due to non-availability of
open spaces and parks nearby these katras and densely populated settlements, the citizens
living there feel suffocated during failure of power. Due to non-availability of power their
lives become hell, especially in the summer.
Therefore, it is proposed to make the supply of electricity compulsory in the katras
and densely populated settlement located in the metropolitan cities and major cities of the
country.
Hence this Bill.
JAI   PARKASH  AGGARW AL
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3  of the Bill, provides that the appropriate Government shall supply electricity
to the citizens living below poverty line in the katras and densely populated settlements for
six hours a day at half of the rate. The expenditure in respect of Union Territories in this
regard shall be borne by the Central Govt. The Bill, therefore if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. In the case of States this expenditure will be incurred
from the Consolidated Fund of those States. It is estimated that approximately a sum of
rupees nine crore will involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 4  of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
5

6
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory supply of electricity to the katras and densely populated
settlements located in the metropolitan cities and major cities of the country and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
 ————
(Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5057RS(S-5)—30-11-2007.