AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. LXIX of 2024 
THE MAKHANA (FOX NUT) INDUSTRY 
    (PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the promotion and development of the Makhana (fox nut) 
industry, predominantly cultivated and produced in the State of Bihar, 
by constituting a Makhana Board, and mandatory declaration of 
Minimum Support Price of Makhana and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fifth Year of th e Republic 
of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Makhana (Fox Nut) Industry
(Promotion and Development) Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “advisories” means non- binding standards and guidance
issued by the Board for promotion and development of the
Makhana industry;
(b) “Board” means the Makhana Board established under section 
3 of this Act; 
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board appointed
under clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 3 of this Act;
(d)“directions” means binding standards and guidance issued by 
the Board for promotion and development of the Makhana 
industry; 
(e) “Fund” means the Makhana Promotion and Development
Fund constituted under section 14;
(f) “grower” means the owner of a  Makhana cultivation, and
includes any agent of such owner, and mortgagee, lessee or any
other person in actual possession of such Makhana cultivation;
(g)“makhana” means the seed of the aquatic M akhana plant, 
primarily cultivated in ponds, wetlands, and other water bodies 
and includes, — 
(i) raw makhana  – the unprocessed, natural seeds
harvested from the plant; and 
(ii) processed makhana – the puffed, edible form of
Makhana obtained after processing through roasting or other 
techniques for human consumption or commercial use, 
including any by-products derived thereof. 
Explanation.— "Makhana plant" means the aquatic plant 
Euryale ferox; 
(h) “makhana industry” means the industry engaged in the
production, manufacture, export, supply, trade and commerce of
Makhana or its bye-products;
(i) “member” means a member of the Board appointed under sub-
section (4) of section 3 of this Act;
(j) "Minimum Support Price"  means the price announced by the
Central Government, on the recommendation of the Commission
for Agricultural Costs and Prices, for a particular agricultural
commodity, to ensure that farmers receive a remunerative price
for their produce;
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(l) “small grower” means a grower the size of whose cultivation
does not exceed two hectares;
(m) “specified” means specified by regulations made by the
Board under this Act; and
(n) “worker” means any person who works in Makhana
cultivation excluding the grower.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 

3 
CHAPTER II 
THE MAKHANA BOARD 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there
s
hall be  constituted, for the purposes of this Act, a Board, to be
called the Makhana Board.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hol d
a
nd dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract
and shall by the said name, sue and be sued.
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at such place as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify and
the Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
establish offices or agencies at other places in or outside India, as
deemed necessary.
(4) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely: —
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected
by the House of the People and one by the Council of States; 
(c) three members to be appointed by the Central Government,
in such manner as may be prescribed,  to represent respectively
t
he Ministries of the Central Government dealing with —
(
i) Commerce;
(ii) Agriculture; and
(iii) Finance;
(d) five members to represent  major Makhana producin g
St
ates, to be appointed by the Central Government, in such
ma
nner as may be prescribed:
 Provided that at least two Members shall be from the 
State of Bihar. 
(e) ten members  to represent the growers, workers and
exporters in the Makhana industry, to be appointed by the
Central Government, in such manner as may be
prescribed:
 P rovided that every appointment under clauses (d) 
and (e) shall be made on the  recommendation of the St ate 
Government or, as the case may be, of the Union territory 
concerned: 
 Provided further that four Members of this category shall 
be from the State of Bihar. 
(f) five members, to represent such institutes or authorities
having specialisation in research in the Makhana industry,
agriculture, foreign trade, packaging and food safety,  to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as ma y
be
 prescribed.
Establishment 
and constitution 
of the Makhana  
Board. 

4 
(5) The qualifications for appointment of the Chairperson and other
members of the Board and the manner of filling of vacancies of  the
members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business a t its
meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by
regulations made by the Board under this Act.
5
Terms of 
office and 
conditions of 
service of the 
Chairperson 
and members. 
4. (1) The term of office of, salaries, remuneration or other
allowances payable to, and the other conditions of service of, the
Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may
be prescribed.
(2) The office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for
being chosen as or for being a Member of either House of Parliament.
(3) A member may resign his office by giving notice thereof in writing
to the Central Government and on such resignation being accepted, he
shall be deemed to have vacated his office.
10 
15 
Vacancies not 
to invalidate 
proceedings. 
5. No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of:
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the
Board;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson
or member of the Board; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting
the merits of the case.
20 
Chairperson 
to preside 
ove
r 
meetings. 
6. (1) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Board, and
without prejudice to any provision of this Act, exercise and discharge
such other powers and functions of the Board as may be prescribed.
(2) In the absence of the Chairperson in a meeting, the Board may elect
any member who is present to preside over such meeting.
(3) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings
of the Board, exercise and discharge such other powers and duties, as
may be delegated to him by the Board and/or as may be prescribed.
25 
30 
Committees, 
officers and 
staff of the 
Board. 
7. (1) The Commission may constitute such advisory or executive
Committees and appoint such officers and staff as it deems
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The method of recruitment, the salary and allowances payable
to and terms and conditions of service of the  officers and staff,  so
appointed under sub -section (1), shall be such as may be
prescribed.
35 
Members, 
officers and 
employees of 
the Board to 
be public 
servants. 
8. All members, officers and other employees of the Board shall be
deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of sub-
section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
40 
45 of 2023. 

5 
CHAPTER III 
FUNCTIONS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE BOARD 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
9. (1)  The Board shall be responsible for the promotion and development
of the Makhana industry in the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub- section (1), the Board
shall —
(a) take such steps as it deems necessary in order to achieve the
objectives enlisted under section 11;
(b) monitor the export, and price of Makhana and propagate data
a
nd other information regarding the demand for and marketability 
of Makhana in the country and in the foreign market; 
(c) render scientific and technical advice aimed at improving th e
pr
oduction, manufacture, supply and distribution of Makhana;
(d) undertake, assist and encourage scientific, technological and
e
conomic research in the area of Makhana production; 
(e) collect statistics from stakeholders in the Makhana industry;
(f) plan and implement human resource training and skill
development in line with the needs of Makhana industry;
(g) take steps either by itself or through accredited agencies to
maintain quality standards for Makhana produced in the country; 
(h) collaborate and cooperate with national scientific and economic
bodies for the benefit of the Makhana industry;
(i) collaborate and cooperate with Departments of the Central or
State Governments on all matters relating to the promotion and
development of Makhana industry;
(j) protect the intellectual property rights of indigenous varieties of
Makhana in the country;
(k) advise the Central Government on all matters relating to the
promotion and development of the Makhana industry, including but
not limited to the marketing within the country and  export of
Makhana;
(l) advise the Central Government on the declaration of Minimum
Support Price for Makhana;
(m) provide advisory services on matters including but not limite d
t
o research, testing and training in the field of Makhana cultivation 
and development to such other class of persons upon the payment 
of such fee or other charges as may be specified;  
(n) formulate incentive schemes for the Makhana industry;
(o) provide financial assistance to growers and workers in
Makhana industry, wherever required;
(p) fix grades, specifications and standards for makhana and its
products;
(q) conduct seminars, workshops, research activities and other
programmes for the development and promotion of Makhana
Functions of the 
Board. 

6 
industry in the country; and 
(r) such other measures as may, having regard to the purposes of
this Act, be prescribed by the Central Government in the interest of
Makhana industry.
Declaration 
of Minimum 
Support Price. 
10. The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Board
constituted under section 3,before the commencement of each financial
year,by order published in the Official Gazette, fix the Minimum
Support Price of raw makhana produced in the country.
5
Objectives of 
the Boar
11. The Central Government and the Board, as the case may be, while
exercising its powers, discharging its functions, or undertaking any
other activity under this Act shall be guided by the following objectives
for optimisation of the production, sale and consumption of Makhana,
which may include, —
(a) pr
omoting the export of Makhana;
(b) promoting  the  sale  and  trade  of  Makhana  through
e-commerce platforms;
(c) improving the quality of Makhana cultivated in the country
for consumption in the country and for export;
(d) promoting branding, product diversification, value addition,
packaging and furthering the interests of stakeholders
involved in the Makhana industry;
(e) promoting sustainable cultivation and increasing production
and productivity of Makhana;
(f) providing support and encouragement to small growers for
using and implementing new technology in Makhana
cultivation;
(g) recommending fair and remunerative prices for Makhana
growers;
(h) safeguarding the interests of Makhana workers; and
(i) increasing awareness amongst the general public about the
Makhana   industry in the country. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Registration. 12. (1) Every person engaged in the cultivation of Makhana in water
bodies, whether such water bodies are comprised in one location or
multiple locations and whether they are situated wholly or partly in
India, shall, within one month from the date of commencement of this
Act or from the date on which the water body is brought under
Makhana cultivation, whichever is later, apply to the Board constituted
under section 3,  for registration as a cultivator in respect of each water
body owned or utilized by them for M akhana cultivation, in such form
and manner and on payment of such amount of fee for the purpose, as
may be specified.
(2) The certificate of registration shall be issued or rejected by the
Board after due verification in such manner and within such period as
may be specified:
 Provided that the certificate of registration shall be 
deemed to have been issued after the expiry of the period so specified, 
if no deficiency has been communicated to the applicant within that 
35 
40 
45 

7 
5 
period: 
 Provided also th at the reasons for rejection of the 
application for registration shall be duly conveyed to the applicant in 
writing by the Board and the applicant shall be given an opportunity to 
be heard before taking a final decision in the matter. 
(3) A registration on ce made shall remain in force until it is cancelled
by the Board, either upon the application of the cultivator or for non -
compliance with the provisions of this Act, or any other reason as
deemed appropriate by the Board.
 
10 
15 
13. For the purposes of this Act, the Board may issue directions or
advisories to stakeholders and such other persons in the Makhana 
industry or any class thereof, as it may deem fit: 
 Provided that every direction issued shall be complied 
with 
by any person engaged in the Makhana industry to who such 
direction has been issued, failing which the Board shall disqualify the 
violator of the direction from the benefits under the Act. 
Issuance of 
direction and 
advisories by 
the Board. 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
20 
Grants and 
loans by the 
Central 
Government. 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
14. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by  
Parliament
 by law, in this behalf, make to the Board, grants and  
loans
 of such sums of money as it may consider necessary for  
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
15. (1)
 The Board shall constitute a Fund to be called the Makhana  
Promotion an
d Development Fund and there shall be credited  
thereto
: —
(a) all sums transferred to or vested in the  Board;
(b) any grants and loans made to the Board by the 
Central
 Government under section 14;
(c) all
 fees levied and collected in respect of 
certificates of registration issued under section 12 and any 
other fees or charges collected under this Act or the rules 
made there under; and 
(d) all sums received by the Board from such other sources
as may be decided upon by the Central Governmen t.
(2) The Fund shall be applied to:—
(a) meet the salary, pension, remuneration and other 
allowances of the members, officers, and staff of the Board 
as applicable;
(b) meet the ex penses relating to  such mea sures as the 
Board may undertake under this Act from time to time in 
order to achieve the objectives enlisted in section 11, and 
in exerci se of its general powers and functions under 
section 9; 
(c) meet the other administrative expenses of the Board
and any other expenses authorised by or under this Act; 
Makhana 
Promotion and 
Development 
Fund. 

8 
(d) repayment of any loans; and
(e) settle any liabilities arising out of legal proceedings.
Borrowing 
powers of the 
Board.
16. (1) The Board may, from time to time, with the previous sanction
of the Central Government and under such conditions as may be
prescribed, borrow any sum required for any of the purposes for
which it is authorised to expend under this Act, from: 
—
(a) any bank or other financial institution by taking loan;
or
(b) the public by issue or sale of bonds or debentures or
any such instrument, carrying interest at such ra tes as
may be specified therein,  in the form and manner
approved by the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government may guarantee the repayment of the
monies borrowed by the Board under sub -section (1) and the
payment of interest thereon and other incidental charges.
5 
10 
15 
Budget and 
audit. 
17. (1) The Board shall prepare in such form and manner, at such time of
each financial year , and such intervals, as may be prescribed, its
budget, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure and forward
the same to the Central Government.
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Controller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him
and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be
payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
20 
Annual 
report. 
18. (1) The Board shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such time
of each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a
full account of its activities during the previous financial year, and
submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The annual report prepared under sub-section (1) shall contain: —
(a) a
 description of all the activities of the Board for the
previous year;
(b) the plan of the Board for the upcoming year; and
(c) any such other details as may be provided under any law
for the time being in force.
(3) The Central Government shall cause the annual report under sub-
section (1) along with the audited accounts of the Board to be laid, as
soon as may be after they are received, before each House of
Parliament.
25 
30 
35 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith.
19. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the
Central Government, or the Board, or any officer, or any member of the 
Board, or any employee thereof, for anything which is done or intended 
to be done in good faith under this Act or the rules or regulations made, 
or standards notified thereunder. 
40 
Power to make 
rules.
20. The Central Government may, in consultation with the Board, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 
45 

9 
5 
21. The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, b y
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to
provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient
for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
Power to make 
regulations. 
10 
15 
22. Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expir y
o
f the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
t
he rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulatio n
s
hould not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so
however, that any such modification or  annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or
regulation.
Rules and 
regulation to be 
laid before 
Parliament. 
20 
25 
23. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by order, published in the Officia l
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this secti on
af
ter the expiry of three years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
24. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force.
Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 

10 
 STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Apart from India, Makhana  (Fox Nut)  is grown in Russia, Korea 
and Japan.  In India , Makhana is cultivated and naturally grown in Bihar, 
West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, J&K, Tripura and Manipur. 
However, Makhana is native to Bihar and is being cultivated there for at 
least 1000 years .  Bihar produces 10,000 tonnes of Makhana per annum, 
which is 90  per cent.  of the production in the country.  The Makhana 
industry is worth 3000 crore  rupees.  India contributes to 80 per cent. of the 
world’s Makhana demand.  Makhana is harvested in more than 15000 
hectares in Bihar and around 5 lakhs families mostly from Mallah 
community are involved in the processing of Makhana.  Nine districts in the 
Mithila region of Bihar are pre-dominant in the cultivation and production of 
Makhana, i.e., Dharbanga, Madhubani, Purnia, Katihar, Saharasa, Supaul, 
Araria, Kishanganj and Sitamarhi.  
It took four years of sustained campaigning by researchers, 
entrepreneurs and farmers to get the coveted GI tag f or Mithila Makhana. 
The farmers of Mithila region cultivate GI tagged Makhana but are from 
very poor background.  The international wholesale price of Makhana is 
8000 rupees per Kg.  However, it was only 1000 rupees  per Kg. ten years 
ago and the current domestic price is around 1500 rupees  per Kg. Makhana 
has a very high international and domestic demand , being  a very good 
source of vegetarian protein  
containing five of the nine Amino Acids, 
particularly as a substitute for animal-based protein. Makhana is a superfood 
now, because of its nutritious properties.   
Popping is a process wherein lotus seeds are roasted and the shell is 
removed to get Makhana. Makhana growers are facing a lot of difficulties 
particularly in popping work as it is being done manually.  Some mechanical 
units are there but outside the State which involve a lot of investment and 
risk.  The farmers do not have the wherewithal and logistics to stock or 
trade.  The farmers are not wealthy but traders can bear the logistic costs and 
take huge margins.  There is very little Government support to the Makhana 
growers who need  financial assistance to survive.  Further in view of the 
hardships faced by growers there has been a consistent demand for 
minimum support price for Makhana without which the sector would not 
survive.  It is, therefore felt that like many commodities and other Boards, a 
Board for Makhana Development and Promotion may be constituted to 
holistically look after the Makhana industry.  Further , there should also be a  
provision for Minimum Support Price to sustain the industry. 
Hence this Bill. 
A.D. SINGH

11 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution o f the Makhana 
Board and for the appointment of the Chairperson and other memb ers of 
the Board. Clause 4 inter alia  provides for the term of office of, salaries, 
remuneration or other allowances payable to, and the other conditions of 
service of, the Chairperson and other members of the Board. Clause 7 
provides for the constitution of advisory or execu tive committees, 
appointment of officers and staff of the Board, as it deems necessary and 
the salaries an d allowances payable to  such officers and staff.  Clause 
9 lays down the functions of the Board  inter alia including assistan ce 
and encouragement to scien tific, technological and economic research 
in the area o f Makhan a production; planning  and implementin g 
human resource training and skill dev elopment in line with the 
needs of the Makhana industry; providing financial assistance to 
growers and workers in the Makhana industry and conducting 
seminars, workshops, research activities an d other p rogrammes for the 
development an d promotion of the Makhan a industry. Clause 14 
provides that the Cen tral Govern ment may make grants and loans o f 
such sums o f money to the Board, as it may consider necessary, to 
enable the Board to carry out th e pu rposes o f the Bill. Clause 15 
provides for the con stitution of a Fund called  the Makhana 
Promotion and Development Fund, the credit of monies thereto and the 
purposes for which  the Fund shall be utilised. Clause 16 
empowers the Board to b orrow money from certain institutions, for 
the repayment of which th e Central Government shall be a guarantor. 
The Bill,  therefore, if enacted will involv e expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of Ind ia. It is estimated that a recurring 
expenditure of about rupees o ne hund red crore per annum is lik ely 
to be in volved from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring 
expenditure of about rupees twenty-f ive crore is also likely to be 
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 

12 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
        Clause 20 and 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and 
the Makhana Board, with the approval of the Central Government, to make 
rules and regulations respectively, for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  
Clause 23 empowers the Central Government to make such pr ovisions 
through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect 
to the provisions of the Bill. 
As the matters in respect of which rules  or regulations or orders may 
be made are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it i s not 
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
__________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the promotion and development of the Makhana (fox nut) 
industry, predominantly cultivated and produced in the State of Bihar, 
by constituting a Makhana Board, and mandatory declaration of 
Minimum Support Price of Makhana and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
__________ 
 (Shri A.D. Singh, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—079—10.02.2025. 