Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LXIX of 2006
THE ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (IDENTIFICATION AND
DEPORTATION) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to set up a National Commission to identify and deport illegal immigrants in the country
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Illegal Immigrants (Identification and Deportation)
Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act 'illegal immigrant' means any person who comes to India without any
proper and valid document issued by the designated Authority of the Government of India.
Definition.
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 24TH NOVEMBER, 2006.
\\SERVER4\BILLS_2004\RAJYA SABHA\3600RS

2
\\SERVER4\BILLS_2004\RAJYA SABHA\3600RS
3. The Central Government shall set up a Commission to be known as the National
Commission for Identification and Deportation of Illegal Immigrants (hereinafter referred
to as the National Commission).
4. (1) The National Commission shall consist of,—
(i) a Chairperson who shall be a retired Judge of the Supreme Court to be
appointed by the President; and
(ii) two other members to be appointed by the President.
(2) The Chairperson and other members shall hold office for a term of five years and
shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances as may be determined by the Central
Government.
5. The Central Government shall also set up a State Commission for a State or two or
more States for identification and deportation of illegal immigrants.
6. (1) Every State Commission shall consist of,—
(i) a Chairperson who shall be a retired Judge of the High Court; and
(ii) four other members.
(2) The Chairperson and other members of the State Commission shall be appointed
by the Central Government in consultation with the Chairperson of the National Commission.
(3) The Chairperson and the other members shall hold office for a term of five years
and shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances as may be determined by the Central
Government.
7. Every State Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(i) to carry out necessary exercise to identify illegal immigrants and their nationality
in their respective area;
(ii) to prepare and send list of all illegal immigrants in their respective area to the
district administration.
8. The National Commission and every State Commission shall exercise the powers of
a civil court in regard to discharge of its functions.
9. The National Commission may direct the respective State Government to:—
(i) stop all assistance being enjoyed by the illegal immigrants immediately;
(ii) impound the ration card in the possession of illegal immigrants;
(iii) terminate the services of illegal immigrants, in case such immigrants are
employed in any public sector and inform persons concerned in case they are employed
in private sector;
(iv) take such necessary action to recover loans borrowed by illegal immigrants;
(v) facilitate speedy hearing of cases against illegal immigrants; and
(vi) take immediate action for deporting them to the countries of their origin.
10. The State Government shall take such action as directed by the National Commission
within three months.
National
Commission
for
identification
and deporting
illegal
immigrants.
Appointment
term and
salary of the
Chairperson
and Members
of the
Commission.
State
Commission.
Appointment,
term and
salary of
Chairperson
and other
members of
State
Commission.
Functions of
the State
Commission.
Powers of the
Commissions.
National
Commission
to direct the
State
Government.
State
Government
to take action
on direction
of the
National
Commission.

3
\\SERVER4\BILLS_2004\RAJYA SABHA\3600RS
11. (1) Any person, who has any complaint against a decision of any State Commission,
shall be entitled to represent to the National Commission, who shall hear the same and
dispose it of within one month.
(2)Every applicant, who represents to the National Commission under clause (1), shall
be given an opportunity of being heard before disposing of such application by the National
Commission.
12. The State Commission and the district administration shall ensure that no
inconvenience is cause to any bona fide citizen of the country during the enforcement of the
provisions of this Act.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Representation
to the
National
Commission.
No
inconvenience
to bona fide
citizens.
Power to
make rules.
Savings.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country, there are lakhs of illegal immigrants who have come from many countries.
Our country is poor and cannot afford to feed the immigrants. Moreover, there have been
complaints that these people indulge in criminal activities. They take the share of benefits
which would have been otherwise available to bona fide citizens. They harass the genuine
citizens and usurp their  rights.
It is, therefore, proposed to set up a National Commission at the National level and
State Commissions at State level to identify and deport illegal immigrants to the countries of
their origin. Due care has been taken in the proposed legislation not to harass bona fide
citizens.
Hence this Bill.
MANOHAR  JOSHI.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3, of the Bill provides for setting up of the National Commission for identification
and deporting of illegal immigrants from the country. Clause 4 provides for salaries and
allowances payable to the Chairman and other members of the Commission. Clause 5 provides
for setting up of State Commission for a State or a group of States and clause 6 provide for
salaries and allowances payable to the Chairman and other members of State Commission.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about one crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules  will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to set up a National Commission to identify and deport illegal immigrants in the country
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Manohar Joshi, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—3600RS(S4)—24-11-2006.