AS INTRODUCED IN THE Raya SABHA.

Bill No. LXIX of 2000

THE ABOLITION OF CHILD LABOUR BILL, 2000
A

BILL

to provide for the abolition of child labour in employment and matters connected
therewith.

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Abolition of Child Labour in Employment Act, — Short title and
2000. extent,

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
5 2. In this act unless the context otherwise requires:— Definitions.

(व) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the State Government
and in all other cases the Central Government.

(b) “child” means a person who has not completed eighteen year of age.
(c) “employer” means a person who engages a child in a job or employment

10 and who has the ultimate control over the affairs of an establishment including
shops where works such as domestic, agricultural or any other works are carried out.


|

Abolition of
Child Labour.

Punishment for
employers of
Child Labours.

Punishment for
Police officers.

Savings.

Power to make
tules.

3. Child labour in any form of employment is hereby abolished.

4. Whosoever engages a child in any employment shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years or with the fine which shall
not be less than fifty thousand rupees, or with both.

5. If a Police officer responsible for registering cases for violation of the provisions
of this act, refuses to register a FIR for an offence punishable under this act, he shall be
punished with imprisonment of two years or with a fine of two thousand rupees, or with
both.

6. The provisions of this act or rules made thereunder shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.

7. The Central Government may, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this
Act.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for caPing out
the purposes of this Act. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.

The delegation of legislative power is thercfore of a normal character.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Although article 24 of the Constitution prohibits the employment of children below
fourteen years of age in any factory or mine or engaged in any hazardous employment, a
number of children are forced by the parents to go in for work and the industrialists
employ them on tneagre salary as a result of which these children are thus deprived of
education because of poverty. It is the duty of the Government to provide free and com-
pulsory education upto the age of fourtecn years under article 45 of the Constitution. Thus
our children are forced to work by their parents. It is also a matter of grave concern that
children are forced to beg by their parents, guardians, gangleaders and others.

There are a number of industries where children are engaged in work hke glass
factories, carpet factories, domestic servants, shops and agricultural labour. The rules or
acts su far in force have no effect as they do not give any deterrent punishment for em-
ployment of children in jobs and the number of child workers in various jobs has contin-
ued to increase during the last fifteen years. Therefore it is high ume that child labour in
any form is completely abolished in the country and this will give a rise in forcing the
parents to send their children 10 school and thus illiteracy will be removed in the country.
It will also help the child to develop and take active part in the welfare of the country.

Hence this Bill.

RUMANDLA RAMACHANDRAIAH


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the abolition of child labour in employment and matters connected
therewith.

(Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4856RS—22-11-2000.