Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2011
Bill No. LXV  of 2010
5
THE PRE-EXAMINATION COACHING CENTRES REGULATORY
AUTHORITY BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Regulatory Authority for regulation of Pre-Examination
Coaching Centres and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Pre-Examination Coaching Centres Regulatory Authority
Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) 'Authority' means Pre-Examination Coaching Centres Regulatory Authority
constituted under section 3 of this Act;
(b) 'pre-examination coaching centre' means and includes any institute or
establishment where any coaching is imparted for admission into any professional
course including medical or engineering education or for appearing in any examination
conducted by any Government or private establishment for the purpose of securing
employment; and
(c) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Pre-Examination Coaching Centres
Regulatory Authority for the purpose of regulating and controlling pre-examination coaching
centres, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necesary for the efficient functioning of the Authority.
(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be situated in New Delhi.
(4) The Authority shall have its offices in every State/Union territory.
4. The Authority shall perform the following functions,—
(i) conferring recognition to pre-examination coaching centres imparting coaching
for various competitive examinations;
(ii) prescribing fees to be charged from students for pre-examination coaching
being imparted at the coaching centres;
(iii) fixing minimum number of classroom lectures for various courses being
offered at the coaching centres;
(iv) laying down minimum qualifications for the teachers to be employed in the
coaching centres;
(v) prescribing penalties against such coaching centres which are not following
the provisions of this Act; and
(vi) any other work relating to regulation of coaching centres as may be assigned
to it by the Central Government from time to time.
5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Definitions.
Establishment
of Pre-
Examination
Coaching
Centres
Regulatory
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The number of private institutions conducting pre-examination coaching is increasing
at an alarming rate throughout the country. These coaching centres claim to be shaping the
future of the youth of this country. Some of these coaching centres make tall claims in order
to attract number of students and get huge amount from them as fees without providing
proper coaching to them, thereby endangering their future. Therefore, there is an urgent
need for legislation to regulate the functioning of such coaching centres in the country to
safegaurd the future of the youths in the country.
Hence the Bill.
MOHAN SINGH
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Pre-Examination Coaching Centres
Regulatory Authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees One hundred
crore is likely to be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involed.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empower the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the
purpose of the Bill. As the rules will  relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—6700RS(S3)—28-02-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Regulatory Authority for regulation of
Pre-Examination Coaching Centres and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P .)