5

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No, LXV of 2000
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of india.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-First Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In article 343 of the Constitution, —

(i) in clause (7) for the words “the international form of Indian numerals” the words
“the Devanagari form of numerals” shall be substituted;

(ii) in clause (3) for sub-clause (b) the following sub-clause shall be substituted
namely:—

“(b) the international form of Indian numerals”.
3. In article 348 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause (1),—

(a) in sub-clause (b) para (iii) for the words “shall be in the English language”
the words “shall be in the Hindi language in Devanagari script” shall be substituted;

(b) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:—

“Provided that the President may, by order, authorise the use of the English
language for any of the purposes referred to above for a limited period as may be
specified in the Order.”.

Short title and
commencement.

Amendment of
article 343

Amendment of
article 348


Amendment
of article 351.

2

(ii) the proviso to clause (2) shall be omitted.
(iii) for clause (3) the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-—

“ (3) Where the Legislature of a Siate has prescribed any language other than
the Hindi language in Devanagari script for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts, passed
by, the Legislature of the State or in Ordinances promulgated by the Governor of the
State or in any order, rule, regulation or bye-law referred to in paragraph (iii) of
sub-clause (b) of clause (/), a translation of the same in the Hindi language in
Devanagari script or in the English language published under the authority of the
Governor of the State in the Official Gazette of that State shall be deemed to be the
authoritative-text, thereof in the Hindi language in the Devanagari script or in the
English language, as the case may be, under this article.”

4, (1) Article 351 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (/) of that article
and in clause (/) as so re-numbered after the words “the spread of Hindi language” the
words “‘at the national and inter-national levels” shall be inserted.

(2) after clause (/) as so re-numbered the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(2) For the proper development of the Hindi language at the national and
international levels it shall be the duty of the Union to open free Hindi language teaching
centres at appropriate places in all the non-Hindi speaking States in the country, and in
all the Indian diplomatic missions abroad and start Hi interpretation services there
at and institute awards for learning Hindi by non-Hi speaking people to secure the
desired objectives in this regard.”

20


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Hindi language in Devanagari script is the official language of our country and it
deserves that position because it is spoken by majority of the people in the country. Hindi is
the link language to all the Indian languages because it is understood throughout the country
from Kashmir to Kanya Kumari. In some States it is opposed due to political reasons only
otherwise it is a well known fact that in Hindi language examinations held at various places
in the country, the top positions are always obtained by the students belonging to non-
Hindi speaking areas. The founding fathers of our Constitution made Hindi as the Official
language but provided that for official purposes English language shall continue only for
fifteen years from the commencement of the Constitution. It is a matter of regret that the
English language, even after the forty-two years of the commencement of the Constitution is
still sitting like an octopus over Hindi. When we could not restore the due place to our
official language Hindi during the last four decades naturally it has hindered the development
of various other Indian languages. It also hampers wider and broad based active participation
by the citizens in the democratic, administrative and judicial processes of our country. The
use of the English language in courts and other places has led to the exploitation of our poor
and illiterate masses by the lawyers and authorities in the Administration.

Therefore, time has come to see that Hindi gets its due place in all the fields such as
judicial, legislative and administrative fields in the country. Fifteen years time for use of
English has elapsed long ago and now Hindi must replace English at all levels. There is no
doubt that Hindi can be used for all Official purposes and its exclusive use in Bihar, Uttar
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh have shown that
there is no difficulty in using Hindi as official language. Only determined will and efforts of
the people and the Government are required in this direction. In the beginning non-Hindi
States may face difficulty but they can use their own language for all official purposes but
such States must decide not to use English as official or primary language. It should be used
as secondary language. Moreover, it will be impractical to abolish English in one go. Therefore,
it may be used to the extent necessary and unavoidable till Hindi is accepted by one and all
in the country. The Union has to play a vital role in this direction by opening Hindi teaching
centres in all the non-Hindi speaking States and in all the diplomatic missions abroad. Hindi
interpretation Service may also be intrcduced there. All these steps may, achieve the desired
results.

Hence this Bull.
5. 5, AHLUWALIA


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that Central Government will open free Hindi language
teaching Centres at various places for the proper development of Hindi. Clause 4 also provides
for starting Hindi interpretation services at all diplomatic Centres and instituting awards for
learning Hindi. Therefore, the Bill if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees one crore per annum.

A non recurring expenditure of rupees Twenty lakhs is also likely to be involved.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CGNSTITUTION OF INDIA
PART XVH
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE

CHAPTER I.—LANGUAGE OF THE UNION
343. Official Language of the Union (/) The official language of the Union shall be
Hindi in Devanagari script.

The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union shall be the
international form of Indian numerals.

. . कं » *
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, Parliament may by law provide for the use
after the said period of fifteen years, of —
(a) the English language, or
(8) the Devanagari form of numerals,
for such purposes as may be specified in the law.
. * . . .
CHapTER HIL—LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME Court, Hick Courts, Etc.

348, Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts and for Acts,
Bills etc.—(/) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, until
Parliament by law otherwise provides—

(a) भी proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court,
(b) the authoritative texts—
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in either
House of Partiament or in the House or either House of the Legislature ofa State.
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of all
Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a State, and
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under this
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State,
shall be in the English language.

* * * * *

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any judgement, decree or order
passed er made by such High Court.

(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (b) of clause (1), where the Legislature of
a State has prescribed any language other than the English language for use in Bills introduced
in, or Acts passed by, the Legislature of the State or in Ordinances promulgated by the
Governor of the State or in any order, rule, regulation or bye-law referred to in paragraph (iii)
of that sub-clause, a translation of the same in the English language published under the
authority of the Governor of the State in the Official Gazette of that State shall be deemed to
be the authoritative text thereof in the English language under this article.


RAJYA SABHA

A
Bu
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri S. 5. Ahluwalia, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4611RS—14-11-2000.