1
THE PROHIBITION OF MULTI-DIGIT LOTTERIES BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to prohibit sale and promotion of multi-digit lotteries and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Multi-Digit Lotteries Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "lottery" means a scheme, in whatever form, and by whatever name called,
for distribution of prizes by lot or chance to persons participating in the lots or chances
of a prize by purchasing tickets in proper form or through online;
(b) "multi-digit lottery" means a lottery in which prizes are distributed to
participating persons on the chances of matching of more than single digit.
Definitions.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. LXV of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
5
10

2
(c) "organization" means any local or other authority functioning under the
control of the Central Government or a State Government and includes an undertaking
established by or under a Central, or a State Act or which is controlled or financed
wholly or substantially by funds, provided directly or indirectly by the Central
Government or a State Government or a Government company as defined in the
Companies Act, 2013.
3. No organization shall organize, conduct or promote multi-digit lottery or sell or
distribute or put for sale any multi-digit lottery ticket either in paper form or through online,
in any manner whatsoever or receive or remit any money in pursuance thereof.
4. (1) Where any contravention of the provisions of Section 3 has been committed by
any Department of the Central Government or a State Government or any other organization
including companies or private individual, the Head of such Department or the person
incharge of such organization, as the case may be, shall be guilty of offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished under sub-section ( 3);
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of the
Department or such person incharge liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence
was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence,
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under
sub-section (1) has been committed by a Department of the Central Government or State
Government or any organization and it is proved that the offence has been committed with
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any officer,
other than the head of such Department or the person incharge or such organization, such
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
(3) Whoever commits an offence under sub-section ( 1) shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 an
offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
Prohibition of
Multi-digit
Lotteries.
Penalty.
Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.
5
10
15
20
25
18 of  2013.
2 of 1974 .

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Lottery is species of gambling. It generates a false sense of security amongst the
poor who get addicted to it and ruin their lives. The social cost of running lotteries was too
high with the earning members of families getting addicted to lottery. At present, states
including Kerala, Punjab, Maharashtra, Sikkim, Mizoram, Nagaland, Goa etc. promote lottery.
These multidigit lotteries are now grappling the youth by entering through electronic media.
The first endeavour to ban lottery in India was in 1998 when the Parliament, cutting
across party lines, unanimously enacted the Lotteries (Regulation) Act, 1998 (Act No. 17 of
1998). The 1998 Act in addition to regulating lotteries, banned the single digit lottery and
pre-announced number lotteries. Such was the momentum around the 1998 Act that Members
of Parliament who had participated in the debate had asked the Central Government to bring
a law banning multi-digit lottery as well.
The Bill proposes to ban all forms of multi-digit lottery including its online form
across the country with a view to ensure that gullible people are not entrapped and looted
by bogus claims of getting richer overnight.
Hence, this Bill.
VIJAY  GOEL
3

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to prohibit sale and promotion of multi-digit lotteries and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Vijay Goel, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4324RS(S3)—11-12-2019.