THE  SPECIAL  PRICE  CONTROL  AUTHORITY  BILL,  2012
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of  a Special Price Control Authority to control the rise in
the prices of commodities and services and  formulate a concrete, adequate and
uniform national price policy in the country and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Price Control Authority Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Goverrnment may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(b) "recognised economist" means economist serving in or retired from various
institutes of the Central or the State Governments; and
(c) "special authority" means Special Price Control Authority constituted under
section 3.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. LXV of  2012
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012

2
Constitution
of Special
Price Control
Authority.
3. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Special Price Control Authority which shall be exercising its powers conferred by this
Act and discharge the assigned duties and functions to maintain the prices at normal level
in the country.
(2) The special authority shall consist of not more than ten members, to be appointed
by the Central Government from amongst the persons who are recognised economists
having not less than ten years of experience in the field of fiscal policy.
(3) The Central Government may appoint one Chairperson and one Secretary from
amongst the members of the Special Authority.
(4) The salary, allowances and the terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson,
Members and Secretary of the Special Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The headquarters of Special Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(6) The Special Authority shall have its own Secretariat consisting of such number of
officers and employees as it deems necessary for the efficient performance of its functions.
(7) The recruitment, salaries and other terms and conditions of service of the officers
and employees of the special authority shall be based on the rules framed for the Central
Government employees and shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The powers and functions of the Special Authority inter alia shall include:—
(i) formulation of a concrete, adequate and uniform national price policy;
(ii) monthly listing of State-wise price fluctuation in all commodities or services;
(iii) preparing suggestions to normalize the price fluctuation and forwarding
them to the Central Government;
(iv) carrying out constant research on various measures of price control;
(v) making special efforts to ensure uniformity in the prices of commodities or
services throughout the country;
(vi) ensuring that price rise in urban areas shall not affect the price level in rural
areas;
(vii) ensuring that price fluctuation at international level does not affect the
price level in the country; and
(viii) making all possible efforts to prevent the problem of price rise from being
a long term on permanent phenomenon.
5. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Powers and
functions of
Special Price
Control
Authority.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
For past many years, there has been an uncontrolled hike in the prices of commodities
or services in the country. All fiscal measures of the Government are proving useless. Due to
this uncontrolled price, where the common men are suffering a lot in one hand, the people
running the Government have remained mere spectator. As per the Government data, there
has been a sixty-three per cent hike in the price of all the commodities during April, 2004 to
April, 2012. Despite a continuous increase in rates of commodities or services the Government
have remained unsuccessful in controlling the prices. On the contrary, this policy had certainly
weakened the economy of the country. When all the mechanisms of the Government are
proving unsuccessful in controlling steep hike in price, it is high time to take fresh and
concrete initiative in this direction.
Hence this Bill.
PRABHAT JHA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constituting a Special Price Control Authority. The Bill,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees one hundred crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
A non-recurring expenditure of a sum of rupees three hundred crore may also involve
on the establishment of Secretariat and other related arrangements for the authority.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislation power is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—3937RS(S3)—07-12-2012.
RAJYA  SABHA
———————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of  a Special Price Control Authority to control the rise in the
prices of commodities and services and formulate a concrete, adequate and uniform
national price policy in the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
—————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P.)