AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. LXV of 2024 
THE DIGITAL PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024  
A 
BILL 
to amend the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of  the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Digital Personal Data Protection (Amendment)
Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and 
commencement. 
22 of  2023. 2. In the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in section 2–
Amendment of 
section 2. 
10 
(i) for clause (i), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
‗(i) ―Data Fiduciary‖ means any person including a State, a 
company, a non -governmental organisation, juristic entity or any 
individual, who alone or in conjunction with other persons determines the 
purpose and means of collection, storage, disclosure, sharing or processing 
of personal data;‘; 

2 
(ii) for clause (k), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
‗(k) ―Data Processor‖ means any person including a State, a 
company, a non -governmental organisation, juristic entity or any 
individual, who processes personal data on behalf of a Data Fiduciary;‘; 
(iii) after clause (x), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely:-
‗(xa)  ―sensitive personal data‖ means such personal data, which 
may reveal, be rel ated to, or constitute financial data, health data, official 
identifier, sex life, sexual orientation, biometric data, genetic data, 
transgender status, intersex status, caste or tribe, religious or political 
belief or affiliation, or any other data which may be categorised as such, 
from time to time, by the Central Government. 
Explanation— For the purposes of this clause, the expressions,- 
(a) ―financial data‖ means personal data used to identify an account
opened by, or card or payment instrument issued by a financial institution 
to a data principal or regarding the relationship between a financial 
institution and a data principal including financial status and credit 
history; 
(b) ―health data‖ means personal data related to the past, present or
future physical or mental health state of the data principal, data collected 
in the course of registration for or provision of health services and any 
data associated with the data principal for the provision of specified health 
services; 
(c) ―official identifier‖ means any number, code or other identifier,
assigned to a data principal under a law made by Parliament or any State 
Legislature which may be used for the purpose of verifying the identity of 
such data principal; 
(d) ―biometric data‖ means facial images, fingerprints, iris scans or
any other similar personal data resulting from measurements or technical 
processing operations carried out on physical, physiological or 
behavioural characteristics of a data principal, which allow or confirm the 
unique identification of that natural person; 
(e) ―genetic data‖ means personal data relating to the inherited or
acquired genetic characteristics of a natural person which gives unique 
information about the behavioural characteristics, physiology or the health 
of that natural person and which results, in particular, from an analysis of 
a biological sample from the natural person in question; 
(f) ―transgender status‖ means the condition of a data principal
whose sense of gender does not match with the gender assigned to t hat 
data principal at birth, whether or not they have undergone sex 
reassignment surgery, hormone therapy, laser therapy or any other similar 
medical procedure; and 
(g) ―intersex status‖ means the condition of a data principal who is a
combination of femal e and male; or neither wholly female nor wholly 
male; or neither female nor male;‘; 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 

3 
5 
10 
15 
(iv) after clause (z), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely:-
‗(za)―significant harm‖ means harm that has an aggravated effect 
having regard to the nature of the personal data being processed, the 
impact, continuity, persistence or irreversibility of the harm. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, ―harm‖ includes bodily or 
mental injury; loss, distortion or theft of identity; financial loss or loss of 
property; loss of reputation or humiliation; loss of employment; any 
discriminatory treatment; any subjection to blackmail or extortion; any 
denial or withdrawal of a service, benefit or goods resulting from an 
evaluative decision about the data principal;  any restriction placed or 
suffered directly or indirectly on speech, movement or any other action 
arising out of a fear of being observed or being under surveillance; any 
observation or surveillance that is not reasonably expected by the data 
principal; psychological manipulation which impairs the autonomy of the 
data principal; or such other harm, as may be prescribed.‘; and 
(v) the clauses (za) and (zb) may accordingly be re -numbered as (zb) and (zc)
respectively.
20 
3. In the principal Act, in section 3, in clause (a), after the words ―where
personal data is collected‖, the words ―stored, disclosed, shared or otherwise
processed‖, shall be inserted.
Amendment of 
section 3. 
25 
4. In the principal Act, in section 4, in sub-section (1)-
(i) for clause (a), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
‗(a)  only for the specific purpose for which the Data Principal has 
given her consent and which the Data Principal would reasonably expect 
that such personal data shall be only used for such purpose and in the 
context and circumstances in which the personal data was collected; or‘ 
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
―Provided that the processing of such data shall be in a fair and 
reasonable manner ensuring the privacy of the Data Principal.‖ 
Amendment of 
section 4. 
30 5. In the principal Act, after section 4, the following new section shall be
inserted, namely:-
―4A. The personal data shall be collected only to the extent that is 
necessary for the purposes of processing of such personal data.‖ 
Insertion of  new 
section 4A. 
Limitation on 
collection of 
personal data. 
35 
40 
6. In the principal Act, in section 5, in sub-section (1)-
(i) after the words ―under section 6 for consent‖, the words ―at the time of
collection of personal data‖, shall be inserted;
(ii) after clause (i), the following new clauses shall be inserted namely:-
―(ia) the source of collection, if the personal data is not collected 
directly from the Data Principal; 
(ib) the individuals or entities including other Data Fiduciaries or Data 
Processors, with whom such personal data may be shared, if applicable; 
(ic) the period for which personal data shall be retained or where 
Amendment of 
section 5. 

4 
such period is not known, the criteria for determining such period;‖ 
Insertion of 
new section  
5A. 
Categorisation 
of personal 
data as 
sensitive 
personal data. 
7. In the principal Act, after section 5, the following new section shall be
inserted namely:-
―5A. (1) The Central Government shall, from time to time, notify such
categories of personal data as ―sensitive personal data‖, having regard to—
(a) the risk of significant harm that may be caused to the Data
Principal by the processing of such category of personal data; 
(b) the expectation of confidentiality attached to such
category of personal data; 
(c) whether a significantly discernible class of Data Principals
may suffer significant harm from the processing of such category 
of personal data; and  
(d) the adequacy of protection afforded by ordinary
provisions applicable to personal data. 
(2) The Central Government may also specify, by rules and regulations,
the additional safeguards or restrictions for the purposes of repeated,
continuous or systematic collection of sensitive personal data for
profiling of such personal data.‖
5 
10 
15 
Amendment of 
section 6. 
8. In the principal Act, in section 6,
(i) after sub-section (1), the following new sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:-
―(1A) The consent of the Data Principal in respect of processing of 
any sensitive personal data shall be explicitly obtained— 
(a) after informing her the purpose of, or operation in, processing
which is likely to cause significant harm to the Data Principal; 
(b) in clear terms without recourse to inference from conduct in a
context; and 
(c) after giving her the choice of separately consenting to the
purposes of, operations in, the use of different categories of, sensitive 
personal data relevant to processing.‖ 
(ii) in sub-section (6), for the words ―within a reasonable time‖, the words
―within a period of thirty days from the date of withdrawal of consent‖, shall
be substituted.
(iii) after sub-section (7), the following new sub-sections shall be inserted:-
―(7A) The provision of any goods or services or the quality thereof, 
or the performance of any contract, or the enjoyment of any legal right or 
claim, shall not be made conditional on the consent to the processing of 
any personal data not necessary for that purpose.  
(7B) The burden of proof that the consent has been given by the 
Data Principal for processing of the personal data under this section shall 
be on the Data Fiduciary.‖ 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 

5 
9. In the principal Act, in section 7, for clause (a), the following shall be
substituted:-
―(a) only for the specified purpose for which the Data Principal has 
voluntarily provided her personal data to the Data Fiduciary.‖ 
Amendment of 
section 7. 
5 
10 
15 
10. In the principal Act, after section 7, the following new section shall be
inserted, namely:-
―7A.(1) The Data Fiduciary shall not retain any personal data beyond 
the period necessary to satisfy the purpose for which it is collected and 
processed and shall delete the same at the end of such period. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the personal
data may be retained for a longer period only if explicitly consented to by the 
Data Principal or is necessary to comply with any obligation under any law 
for the time being in force.  
(3) The Data Fiduciary shall undertake periodic review to determine
whether it is necessary to retain the personal data in its possession. 
(4) Where it is not necessary for personal data to be retained by the
Data Fiduciary under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), then, such personal 
data shall be deleted in such manner as may be specified by regulations.‖ 
Insertion of new 
section 7A. 
Restriction on 
retention of 
personal data. 
20 
11. In the principal Act, in section 8, in sub-section (7), for clause (a), the
following shall be substituted, namely:-
―(a) erase personal data, upon the Data Principal withdrawing her 
consent or immediately upon the specified purpose for which the personal 
data was collected or processed has been served.‖ 
Amendment of 
section 8. 
25 
30 
35 
40 
12. In the principal Act, in section 12, after sub-section (3), the following new
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
―(4) Where the Data Fiduciary receives a request under sub-sections (2) 
and (3), and the Data Fiduciary does not agree with such correction, 
completion, updation or erasure having regard to the purposes of processing, 
such Data Fiduciary shall provide the Data Principal with adequate 
justification in writing for rejecting the application, within a period of thirty 
days of receipt of such request. 
(5) Where the Data Principal is not satisfied with the justification
provided by the Data Fiduciary under sub-section (4), the Data Principal may 
require that the Data Fiduciary take reasonable steps to indicate, alongside the 
relevant personal data, that the same is disputed by the Data Principal. 
(6) Where the Data Fiduciary corrects, completes, updates or erases any
personal data in accordance with sub-sections (2) and (3), such Data 
Fiduciary shall also take necessary steps to notify all relevant entities or 
individuals to whom such personal data may have been disclosed regarding 
the relevant correction, completion, updation or erasure, particularly where 
such action may have an impact on the rights and interests of the Data 
Principal or on decisions made regarding them.‖ 
Amendment of 
section 12. 

6 
Insertion of 
new section 
12A and 12B. 
Right to data 
portability. 
13. In the principal Act, after section 12, the following new sections shall be
inserted, namely:-
―12A. (1) Where the processing has been carried out through automated
means, the Data Principal shall have the right to—
(a) receive the following personal data in a structured, commonly used
and machine-readable format— 
(i) the personal data provided to the Data Fiduciary;
(ii) the data which has been generated in the course of provision of
services or use of goods by the Data Fiduciary; or 
(iii) the data which forms part of any profile on the Data Principal,
or which the Data Fiduciary has otherwise obtained; and 
(b) transfer the personal data referred to in clause (a) to any other Data
Fiduciary in the format referred to in that clause. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply where—
(a) processing is necessary for functions of the State or in compliance of
any law or any judgement or order of any court, quasi-judicial authority or 
tribunal under section 7; 
(b) compliance with the request in sub-section (1) would not be
technically feasible, as determined by the Data Fiduciary in such manner as 
may be specified by regulations. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
Right to be 
forgotten. 
12B. (1) The Data Principal shall have the right to restrict or prevent the 
continuing disclosure of her personal data by a Data Fiduciary where such 
processing or disclosure— 
(a) has served the purpose for which it was collected or is no
longer necessary for the purpose and there are no other legal grounds for 
its processing or disclosure; or 
(b) was made with the consent of the Data Principal under section
6 and such consent has since been withdrawn; or 
(c) has been objected to by the Data Principal and there are no
overriding legitimate grounds for processing or disclosure; or 
(d) was made contrary to the provisions of this Act or any other
law for the time being in force. 
(2) The rights under sub-section (1) may be enforced only on an order of the
Board made on an application filed by the Data Principal, in such form and
manner as may be prescribed, on any of the grounds specified under clauses
(a), (b) or clause (c) of that sub-section:
Provided that no order shall be made under this sub-section unless it is 
shown by the Data Principal that her right or interest in preventing or 
restricting the continued disclosure of her personal data overrides the right to 
freedom of speech and expression and the right to information of any other 
citizen. 
25 
30 
35 
40 

7 
5 
10 
15 
(3) The Board shall, while making an order under sub-section (2),have regard
to—
(a) the sensitivity of the personal data;
(b) the scale of disclosure and the degree of accessibility sought to
be restricted or prevented; 
(c) the role of the Data Principal in public life;
(d) the relevance of the personal data to the public; and
(e) the nature of the disclosure and of the activities of the Data
Fiduciary, particularly whether the Data Fiduciary systematically 
facilitates access to personal data and whether the activities shall be 
significantly impeded if disclosures of the relevant nature were to be 
restricted or prevented. 
(4) Where any person finds that personal data, the disclosure of which has
been restricted or prevented by an order of the Board under sub-section (2),
does not satisfy the conditions referred to in that sub-section, he may apply
for the review of that order to the Board in such manner as may be prescribed,
and the Board shall review the order.
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order made under this section by the Board
may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
20 14. In the principal Act, in section 13, in sub-section (2), for the words ―within
such period as may be prescribed‖, the words ―within thirty days‖, shall be
substituted.
Amendment of 
section 13. 
15. In the principal Act, in section 17, sub-section (3) may be omitted. Amendment of 
section 17. 
25 
16. In the principal Act, in section 20, for sub-section(2), the following shall be
substituted, namely: -
―(2) The Chairperson and other Members shall hold office for a term of five
years and shall not be eligible for re-appointment.‖
Amendment of 
section 20. 
17. In the principal Act, in section 40, in sub-section (2), clause (o) shall be
omitted.
Amendment of 
section 40. 

8 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In a country like India with a population of around 1.4 billion, out of which at 
least 1.2 billion are mobile phone users, the State has an onerous responsibility to 
ensure data privacy of citizens, particularly of personal data. At a time when 
technology has become the defining paradigm, particularly in the post-COVID 
world, which represents a watershed moment for the role of digital technologies in 
our lives, data is the new ‗gold‘, a very valuable asset, which if processed and used 
wisely can be a gamechanger in the development story of any society and nation. 
Data is the lifeblood of the digital economy.   In this scenario, putting in place a 
strong data privacy regime has become a necessity of the times to leverage the 
potential of data without compromising the privacy of its citizens.   Protection of 
personal data holds the key to empowerment, progress, and innovation.    
 The Right to Privacy was not directly envisaged by the Constitution makers 
and as such does not find a mention in Part III of the Constitution relating to 
Fundamental Rights.   However, through various judgements over the years the 
Courts of the country have interpreted the other rights in the Constitution to be 
giving rise to a limited right to privacy – primarily through Article 21 – the right to 
life and liberty. In 2015, this interpretation was challenged and referred to a larger 
Bench of the Supreme Court in the writ petition of Justice K.S Puttaswamy & 
Another vs. Union of India and Others [Writ Petition (civil) No. 494 of 2012]. The 
Court in a landmark judgement on 24 August, 2017 unanimously ruled that privacy 
is a fundamental right, and that the right to privacy is protected as an intrinsic part of 
the right to life and personal liberty, as a part of the freedoms guaranteed by Part III 
of the Constitution. The Bench also ruled that the right to privacy is not absolute, but 
is subject to reasonable restrictions, as is every other fundamental right.   
 Privacy enjoys a robust legal framework internationally. Article 12 of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 and Article 17 of the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), 1966, legally protect persons 
against ―arbitrary interference‖ with one‘s privacy, family, home, correspondence, 
honour and reputation.   The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) of the 
European Union, which came into force on 25 May 2018 is also a case in point.  
 The Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) Act passed in 2023 (22 of 2023) 
is a welcome step in this direction.   However, there are many shortcomings and 
loopholes in the new Act, which waters down the legislative intent of ensuring a 
strong data privacy framework at par with other nations and dilutes accountability 
and transparency.   As  a corrective measure to the Act, this Bill aims to widen its 
scope by addressing certain key aspects and concerns flagged by stakeholders.  To  
begin with, the applicability of the Act is proposed to be made broad based to 
include not only personal data that is collected, but also stored, disclosed, shared or 
otherwise processed.  Certain definitions are also being proposed to render clarity to 
the various terminologies used in the Bill.   Purpose limitation has been proposed to 
ensure that data may be processed only for the specific purpose for which the Data 
Principal has given consent and shall be used only in the context and circumstances 
in which the data was collected, thus guaranteeing the right to privacy to all citizens.  
The scope of the information to be accompanied or preceded by the notice to be 
given by a Data Fiduciary to a Data Principal at the time of collection of personal 
data has also been widened so that each individual while giving their consent can 

9 
make an informed and free decision with full knowledge of the implications of 
giving consent.   
 The present Act is silent on sensitive personal data and its collection and 
processing.  It is therefore proposed to categorise sensitive personal data and clearly 
define it.  The present Act also does not regulate the risks of harms including 
material losses such as financial loss, loss of access to benefits or services, identity 
theft, loss of reputation, discrimination etc., arising out of processing of personal 
data.  The Committee of Experts on Data Protection constituted by the Central 
Government in 2017 under the chairmanship of Justice B.N. Srikrishna to examine 
the issues relating to data protection in the country in its Report had observed that 
harm is a possible consequen ce of personal data processing and had recommended 
that it should be regulated under a data protection law.   The Bill therefore proposes 
that explicit consent is mandatory for collection and processing of sensitive personal 
data.  Further, it is proposed that in cases of withdrawal of consent by the data 
principal, the request must necessarily be processed and implemented within a 
stipulated time frame of thirty days.   The Bill also seeks to restrict the retention of 
personal data. 
 In the DPDP Act, 2023,  the provisions relating to Right to Data Portability 
and the Right to be Forgotten have not been included.  Both these rights were part of 
the 2018 draft Bill and the Personal Data Protection Bill, 2019 introduced in 
Parliament and was recommended by the Joint Parliamentary Committee on the 
Personal Data Protection Bill, 2019. The Srikrishna Committee (2018) had observed 
that a strong set of rights of data principals is an essential component of a data 
protection law and that these rights are based on the principles of autonomy, 
transparency and accountability to give individuals control over their data.   The 
GDPR of the European Union also recognises these rights. The right to data 
portability allows data principals to obtain and transfer their data from data fiduciary 
for their own use in a structured, commonly used and machine-readable format, thus 
giving the data principals greater control over their data.   It also facilitates migration 
of data from one data fiduciary to another.   
 The Right to be Forgotten refers to the right of individuals to limit the 
disclosure of their personal data on the internet and to have their personal data 
removed or erased in certain circumstances, such as withdrawal of consent or the 
purpose for which data was collected and processed has been served or the data is 
requested to be pulled down by the data principal for various reasons. Guaranteeing 
of this right is imperative in the present times when a person is often haunted by the 
data being retained in the digital world, irrespective of its veracity or contextual 
relevance, and has the power to cause damage to a person‘s right to life with dignity.   
The Srikrishna Committee (2018) observed that the Right to be Forgotten is an idea 
that attempts to instil the limitations of memory into an otherwise limitless digital 
sphere.  However, the Committee has also highlighted that this right may need to be 
balanced with competing rights and interests and has laid down five-point criteria 
for determining its applicability.   Several Court pronouncements have also 
recognised this right, particularly when it pertains to sensitive personal information 
and acquittals which if allowed to remain on digital platforms adversely affects the 
personal life of an individual, continued loss of respect, employment opportunities, 
matrimonial prospects and leads to discrimination and isolation in society.   The 
present Bill therefore, proposes to incorporate the Right to be Forgotten subject to 

10 
the limitations based on the five-point criteria laid down in the Srikrishna 
Committee Report.   
 The Bill also proposes to omit the exemption given to certain class of data 
fiduciaries from giving the requisite notice before collection of personal data and 
obtaining consent for its processing.  Though the present Act provides that the Data 
Protection Board of India will function as an independent body, the appointment of 
its Members for two years with eligibility for re-appointment is likely to lead to 
increased influence and control of the Executive.   It  is therefore, proposed that 
Members of the Board will be appointed for five years and will not be eligible for 
re-appointment, so that the independent functioning of the Board is not undermined.   
 The above-mentioned amendments will definitely give more teeth to our data 
protection framework and strengthen it sufficiently so that India can unleash the 
power of data and use it to its fullest potential in transforming our country and 
economy into one of the foremost powers in the world. 
 Hence this Bill. 
SANDOSH KUMAR P. 

11 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DIGITAL PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION ACT, 2023 
(22 OF 2023) 
* *  * *  * 
2. * *  * *  * 
(i) ―Data Fiduciary‖ means any person who alone or in conjunction with
other persons determines the purpose and means of processing of personal data.  
Definitions. 
*                          *                          *                            *                            *  
(k) ―Data Processor‖ means any person who processes personal data on
behalf of a Data Fiduciary. 
* *  * *  * 
3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall–––
(a) apply to the processing of digital personal data within the territory of
India where the personal data is collected–– 
(i) in digital form; or
(ii) in non-digital form and digitised subsequently;
Application of 
Act. 
* *  * *  * 
4. (1) A person may process the personal data of a Data Principal only in
accordance with the provisions of this Act and for a lawful purpose,––
(a) for which the Data Principal has given her consent; or
(b) for certain legitimate uses.
(2) For the purposes of this section, the expression ―lawful purpose‖ means
any purpose which is not expressly forbidden by law. 
Grounds for 
processing 
personal data. 
*                          *                           * *  * 
5. (1) Every request made to a Data Principal under section 6 for consent shall be
accompanied or preceded by a notice given by the Data Fiduciary to the Data
Principal, informing her,––
(i) the personal data and the purpose for which the same is proposed to
be processed; 
(ii) the manner in which she may exercise her rights under sub -section
(4) of section 6 and section 13; and
(iii) the manner in which the Data Principal may make a complaint to the
Board, in such manner and as may be prescribed. 
Notice. 
6. (1) The consent given by the Data Principal shall be free, specific, informed,
unconditional and unambiguous with a clear affirmative action, and shall signify
an agreement to the processing of her personal data for the specified purpose and
be limited to such personal data as is necessary for such specified purpose.
Consent. 

12 
* *  * *  * 
(6) If a Data Principal withdraws her consent to the processing of personal
data under sub -section (5), the Data Fiduciary shall, within a reasonable time, 
cease and cause its Data P rocessors to cease processing the personal data of such 
Data Principal unless such processing without her consent is required or 
authorised under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any 
other law for the time being in force in India. 
* *  * *  * 
Certain 
legitimate 
uses. 
7. A Data Fiduciary may process personal data of a Data Principal for any of the
following uses, namely:–––
(a) for the specified purpose for which the Data Principal has voluntarily
provided her personal data to the Data Fiduciary, and in respect of which she has 
not indicated to the Data Fiduciary that she does not consent to the use of her 
personal data. 
* *  * *  * 
General 
obligations of 
Data 
Fiduciary. 
8. * *  * *  * 
(7) A Data Fiduciary shall, unless retention is necessary for compliance with any
law for the time being in force,—
(a) erase personal data, upon the Data Principal withdrawing her consent or
as soon as it is reasonable to assume that the specified purpose is no longer being 
served, whichever is earlier; and  
(b) cause its Data Processor to erase any personal data that was  made
available by the Data Fiduciary for processing to such Data Processor. 
* *  * *  * 
Right of 
grievance 
redressal. 
13. * *  * *  * 
(2) The Data Fiduciary or Consent Manager shall respond to any grievances
referred to in sub -section (1) within such period as may be prescribed from the 
date of its receipt for all or any class of Data Fiduciaries. 
* *  * *  * 
Exemptions. 17. * *  * *  * 
(3) The Central Government may, having regard to the volume and nature of
personal data processed, notify certain Data Fiduciaries or class of Data 
Fiduciaries, including startups, as Data Fiduciaries  to whom the provisions of 
section 5, sub -sections (3) and (7) of section 8 and sections 10 and 11 shall not 
apply. 
* *  * *  * 
Salary, 
allowances 
payable to and 
term of office. 
20. * *  * *  * 
(2) The Chairperson and other Members shall hold office for a term of two
years and shall be eligible for re-appointment. 

13 
* *  * *  * 
40. * *  * *  * 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:–– 
*                          *                           *                             *                            *  
(o) the period within which the Data Fiduciary shall respond to any
grievances under sub-section (2) of section 13; 
Power to make 
rules. 
*                          *                           *     * *

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023. 
(Shri Sandosh Kumar P., M.P.) 
RS-P&PS–PMB(E)—059–10.02.2025. 