1
Bill No. LXV of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In article 124 of the Constitution, after clause (7), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
''(8) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall hold
any executive position or any office of profit, under the Government of India or any of
the State Governments, before the expiry of five years from the date he ceases to hold
such office.''
A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
article 124.
5
10

3. After article 220 of the Constitution, the following new article shall be inserted,
namely:—
''220A. No person who has held office as a Judge or as the Chief Justice of a High
Court shall hold any executive position or any office of profit, under the Government
of India or any of the State Governments, before the expiry of five years from the date
he ceases to hold such office.''
2
Amendment of
article 220.
Restriction on
post-
retirement
employment
under
Government
of a Judge of a
High Court.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Independence and impartial functioning of the judiciary and the protection of
constitutional governance depend upon the separation of powers. The judiciary is supposed
to uphold the Constitution. It acts as a check against excesses, arbitrariness, and unlawful
steps that may emanate from other branches.
This independence of the judiciary is achieved by many protective constitutional
provisions. Judges cannot be arbitrarily removed once they are appointed, and can only be
removed from office by a special majority of both Houses under article 124(4) of the
Constitution. Judges, therefore, enjoy security of tenure while holding office, which is essential
for maintaining judicial independence.
The Constitution also prohibits post-retirement work by judges as lawyers. Article
124(7) of the Constitution provides that a retired Supreme Court judge cannot ''plead or act in
any court or before any authority within the territory of India''.
However, this provision only restricts post-retirement appointments in judiciary itself,
but not in posts of President, Governor, Member of Parliament, etc. The post-retirement
appointment of judges to other executive posts may undermine judicial independence.
In the Constituent Assembly, K T Shah, had put forward the suggestion that High
Court and Supreme Court judges should not take up an executive office with the Government,
''so that no temptation should be available to a judge for greater emoluments, or greater
prestige which would in any way affect his independence as a judge.''
In its 14th report in 1958, the Law Commission strongly recommended banning post-
retirement Government employment for Supreme Court judges because the Government was
a litigant in the courts in large number of cases.
Several appointments to administrative bodies require a cooling-off period for
individuals so as to eliminate the possibility or suspicion of a conflict of interst or quid pro
quo. This cooling-off period must be extended to Indian Judiciary. No person who has been
appointed as judge in the Supreme Court or the judge or chief  justice of a High Court shall
hold any executive position or any office of profit, under the Government of India or any of
the States of India, before the expiry of five years from the date of reirement from the post of
the Judge of the respective court.
The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives.
DR.  V .  SIV ADASAN.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION  OF INDIA
124. * * * * * * *
(7) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall plead or act in
any court of before any authority within the territory of India
* * * * * * *
Establishment
and
constitution
of Supreme
Court.
4

MGIPMRND—1787RS(S3)—12-12-2022.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Dr. V. Sivadasan, M.P .)