AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. LXV of  2025 
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A 
B
ILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
I
ndia as follows:– 
5 
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) A ct, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Sh
ort title and 
commencement. 
2. I n the Preamble to the Constitution, the words "SOCIALIST" and
"SECULAR" shall be omitted.
Amendment of 
th
e Preamble. 
10 
3. Nothing in this Act shall affect the operation of any provision of the
Constitution, unless explicitly amended by Parliament in exercise of its
constituent power under article 368.
Ac
t not to affect 
operation of any 
provision of the 
Constitution. 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 The purpose of this Bill is to omit the words 'Socialist' and 'Secular' from 
the Preamble to the Constitution of India, which were added by way of the 
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976. This Bill seeks to correct the 
apparent violation of democratic standards and to restore the original, unaltered 
Preamble adopted by the Constituent Assembly on November 26, 1949 and its 
constitutional validity in accordance with the original vision of the founding 
fathers of the Constitution and to address the deep ideological tensions that were 
triggered during the Emergency period. 
The Forty-second Amendment, commonly referred to as the 'Mini 
Constitution', was enacted in 1976 during a time when the country was placed 
under a state of Emergency when civil liberties were suspended, and most of the 
leaders of the opposition were imprisoned.  The said amendment was passed by 
the Parliament expeditiously leading to widespread concerns about its 
implications. The apparent arbitrariness of this process, the absence of opposition 
dissent and the imprisonment of leaders have raised questions about its 
constitutional validity and the sanctity of the democratic process to this day. 
The words 'Socialist' and 'Secular' were not in the original Preamble and 
this was a reasoned priority of the founding fathers of the Constitution. The 
founding father of the Constitution, Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, clearly opposed the 
inclusion of the term “Socialist”, stating that it would “completely destroy 
democracy”, as it would bind the future generations to a particular economic 
ideology and deprive them of the freedom to choose their own paths according to 
time and circumstances. Similarly, he considered the term "Secular" unnecessary, 
as the fundamental structure of the Constitution had already ensured the religious 
freedom and the neutrality of the State in Articles 25 to 28. The Preamble was a 
fundamental principle declaration, not a code bound by any rigid ideological 
framework. Thus, omission of these words would be a sign of respect towards the 
original intent and vision of the Constituent Assembly. 
It is also significant that even in the absence of these words in the 
Constitution, it had clearly incorporated the principles of protecting the rights of 
the minorities, and ensuring religious freedom, and economic justice. From the 
very beginning, the values of liberty, equality, justice, and fraternity have been at 
the core of the Preamble and the Constitution. Therefore, it is reasonable to say 
that the Constitution was inclusive and equitable even without these additional 
words. 
"Socialism" and "Secularism" are often considered western concepts that 
do not align with cultural and civilisational traditions of India. India's religious 
perspective is based on the principle of ‘ Sarva Dharma Samabhava ’, which 
reflects a sense of equal respect for every religion, rather than the necessity of 
complete separation of religion from the State. In the Indian tradition, religion has 
been an integral part of life, not an element that should be completely separated 
from public life. After the addition of the term 'Secular', a misconception arose 
that the State has to maintain distance from all religious activities, which is 
contrary to the spirit of the Indian tradition. 
Similarly, the Indian version of socialism turned into a system of 
government control, subsidy-based arrangements, and a bureaucratic mechanism, 
which stifled the possibilities of innovation, competition, and private initiative. It 
could neither eradicate poverty nor mitigate economic inequality. Instead, it gave 
birth to a corrupt and inefficient system. In contrast, Indian economic concepts 
such as Gandhian 'trusteeship' have been based upon service, obligation, and 
community welfare. 
The addition of these words has led to criticism as promoting 'artificial 
secularism' and 'politics of appeasement' . Removal of these words will allow 
India to redefine its national identity and guiding principles based on its own 
cultural and philosophical heritage. 

3 
The addition of these words through the 42nd amendment was an apparent 
violation of democratic ideals. Through this Bill, the Parliament can send a clear 
message that constitutional amendments should only be made through free and fair 
democratic deliberations and not as a tool for centralization of power or 
authoritarian tendencies. 
 Though, the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India has held 'Secularism' and 
'Socialism' as part of the basic structure of the Constitution, as seen in the rulings 
such as Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala (1973) and the recent Dr. 
Balaram Singh vs. Union of India (2024), this Bill is a strong assertion of the 
legislative sovereignty of the Parliament. This gives the judiciary an opportunity to 
review whether any principle could be part of that “Basic Structure” which has 
been added to the Constitution through an apparent undemocratic process, while 
democracy itself is the fundamental basis of the basic structure. This legislative 
initiative simultaneously challenges the judicial concepts and also demonstrates 
that the will of Parliament is the highest constitutional expression in a democracy. 
Hence, this Bill. 
BHIM SINGH. 

4 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
Preamble 
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to  constitute 
India into a SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC 
and to secure to all its citizens: 
 JUSTICE, social, economic and political; 
 LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; 
 EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; 
and to promote among them all 
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and 
integrity of the Nation; 
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of November, 
1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS 
CONSTITUTION. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
____________ 
(Dr. Bhim Singh, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–259–08.12.2025. 