AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LXV of 2001
THE BANNING OF FAKE EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
BILL, 2001
A
BILL

to provide for banning all the fake educational institutions which exist just for the name
sake in the country and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, (7) This Act may be called the Banning of fake Educational Institutions Act,
2001.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall. come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “fake educational institution”
means an educational institution which does not exist physically and confers certificates of
Matric, Higher Secondary, B.A. Degrees and Technical diplomas and degrees without
conducting any exantination and offers false promises through advertisements to attract
students.

Short ttle,
extent and

Definitions.


2

Banning of fake 3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
educational all fake educational institutions are hereby banned.

Institutions. :

Setting up of 4. (1) For the purposes of this Act the Central Government shall set up a committee

the Committee. of educational experts.
(2) The functions of the Committee shall be:—
(i) to make a list of all fake educational institutions that exist in the country;

(ii) to scrutinize all advertisements given in newspapers, magazines, periodicals
by such institutions;

(iii) to recommend to the Central Government or State Government, as the
case may be, for cancellation of registration, if any, and immediate closure of such
institutions and such other action against than as may be necessary for carrying out

the provisions of this Act.
Penalty. 5. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term of not exceeding five years or fine of rupees one lakh, or with
, both.
Power to make 6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules

rules. for carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It has been pointed out by the University Grants Commission that fake educational
institutions are operating in the country. They have also issued warnings to the students
that they should not fall prey to such institutions. The certificates for Matric, Higher
Secondary, B.A. Degrees and Technical diplomas and degrees are being provided by such
institutions in a large scale without conducting any examination. Many such fake degrees
have been unearthed recently in the recruitment of army, government services and also in
public sector undertakings. These institutions demand exorbitant fees and money from the
students. These institutions spend lot of money for advertisements by advertising in almost
all the Indian Papers. These institutions, thus, destroy and spoil our youths. These institutions
are at present operating in a large scale. Hence, it is necessary that Government should
take immediate measures to check such type of institutions. They not only spoil the youth
but there is a deterioration in working as these students have no proper knowledge of their
education. As such, it is time that Government should introduce such a legislation to
eliminate such type of institutions in the country.

RUMANDLA RAMACHANDRAIAH


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of Legislative Power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for banning all the fake educational institutions which exists just for the
name sake in the country and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

(Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3187RS—31.10.2001.