AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LXVIII of 2001

THE CHILDREN OF PARENTS LIVING BELOW POVERTY LINE
(SPECIAL EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES) BILL, 2001

A

BILL
to provide for the special educational facilities to children of parents living below poverty
line throughout the country and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Children of Parents Living Below Poverty Line
(Special Educational Facilities) Act, 2001.

5 (2) It xtends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the State Govern-
ment and in all other cases the Central Government,

10 (0) “parents living below poverty line” means those parents of a child whose
monthly income from all the sources is less than five hundred rupees per mensem;

(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

Short title
extent and

Definitions.


Free education
to children
born of parents
living below
poverty line,

Provision of
certain
facilities to
children of
parents living
below poverty
fine

Schotarshups an
deserving
cases

Power to make.
rules

2

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force the appropriate Government shall provide all children born of parents living
below poverty line free education from school to post graduate levels and in technical
Institutions including medical and engineering Colleges.

4. The appropriate Government shall provide all children of parents living be-
low poverty line and getting education under section 3 free of cost necessary books,
writing materials, clothing, hostel facilities wherever necessary, transportation and
such other facilities which are essential for education as may be prescribed from time
to time.

5. The appropriate Government shall provide monthly scholarships to the
children of parents living below poverty line in deserving cases during their education
at such rates as may be prescribed.

6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Nearly 40 per cent. of the total population of our country live below the poverty
line. Their income is meagre and they fight for their subsistence throughout their lives.
They had a hand to mouth existence and cannot even think of getting elementary educa-
tion which may enable them to read and write. Since promotion of universal education
and establishment of classless and creedless society is one of the basic aims of our Consti-
tution, the Governments at the National and State levels should make provisions for free
educational facilities and provide books, uniform, writing materials, transportation and
hostel facilities free of cost to the children of persons living below the poverty line that is
to say, whose total famtiy income is below five hundred rupees per month, so that they
could get proper education and have better job opportunities and are able to raise their
standard of living. It will also be a major step in eradicating illiteracy from the country
and achieving the goals of universalisation of education by our country.

Hence this Bill.

SURESH PACHOURI


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free education to children born of parents living
below poverty line. Clause 4 provides for certain facilities to such children and clause 5
provides for scholarships in deserving cases. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of india. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure to the
tune of rupees three hundred crores is likely to be incurred per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore 18 also likely to be
incurred,


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to frame rules for carry-
ing out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The
delegation of Legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the special educational facilities to children of parents living below poverty
line throughout the country and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P)

MGIP(PLUJMRND—3220RS—06-1 1-2001,