AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LXVI of 2001

THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
Bai
to amend the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Prevention of Corruption Amendment Act, 2001.

49 of 1988 2. In section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as
5. the Principal Act),—
(@ in sub-clause (iii) of clause (०), after the words and figure & “Companies
Act, 1956" the following expression shall be inserted namely:—
“or a company or corporation in which the State, as defined in Article 12 of
the Constitution of India, holds not less than one percent of the paid up share-capital
10 thereof.”
(ii) in sub-clause (ix), for the words "trade or banking” the words "housing
activities, healthcare, trade or banking” shall be substituted;

Short title.

Amendment of
Section 2.


(iii) in sub-clause (xii), for the words “any financial assistance”, the words
“any financial assistance including, concession in payment of taxes, purchase of
land for house-building or afforestation or incentives for export-promotion” shall
be substituted.

Amendment of 3. In section 4, of the Principal Act, in sub-section (4)— 5
‘ (0) The words “as far as practicable”, shall be omitted; and

(ii) after the words “day-to-day basis” the following words shall be inserted,
namely,—

“unless sufficient cause for seeking adjourhment of the case for a longer period
is proved to exist and the special Judge, before granting such adjournment, records 10
the reasons therefore in writing and announces in open court.”


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

With the recent unbridled expansion of the system of liberalisation, privatisation
and globalisation, the corruption and scams related activities of functionaries in non-
government companies have become a major factor not only in the increased distortion of
the national economy and the social life of the people but also tend to adversely affect the
political stability to the detriment of safety, security and integrity of the Country. The
non-governmental institutions with the active and substantial financial support of the ‘State’
have begun to exercise great influence on the economic, social and political and even on
religious life of the common people. Unscrupulous functionaries of such institutions are
getting increasingly involved in perpetration of corrupt practices. Hence it is necessary to
incorporate provisions in the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 to extend its application
to such functionaries of non-governmental agencies who take substantial benefit of the
largesse of the ‘State’. The Bill seeks to expand the definition of the expression “public
servant” so as to bring the functionaries of such non-governmental institutions within the
scope of the Act. It also seeks to provide for expeditious hearing of cases under the Act.

S. RAMACHANDRAN PILLAI


Definitions,

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE PREVENTION OF CorRuPTION AcT, 2001.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “election” means any election, by whatever means held under any law for
the purpose of selecting members of Parliament or of any Legislature, local authority
or other public authority;

(b) “Public duty” means a duty in the discharge of which the State, the public
or the community at large has an interest;

Explanation.—In this clause “State” includes a corporation established by or under

a Central, Provincial or State Act, or an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided
by the Government or a Government tompany as defined in section 617 of the companies
Act, 1956;

(c) “public servant” means—

(@ any person in the service or pay of the Government or remunerated by the
Government by fees or commission for the performance of any public duty;

(ii) any person in the service or pay of a local authority;

(iii) any person in the service or pay of a corporation established by or under
a Central, Provincial or State Act, or an authority or a body owned or controlled or
aided by the Government or a government company as defined in section 617 of the
Companies Act, 1956;

(iv) any Judge, including aay person empowered by law to discharge, whether
by himself or as a member of any body of persons, any adjudicatory functions;

(v) any person authorised by a court of justice to perform any duty, in connection
with the administration of justice, including a liquidator, receiver or commissioner
appointed by such court;

(vi) any arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or matter has been,
referred for decision or report by a court of justice or by a competent public authority;

(vii) any person who holds an office by virtue of which he is empowered to
prepare, publish, maintain or revise an electoral roll or to conduct an election or
part of an election;

(viii) any person who holds an office by virtue of which he is authorised or
required to perform any public duty;

(ix) any person who is the president, secretary or other office-bearer of a
registered co-operative society engaged in agriculture, industry, trade or banking,
receiving or having received any financial aid ftom the Central Government or a
State Government or from any corporation established by or under a Central,

Provincial or State Act, or any authority or body owned or controlled or aided by the ~

Government or a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies
Act, 1956;

(x) any person who is a chairman, member or employee of any Service
Commission ७ Board, by whatever name called, or a member of any selection
committee appointed by such banner or Board for the conduct of any
examination or making any selection on of such Commission or Board;

1 of 1956,

1 of 1956.

1 of 1956,


2 of 1974,

Zot 1४74.

of 1974,

(xi) any person who is a Vice-Chancellor or member of’ any governing body,
professor, reader, lecturer or any other teacher or employee, by whatever designation
called, of any University and any person whose services have been availed of by a
University or any other Public authority in connection with holding or conducting
examinations;

(xii) any person who is an office-bearer or an employee of an educational,
scientific, social, cultural or other s¢stitution, in whatever manner established,
receiving or having received any financial assistance from the Central Government
of any State Government, or 1008 or other public authority.

Explanation 1.—Persons falling .-der any of the above sub-clauses are public
servants, whether appointed by the Government or not.

Explanation 2.—Wherever the wors!s “public servant” occur, they shall be understood
of every person who is in actual possessine of the situation of a public servant, whatever
legal defect there may be in his right to hoid thet situation.

4. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained 75 the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
or in any other law for the time being in force, ihe offences specified in sub-section (/) of
section 3 shall be tried by special Judge only.

(2) Every offence specified in sub-section (7) of section 3 shall be tried by the
special Judge for the area within which it was committed, or, as the case may be, by the
special Judge appointed for the case, or where there are more special Judges than one for
such area, by such one of them as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government.

(3) When trying any case, a sepcial Judge may also try any offence, other than an
offence specified in section 3, with whizh if accused may, under the Code of Criminal
Procdure, 1973 be charged at the same tri.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a
special Judge shall, as far as practicable, hold the trial of an offence on day-to-day basis.

Cases triable by
special Judges,


RAJYA SABHA

A
Bue
to amend the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.

Ser 7 5 ip chandron Pillai i 7)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3185Ris--4 1 #00"