1
Bill No. LXVIII of 2012
THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGES BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to provide for all regional languages to be used for all official purposes of the Union
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS in a democracy, the application of laws must be understandable to all its
citizens;
AND WHEREAS the Hindi speaking population in India is concentrated in just six States
and residents of the remaining States, which constitute the majority have, been discriminated
against by not being allowed to conduct official business in their regional language;
A
ND WHEREAS the languages people speak helps in define who they are and being
allowed to communicate in the same language is part of our right to identity which is implicit
in the Fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution of India.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:
1. (1) this Act may be called the Official Languages Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012

2
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States and
any reference in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed in
relation to any State as a reference to the coming into force of that provision in that State.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires;—
(a) "Committee" means the Official languages Committee Constituted under
section 6;—
(b) "official purpose" means and includes,—
(i) communication between one Ministry or Department or office of the
Central Government and another Ministry;
(ii) communication between one Ministry or Department or office of the
Central Government and any corporation or company owned or controlled by
the Central Government or any office thereof;
(iii) communication between the Central Government or any Ministry or
Department or office thereof or any corporation or company owned or controlled
by the Central Government or any office thereof and any State Government or
any Ministry or Department or office thereof or any corporation or company
owned or controlled by the State Government or any office thereof;
(iv) communication between any corporation or company owned or
controlled by the Central Government or any office thereof and another;
(v) resolutions, general orders, rules, notifications, administrative or other
reports or press releases issued or made by the Central Government or by a
Ministry, Department or office thereof or by a corporation or company owned or
controlled by the Central Government or by any office of such corporation or
company;
(vi) administrative and other reports and official papers laid before the
Houses of Parliament;
(vii) contracts and agreements executed, licences, permits, notices and
forms for tender issued, by or on behalf of the Central Government or any
Ministry, Department or office thereof or by a corporation or company owned or
controlled by the Central Government or by any office of such corporation or
company; and
(viii) proceedings conducted in High Courts of all States including any
judgment, decree or order passed or made by the High Court.
(c) "official status" means the position given to all languages mentioned in the
Eighth Schedule to the Constitution which can be used for official purposes;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other legislation for the time being in
force, all languages listed in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India, as of the day
this Act comes into force, and those to be included by amending the constitution, shall be
given official status from such date on which this Act comes into force:
Provided that no language that has been removed from the Eighth Schedule of the
Constitution by an amendment made to the constitution shall be given official status.
4. All languages that have been given official status shall be used for all official
purposes as defined in section 2 of this Act, of the Union:
Provided that for communication between one Ministry or Department or office of the
Central Government and another; or communication between one Ministry or Department
or office of the Central Government and any corporation or company owned or controlled by
Definitions.
Official status
to languages in
the Eighth
Schedule.
Languages to
be given
official status
for all official
purposes of the
Union.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
the Central Government or any office thereof; or communication between any corporation
or company owned or controlled by the Central Government or any office thereof and
another; the official language or languages preferred by both the Ministries or Departments
or other office of the Central Government or corporations or companies owned or controlled
by the Central Government or any office thereof shall be taken into account and all
communication between the Ministries or Departments or other office of the Central
Government or any office thereof shall be conducted in all such official languages in such
a way that they are all translations of one another:
Provided further that all communication between the Central Government or any
corporation or company owned or controlled by the Central Government or any office
thereof and any State Government or any corporation or company owned or controlled by the
State Government or any office thereof shall be in both English and the official language
preferred by the State concerned and the official language preferred by the Centre
Government:
Provided further that all resolutions, general orders, rules, notifications,
administrative or other reports, press releases issued or made by the Central Government
or by a corporation or company owned or controlled by the Central Government or by any
office of such corporation or company, administrative and other reports, official papers laid
before a House or the House of Parliament, contracts and agreements executed, licences,
permits notices and forms for tender issued by or on behalf of the Central Government or by
a corporation or company owned or controlled by the Central Government or by any office of
such corporation or company, shall be issued in all official languages:
Provided further that proceedings of High Courts including any judgment, decree or
order passed or made by a High Court may be in the official language adopted by the State in
which the High Court is situated.
5. Notwithstanding anything provided in section 4, an English translation shall be
provided at the time for all communications made for official purposes.
6. ( 1) The Central Government shall by notification in the official Gazette constitute
an Official Languages Committee under the provisions of  this Act within sixty days of its
coming into force.
(2) The Committee shall consist of twenty members, of whom ten shall be members of
the House of the people and ten shall be members of the Council of States, to be elected
respectively by the members of the House of the People and the members of the Council of
States in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of a single
transferable vote.
7. The Committee shall promote the teaching and learning of all official languages in
such manner as may be prescribed.
8. (1) The Committee shall annually submit a report to the President making
recommendations thereon and the president shall cause the report to be laid before each
house of Parliament, and sent to all the State Governments.
(2) The President may, after consideration of the report referred to in sub-section (1) of
section 8, and the views, if any , expressed by the State Government thereon, issue directions
in accordance with the whole or any part of the report:
Provided that the directions so issued shall be consistent with the other provisions of
this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
English
translation of
communications.
Establishment
of Official
Languages
Committee.
Functions of
the Committee.
Power to make
rules.
Annual Report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
10. The Official Languages Act, 1963 with all its amendments is hereby repealed.
Repeal of
Official
Language Act,
1963.
19 of 1963.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The language we speak helps define who we are and adds to our sense of identity. It is
a inalienable right conforming to the principles embodied in the United Nations International
Convention on Civil and Political Rights and according to the spirit of Part III of the
Constitution of India. It is therefore pertinent to make provisions that promote the linguistic
and cultural diversity of India and not to stifle it.
In a democracy, the laws it applies must be understandable to all its citizens. Moreover
there can be no discrimination between people belonging to different states are treated. If
residents of one State are given the privilege to conduct official business in their mother
tongue, the same privilege must be extended to all citizens. In the official dealings with
institutions, all citizens must have the right to use their own regional language. While national
integration is of paramount importance, we as a union of State must also actively promote the
freedom of its peoples to speak and write their own language.
India must be committed to maintaining its multilingual character. It is important for us
to realize that the protection and promotion of regional languages represent an important
contribution to the building of an India based on the principles of democracy and cultural
diversity within the framework of national sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
TIRUCHI  SIV A
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that all official languages may be used for all official
purposes of the Union. Clause 5 of the Bill provides that an English translation must be
provided at all times for all communications made for official purposes. Clause 6 of the Bill
provides for the constitution of an Official languages Committee to promote the teaching
and learning of all official languages. Clause 7 of the Bill prescribes the function of the
Official Languages Committee. The expenditure shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund
of India, however, at this stage, it is difficult to estimate the exact expenditure both recurring
and non-recurring.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Act. Each rule made by the Central Government is required to be laid,
before each House of Parliament. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are
matters of procedure or administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislation power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for all regional languages to be used for all official purposes of the Union and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Tiruchi Siva, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3973RS(S3)—07-12-2012.