AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
ON 2ND FEBRUARY, 2024 
Bill No.  LXVIII of 2023 
THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS 
(AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2023 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. 
       BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:- 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(Amendment) Act, 2023. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
59 of 1960 
. 
10 
2. In section 20 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960,  in clause
(b), for the words “with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees,’’, the
words “with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 6 months and
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees,’’ shall be substituted.
Amendment of 
Section 20. 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The crime of practising cruelty towards animals is an offence, which  is directed  towards 
harming or taking away the lives of innocent creatures with whom we share our world. 
Cruelty towards animals is, in most cases, an action resulting from a gross perversion of  the 
mind of the person committing the offence and is an act that is violent as well as sadistic in 
nature. Animals around us need our protection as they are beings unable to communicate or 
express their pain. While human beings have the intellectual and  logical  facilities  to seek 
justice against torture, the same is not available to animals, who are helpless and dependent 
on whoever has their custody. We are a country with a rich cultural history of  compassion 
towards animal life and even our ancient texts provide  for a special place for animals in our 
society. Notable texts like the Jataka Tales have even used animals as a medium for instilling 
righteous and moral values in children. We have always recognized that animals are sentient 
beings, who exhibit qualities often attributed to humans such as love, grief, pain, attachment, 
emotional intelligence and loyalty. When laws of our country provide for  exemplary 
punishment against torture of human beings, it is also essential that cruelty towards animal 
life be punished in a manner that not only penalizes the offender proportionate to their crimes 
but also acts as a deterrent for any potential offenders. Currently, the  extant  law, i.e., the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, only  provides for a penalty of two hundred 
rupees if found guilty of the crime of inflicting torture and cruelty towards animals. While 
that sum might have been an exemplary penal amount in 1960, the evolution of our society as 
well as present circumstances demonstrates that a harsher penalty is warranted. Individuals 
guilty of inflicting cruelty and torture on animals should not be allowed to do so and escape 
by paying a meagre penalty of just two hundred rupees. Cruelty towards animals can happen 
across a spectrum of severity and our judiciary should have the provision of imposing the 
penalty of imprisonment as well as enhanced exemplary fine in cases of wanton and sadistic 
infliction of cruelty on and torture of animals.  
The objective of the proposed Bill emanates from our responsibility as a  civilized  society 
towards protecting animals and punishing wanton torture and cruelty inflicted  on them by 
individuals of a sadistic bent. Such cruelty when demonstrated in front of  children also 
influences the way they  look at animals and can influence their minds with the horrible 
notion that torturing animals  is acceptable and that it can even be  an  activity  for fun and 
entertainment. Imposing harsher penalties for cruelty towards animals will not only ensure 
adequate punishment for such crimes  but will also  positively influence our society into 
understanding that animals are emotional sentient beings, whose innocent lives deserve to be 
respected and protected from torture and cruelty.  
Hence, this Bill. 
SAKET GOKHALE

3 
ANNEXURE 
 EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960 
(59 OF 1960) 
          *              *              *            *           *              *            *          
Penalties 20. If any person—
(a) contravenes any order made by the Committee under section 19; or
(b) commits a breach of any condition imposed by the Committee under that
section;
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, 
and, when the contravention or breach of condition has taken place in any 
institution, the person in charge of the institution shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be punishable accordingly. 
          * * * * * * *          

RAJYA SABHA 
_______ 
 A 
    
 BILL 
to 
amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. 
_______ 
(Shri Saket Gokhale, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—047—05.02.2024.