Short title and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
.
THE PROTECTION AND UTILISATION OF PUBLIC FUNDED
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and utilisation of intellectual property originating from
public funded research and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection and Utilisation of Public Funded Intellectual
Property  Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “designated countries” means countries in respect of which the recipient
opts to retain the title under section 5;
(b) “Government” means the Central Government and includes local authorities
and statutory authorities under the control of the Central Government;
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA.
Bill No. LXVI of 2008

2
(c) “intellectual property” means any right to intangible property, including
trade mark, patent, design, and plant variety as defined under the Copyright Act, 1957,
the Patents Act, 1970, the Designs Act, 2000, the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits
Layout-Design Act, 2000, and the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights
Act, 2001;
(d) “intellectual property creator” means the person employed or engaged by
the recipient for research and development and who created the public funded
intellectual property;
(e) “recipient” includes a university or institution of higher education established
for research purposes which has entered into an agreement with the Government
under section 3, and includes an organisation established by an Act of Parliament or a
non-profit scientific or educational organisation registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) “public funded intellectual property” means intellectual property which is
the outcome of research and development for which the Government has provided
grant under section 3;
(h) “utilisation” means the manufacture of a composition or product, the practice
of a process or method, operation of a machine or system, or commercialisation thereof.
3. (1) Any recipient interested to take a grant from the Government for the purpose of
research and development shall enter into an agreement with the Government before receipt
of such grant.
(2) The agreement entered into under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and manner
as may be prescribed.
(3) The recipient shall,—
(a) make disclosure of public funded intellectual property to the Government
within the time specified under section 4;
(b) perform the duties under section 7;
(c) constitute an intellectual property management committee in the manner
specified under section 10;
(d) abide by such other conditions as may be prescribed.
(4) The Government shall not release any grant to any recipient until an agreement
under sub-section (1) is entered into.
4. The recipient shall within a period of sixty days of actual knowledge of the public
funded intellectual property make a disclosure thereof to the Government in such form and
manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The recipient shall within ninety days of the disclosure under section 4, but
within the period specified by any law for the time being in force for receipt of application in
the designated countries for protection of public funded intellectual property, intimate, in
such form as may be prescribed, to the Government, his intention to retain the title of the
public funded intellectual property with respect to the designated countries and the
Government shall allow the title of such public funded intellectual property with respect to
such countries to vest in the recipient:
Provided that where the recipient fails to disclose the public funded intellectual property
under section 4 or give such intimation within the specified time, the title of the public funded
intellectual property, shall vest in the Government:
14 of 1957.
39 of 1970.
16 of  2000.
37 of 2000.
53 of 2001.
21 of 1860.
Funding
Agreement.
Disclosure of
public funded
intellectual
property.
Vesting of
title of public
funded
intellectual
property.

3
Provided further that the Government may, by an Order published in the Official Gazette,
refuse the title to the recipient within ninety days of the receipt of the intimation on any of the
following grounds,—
(a) that the recipient is not located in India or does not have a place of business
located in India or is subject to the control of a foreign Government;
(b) that in the public interest and in exceptional circumstances the Government
deems it expedient so to do;
(c) that it is necessary so to do in the interest of the security of the nation;
(d) that the public funded intellectual property is related to atomic energy as
defined under section 20 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 or under section 4 of the
Patents Act, 1970:
Provided also that where the Government is satisfied that the recipient has, for reasons
beyond his control failed to give intimation within the time specified under this sub-section,
it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the said period to such limit as may be
prescribed.
(2) The title of the public funded intellectual property in respect of the countries other
than the designated countries shall vest in the Government.
(3) Where the recipient fails to apply for protection of public funded intellectual property
within the period specified under section 7, the title of same, shall vest in the Government.
(4) Where the recipient does not make a written submission to retain the title to the
intellectual property or is refused the retention of title to the intellectual property by the
Government, and where more than one Government authorities are party to the funding
agreement, the intellectual property shall be jointly owned by the Government authorities on
terms agreed upon by such Government authorities:
Provided that the share of costs and responsibility for intellectual property protection,
maintenance, litigation and its utilisation shall be mutually agreed to by the Government
authorities within such time as may be prescribed.
6. The recipient shall not publically disclose, publish or exhibit the public funded
intellectual property till an application for the protection of the same in the designated
countries is made:
Provided that the recipient shall give intimation regarding public disclosure, publication
or exhibition at least fifteen days before such disclosure, publication and exhibition to enable
the Government to file application in countries other than the designated countries.
7.  A  recipient who retains the title to a public funded intellectual property shall,—
(a) apply for the protection of public funded intellectual property in designated
countries within the period specified by any law for the time being in force;
(b) having regard to its financial capability, bear all the expenses for its protection
and enforcement;
(c) initiate the process for utilisation of the public funded intellectual property
immediately after the application for protection of public funded intellectual property
is filed and submit a written report within six months and biannually thereafter to the
Government, specifying the steps taken for utilisation of the public funded intellectual
property, details of licensees and any other information as may be prescribed.
(d) share the royalties or income received from the public funded intellectual
property with the intellectual property creator under section 11;
(e) cause to maintain the accounts of the intellectual property management
committee constituted under section 10;
33 of 1962.
39 of 1970.
Bar to public
disclosure,
publication
and
exhibition.
Duties of
recipient who
retains title
to intellectual
property.

4
(f) cause the funds of the intellectual property management committee to be
audited under section 14.
8. The recipient shall not assign its right to public funded intellectual property to any
person or body of persons without the prior written permission of the Government obtained
sixty days in advance to such assignment:
Provided that the Government shall within a period of forty-five days convey its
decision to grant or refuse such permission to the recipient:
Provided further that where no such decision is conveyed within the said period of
forty-five days, permission shall be deemed to have been granted.
9. (1) The intellectual property creator shall, immediately after the creation of public
funded intellectual property, make a disclosure to the recipient to enable it to make a disclosure
to Government under section 4.
(2) The intellectual property creator shall co-operate in all respects with the recipient
or the Government, as the case may be, in the process of protection and utilisation of the
public funded intellectual property so created.
(3) The intellectual property creator shall not publish, exhibit or publicly disclose the
public funded intellectual property without prior intimation, of at least thirty days, to the
recipient or the Government, as the case may be.
10. (1) Every recipient shall, within one hundred and eighty days of the receipt of the
funds under section 3, constitute an intellectual property management committee within its
organisation.
(2) The intellectual property management committee constituted under sub-section
(1) shall,—
(a) identify, assess, document and protect public funded intellectual property
having commercial potential;
(b) perform market research and market such public funded intellectual property;
(c) create an intellectual property management fund;
(d) monitor the process of licensing and assignment;
(e) manage revenues from licensed public funded intellectual properties for the
organisation;
(f) within one hundred and eighty days of its constitution, establish mechanism
to promote the culture of innovation and public funded intellectual property generation
within the organisation;
(g) create mechanisms to govern the relations between the recipient and the
creator of public funded intellectual property.
11. (1) The income or royalties arising out of the public funded intellectual property
shall be shared as under:—
(a) subject to the provisions of any agreement which may be entered into between
the intellectual property creator and the recipient, not less then thirty per cent. of such
income or royalties, after deducting the expenses incurred in  protection and utilisation,
shall be given to the creator of intellectual property:
Provided  that  where such agreement has a provision for a lesser amount than thirty
per cent. of the net income, the provisions of this section shall prevail;
(b) out of the remainder, thirty per cent. shall be paid into the fund created by the
intellectual property management committee;
Assignment.
Duties of
intellectual
property
creator.
Constitution
of intellectual
property
management
committee
and its
functions.
Sharing of
royalties or
income.

5
(c) rest of the income or royalties shall be retained by the recipient for their
utilisation in any further research and to meet other expenses for the protection and
maintenance of public funded intellectual property.
(2) The recipient shall give a written report regarding the distribution of the royalties or
income to the Government along with report under clause (c) of section 7.
12.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no recipient who has retained
title to any public funded intellectual property and no assignee of any such recipient shall
grant, to any person, the exclusive right to use or sell any public funded intellectual property
in India, unless such person manufactures products using such public funded intellectual
property substantially in India:
Provided that the Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, allow such
sale or use for manufacture in countries other than India.
13. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Government shall have a right
to practice and to assign any public funded intellectual property to carry out its obligations
under any international treaty or agreement.
14. (1) The recipient shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be, in consultation with the
Comptroller  and Auditor-General of India, prescribed.
(2) The accounts of the recipient shall be audited by the Comptroller and Autitor-
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the recipient to the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall have the same rights and privileges
and authority as he has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers, other documents and papers  and inspection of offices of the recipient.
(4) The accounts of the recipient, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded to the Government at such
time as may be prescribed.
15. The recipient, shall prepare in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, an
annual report giving a summary of its activities including information relating to the
proceedings and policies during the previous years and such report shall also contain
statements of annual accounts of  the recipient.
16.  All disputes arising as a result of the provisions of this  Act shall be settled in
accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,  1996.
17. Nothing in this Act shall apply to any intellectual property generated out  of
scholarship, fellowship and grant given by the Government, primarily, for educational
purposes:
Provided that this section shall not apply to any public funded intellectual property
falling within sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.
18. The Government shall,—
(a) apply for protection and maintain the public funded intellectual property for
which the title vests with it under section 5 in any country as deemed necessary;
(b) grant non-exclusive, exclusive, or partially exclusive licences for Government
owned public funded intellectual property, royalty free or for royalties or other
consideration and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed;
(c) transfer custody and administration, in whole or in part, to any other entity,
the right, title or interest in any Government owned public funded intellectual property
under section 5;
Preference
for national
industry.
Government’s
right to
public funded
intellectual
property.
Audit and
Accounts.
Annual
Report.
Dispute
settlement.
Disposition
of rights in
educational
Awards.
Duties of
Government.
26 of 1996.
33 of 1962.

6
(d) give directions for prohibiting or restricting the publication of information
with respect to any public funded intellectual property or communication of such
information to any person or entity which it considers prejudicial to the interest of the
security of India.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression “interest of
security of India" means any action for the security of India that relates to the use of
public funded intellectual property for making a product which —
(i) relates to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are
derived; or
(ii) relates to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to
such traffic in other goods and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for
the purpose of supplying to a defence establishment; or
(iii) is taken in time of war or other emergency in international  relations;
(e) acquire title to any public funded intellectual property which it considers
necessary in the interest of the security of India.
19. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person in respect of anything
which is  in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.
20.  Where a recipient fails to fulfil the conditions of the agreement entered into under
section 3 and contravenes any of the provisions of sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14 and
15 the Government shall,—
(a) recover the amount of grant already released with interest at the rate of ten
per cent. per annum thereon in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) bar such recipient for future grants for those purposes which were subjects
of initial funding agreement.
21. Whoever, being creator of intellectual property, fails to discharge his duties under
section 9 shall,—
(a) not be given his share of income or royalty; and
(b) be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty-five per cent. of the
amount of grant received by the recipient for research and development.
22. Whoever being recipient, contravenes the provisions of sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10,
11, 12, 14 and 15 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty per cent. of the
amount of  the grant received by him for research and development under section 3.
23. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
24 (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry
out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which agreement shall be entered into under sub-
section (2) of section 3;
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Stoppage of
grant and
recovery of
grant
released.
Penalties for
failure to
discharge
duties of
intellectual
property
creator.
Penalty for
failure to
discharge
duties of
recipient.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.

7
(b) the conditions under clause (d) of sub-section (3) of section 3;
(c) form and manner in which the disclosure shall be made under section 4;
(d) form in which the recipient shall intimate his intention and the limit of time
extended under sub-section (1) of section 5;
(e) the time for the Government authorities to mutually agree to share costs and
responsibilities under sub-section (4) of section 5;
(f) information under clause (c) of section 7;
(g) form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be made under sub-
section (1) of section 14;
(h) the time at which the accounts together with the audit report shall be forwarded
to the Government under sub-section (4) of section 14;
(i) the form and time in which the annual  report shall be prepared  under section
15;
(j) the terms and conditions for grant of licences under clause (b) of section 18;
(k) the manner of recovery of grant under section 20.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as, may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thiry days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, that rule shall, thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of  no effect, as
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
To compete in a global environment, it is necessary for India to innovate and promote
creativity.  For promoting creativity and innovation, India needs to protect and utilise the
intellectual property created out of public funded research and development.  Over the
years, the Government has invested large funds in research and development.  To provide
incentives for creativity and innovation, it is necessary to develop a framework in which the
protection and utilisation of intellectual property is put in place.  The ultimate objective,
however, is to ensure access to such innovation by all stakeholders for public good.
2. The proposed legislation imposes obligations and creates rights to optimise
the potential of public funded research and development, provides incentive to create
intellectual property and the mechanism for its protection and utilisation, encourages
innovation in small and medium enterprises, promotes collaboration between Government,
private enterprises and non-Government organisations, commercialisation of intellectual
property created out of public funded research and development and the culture of innovation
in the country.
3. The proposed legislation will enhance awareness about intellectual property issues,
especially in universities, academic and research institutions. It will also increase the
responsibility of universities, academic and research institutions to encourage students,
faculty and scientists to innovate. Such innovations can be utilised for raising financial
resources of these establishments, through royalties or income.  The income from intellectual
property will promote self-reliance and will minimise dependence of universities, academic
and research institutions and other recipient organisations for Government funding.
4. The proposed legislation seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; KAPIL SIBAL.
The 3rd December, 2008.
8

Notes on clauses
Clause 2 seeks to define various words and expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3 seeks to provide for a funding agreement between the Government and the
recipient before release of grant for research and development.
Clause 4 provides for disclosure of public funded intellectual property within a
period specified therein.
Clause 5 seeks to provide for vesting of the title of public funded intellectual property
with the recipient or the Government, as the case may be.
Clause 6 seeks to bar public disclosure, publication and exhibition of the public
funded intellectual property.
Clause 7 provides for duties of the recipient who retains title to the public funded
intellectual property.
Clause 8 provides for the conditions for assignment of the public funded intellectual
property by the recipient.
Clause 9 provides for the duties of intellectual property creator.
Clause  10 provides for the constitution of intellectual property management
committee and its functions.
Clause 11 provides for sharing of royalties or income arising out of public funded
intellectual property between the recipient and the intellectual property creator.
Clause 12 provides for the preference to the domestic industry in manufacturing
products using the public funded intellectual property.
Clause 13 seeks to empower the Government to practice or assign any public funded
intellectual property to carry out its obligations under International treaty or agreement.
Clause 14 seeks to provide for preparation of accounts and other relevant records by
the recipient for its audit by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Clause 15 provides for preparation of an annual report by the recipient.
Clause 16 provides for dispute settlement in accordance with the provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
Clause 17 seeks to provide exemption to certain intellectual property generated for
educational purposes from the purview of this Bill.
Clause 18 provides for duties of the Government in respect of the countries for which
intellectual property title vests with it.
Clause 19 provides for protection of action taken in good faith.
Clause  20 seeks to provide for stoppage of grant and its recovery in case of
contravention of the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 21 provides for penalties for failure to discharge the duties of intellectual
property creator.
Clause 22 provides for penalty for failures to discharge the duties of the recepient.
Clause 23 seeks to empower the Government to remove difficulties in implementation
of the Bill.
Clause 24 seeks to empower the Government to make rules to carry out the provisions
of the Bill.
9

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (2) of clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
to provide for the form and manner in which agreement shall be entered into.
Item (d) of sub-clause (3) of clause 3 empowers the Central Government to lay down
conditions to be complied by the recipient.
Clause 4 empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide for the form and
manner in which the disclosure shall be made.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 5 empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide
for the form in which the recipient shall intimate its intention to retain title of the public
funded intellectual property with respect to designated countries and the extended limit of
time for such intimation.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 5 empowers the Central Government to make rules specifying
time to mutually agree to share costs and responsibilities with regard to jointly owned public
funded intellectual property.
Sub-clause (c) of clause 7 empowers the Central Government to make rules specifying
the information to be furnished, in the report, by the recipient who retains the title to a public
funded intellectual property.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 14 empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide
for the form for maintenance of accounts and records and preparation of annual statement of
accounts.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 14 empowers the Central Government to make rules specifying
the time frame for submission of accounts together with audit report to the Government.
Clause 15 empowers the Central Government to make rules to provide for the form and
time in which the annual report shall be prepared by the recipient.
Sub-clause (b) of clause 18 empowers the Central Government to make rules with
regard to the terms and conditions for grant of licences.
Clause 20 empowers the Central Government to make rules specifying the manner of
recovery of grant from the recipient for contravention of the provisions of the Bill.
The matters, for which the rules are to be made, pertain to matters of procedure or
administrative detail, and it is not possible to provide for them in the Bill. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of normal character.
10

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and utilisation of intellectual property orginating from public
funded research and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Science & Technology and Earth Sciences)
GMGIPMRND—4262RS(S-1)—10.12.2008.