THE REGULATORY AUTHORITIES (ACCOUNTABILITY) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to make all the regulatory and subordinate authorities, under different central legislations
accountable to the Parliament and for all matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Regulatory Authorities (Accountability) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "central Act" means any legislation passed by the Houses of Parliament for
enforcement in whole or any part of the country;
(b) "impact assessment study" means an audit or monitoring and evaluation
study regarding the functioning of regulatory or subordinate authorities by the Ministry
under which the Regulatory or subordinate authority functions;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. LXVII of  2012
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH DECEMBER, 2012

2
(c) "regulatory or subordinate authority" includes any council, board or any
body by whatever name called constituted under a Central Act;
(d) "report" means the annual report that explains the functions, activities, and
decisions taken by a regulatory or subordinate authority; and
(e) "subordinate legislation" means any rule or regulation or scheme made by
the regulatory or subordinate authorities for the implementation of the Central Act.
3. (1) All regulatory or subordinate authorities, which are not submitting reports to
the Houses of Parliament shall, hereafter, submit half yearly report to the Houses of Parliament.
(2) It shall be compulsory for each regulatory or subordinate authority to frame rules,
regulations, bye laws etc. within thirty days from the date of enactment of a Central Act:
Provided that if any Central Act is pending for consideration in any court of law, the
authorities shall proceed to make rules regulations, bye law etc. on such Act after the
pronouncement of the judgement.
(3) The rules, regulation, bye laws etc. so made, shall be laid before the Houses of
Parliament for scrutiny as soon as possible after these have been framed.
4. (1) There shall be a monitoring and evaluation study by a study team (hereinafter
referred to as study) of all regulatory or subordinate authorities under the concerned Ministry
and the concerned Ministry shall submit a report of the study to the Houses of the Parliament,
every year.
(2)The study team shall comprise the following members,—
(a) one Secretary from the concerned Ministry or Department;
(b) two persons associated with the Ministry and selected by the Minister; and
(c) one Member of Parliament from Rajya Sabha and the other from Lok Sabha
nominated by the Chairman and Speaker respectively.
5. The Central Government shall ensure that each Ministry of the Central Government,
in its website upload the reports of various regulatory or subordinate authorities under its
jurisdiction alongwith the study report.
6. All regulatory or subordinate authorities constituted under a Central Act shall have
in its composition one Member from the Rajya Sabha and two Members from the Lok Sabha
as nominated by the Chairman or the Speaker of the respective House.
5
10
15
20
25
Duties of
Regulatory or
subordinate
Authorities.
Monitoring
and
evaluation
study.
Uploading of
reports on
website.
Member of
Parliament to
be a part of
the authority. 30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The country has a number of independent regulatory bodies or subordinate authorities,
which are constituted under various acts, for each sector. Regulatory authorities are vested
with the powers, inter alia of creating rules for the implementation of laws and imposing
penalties for non adherence to laws. However, there has been no measure initiated to ensure
the accountability of these regulatory authorities. Many regulatory bodies that act
independently are not mandated by any law to submit their reports to the Parliament.
While the subordinate authorities are required to submit the rules that are made by
them to the Parliament, and are subject to scrutiny by the Committee on Subordinate
Legislations, there are no mechanisms to ensure the transparency in the working of these
authorities. It is necessary to make the subordinate authorities democratically accountable
and ensure that the work carried out and the decisions made by them are in line with the best
interest of the people they are required to serve. Besides it is also felt that a monitoring and
evaluation study of such regulatory and subordinate authority should also be done.
The Bill, hence seeks to establish a system to make the regulatory or subordinate
authorities accountable and answerable to the Parliament. The Bill requires every regulatory
authority in the country to table their annual report of functions and the rules made by them
for the implementation of particular legislations to the Houses of Parliament, for scrutiny.
Hence this Bill.
VIVEK  GUPTA
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for conducting an Impact Assessment Study on the
regulatory authorities annually. The cost of conducting the study shall be borne by the
respective Ministry. An amount for this study has to be set aside in the annual budget of the
Ministry. The implementation of the bill will not incur any cost to the Central Government.
4

GMGIPMRND—3961RS(S3)—07-12-2012.
RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to make all the regulatory and subordinate authorities, under different central legislations
accountable to the Parliament and for all matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
—————
(Shri Vivek Gupta, M.P.)