AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LXVIII of 2000
——— नमन नमन».

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL
(further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title and
comm =
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by ment. ence

5 Notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.


Insertion of 2. After article 16 of the Constitution the following article shall be inserted,
new article namely,—

16A.

Right to work 16A(1) Every citizen who has attained the age of eighteen years shall have
and the right to work and in the event of failure on the part of the state to provide him
ewe an employment, he shall be paid unemployment allowance till he is provided with

gainful employment.
(2) For the purposes of clause (7) Parliament may be law provide for:—

(a) different rates of unemployment allowances for illiterates, primary
and middle passed, Matriculates, Graduates, Post Graduates, professionally
qualified and others;

(6) unemployment Insurance Scheme to be framed by the State so as to

pay unemployment allowance therefrom and contributions to be made therein
by different agencies including the beneficiaries.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Right to life and liberty is meaningless without the right to livelihood. However,
Part III of our Constitution guarantees certain fundamental rights, but the right to work
does not find a place in the Constitution. In our democracy, millions of unemployed youth
who are not looked after properly and left without employment and a source of livelihood,
have developed frustration. In the present times, our youth have become restless and taken
to ways of violence, robbery, dacoity and narcotics drug addiction. The level of
unemployment among the youth is increasing and has created unrest, terrorism, violence
and crime. It is therefore felt necessary to make the payment of unemployment allowance
a fundamental right. .

Hence this Bill.

RUMANDLA RAMACHANDRAIAH


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4853RS—22-1 1-2000.