THE  TELECOM  REGULATORY  AUTHORITY  OF  INDIA
(AMENDMENT)  BILL,  2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment)
Act, 2008.
(2) It shall  come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997, in section 4, for the
proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that a person, who is in the service of the Government or has
retired from such service on attaining the age of superannuation, shall not be
appointed as a member unless such person has held the post of Secretary or
Additional Secretary to the Government of India, or any equivalent post in the
Central Government or the State Government, for a period of not less than
three years.”.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
24 of 1997. Amendment
of section 4.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. LXVIII of 2008.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (hereinafter referred to as TRAI) is a
statutory body set up by the Government of India under section 3 of the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India Act, 1997.  It consists of a Chairperson and not more than two full-time
members and not more than two part-time members.
2. The qualifications for the appointment of the Chairperson and other members of the
TRAI are provided in section 4 of the said Act.  In terms of this section, the Chairperson and
other members of the Authority shall be appointed by the Central Government from amongst
persons who have special knowledge of, and professional experience in, telecommunication,
industry, finance, accountancy, law, management or consumer affairs.  The proviso of the
said section further provides that a person who is, or has been, in the service of Government
shall not be appointed as a member unless such person has held the post of Secretary or
Additional Secretary, or the post of Additional Secretary and Secretary to the Government of
India or any equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Government for a  period
of not less than three years.
3. The provisions of the proviso of the said section has been considered as unreason-
able, inconsistent and having no nexus with the object of finding an appropriate person to be
appointed as Chairperson or Member of the TRAI as it inflicts a disability in cases where a
person who has served the Government, even for short duration, in one or other capacity
and while being in the Government or after leaving the Government has excelled in the field
of telecommunication or other relevant field.  In these cases, such a person would not be
eligible under section 4 of the said Act only for the reason for his not having held the post of
Secretary or Additional Secretary or equivalent post in the Central Government or the State
Government for a period of three years.
4. In order to remove the said inconsistency in the qualifications of the Chairperson or
other members of TRAI, the amendment to the proviso of section 4 of the said Act has been
proposed to provide that a person, who is in the service of Government or has retired from
such service on attaining the age of superannuation, shall not be appointed as a member
unless such person has held the post of Secretary or Additional  Secretary to the Govern-
ment of India, or any equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Government, for
a period of not less than three years.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI;
The 29th October, 2008. A. RAJA.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE  TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1997
(24 OF 1997)
* * * * *
4.  The Chairperson and other members of the Authority shall be appointed by the
Central Government from amongst persons who have special knowledge of, and profes-
sional experience in, telecommunication, industry, finance, accountancy, law, management or
consumer affairs:
Provided that a person who is, or has been, in the service of Government shall not be
appointed as a member unless such person has held the post of Secretary or Additional
Secretary, or the post of Additional Secretary and Secretary to the Government of India or
any equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Government for a period of not
less than three years.
* * * * *
3
Qualifications
for
appointment
of
Chairperson
and other
members.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
Bill
further to amend the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997.
————
(Shri A. Raja, Communication and Information Technology)
GMGIPMRND—4302RS(S-5)—12.12.2008.