1
THE BUREAU OF ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a Bureau of Accountability to suggest measures to uproot
corruption; making the administration efficient and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bureau of Accountability Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date,  as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires the word 'Bureau' means the
Bureau of Accountability established under section 3 of this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Bureau which shall consists of the
following:—
(i) two serving or retired Judges of the Supreme Court of India;
(ii) Cabinet Secretary to the Central Government;
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. LXVIII of  2010
Definition.
Establishment
of a Bureau of
Accounta-
bility.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2011

2
(iii) Home Secretary to the Central Government;
(iv) Chief of the Intelligence Bureau of India;
(v) one retired General of the Army to be nominated by the Central Government;
and
(vi) An eminent social and political worker to be nominated by the Central
Government.
(2) The members of the Bureau shall have a tenure of five years from the date of their
appointment or nomination, as the case may be.
(3)  The Bureau shall have its office located at New Delhi.
(4) The Central Government shall appoint such number of Officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Bureau.
4. The members of the Bureau shall elect from amongst themselves a member to preside
over the meetings of the Bureau and the member so elected shall be designated as Chairman
of the Bureau.
5. The Bureau shall take steps and suggest measures to the Central Government to—
(i) accelerate the pace of working in the Ministries of the Government of India;
(ii) make the administration corruption free; and
(iii) implement the policies framed by the Central Government within the prescribed
time period.
6. The members of the Bureau shall carry out surprise inspections of various Ministries
and Departments of the Central Government from time to time and suggest measures for
carrying out administrative reforms in the functioning of the Ministries.
7.  (1) The Bureau shall formulate rules for its internal working and the rule so made
shall be laid on the Table of  each House of Parliament.
(2) If any amendment is made to the rules framed under sub-section (1), the amendment
so made shall also be laid on the Table of each House of Parliament.
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules  to
carry out the provisions of this Act.
Chairman of
the Bureau.
Functions of
the Bureau.
Powers of
Bureau.
Procedure to
be followed
by the
Bureau in its
functioning.
Powers to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It has been emphasized time and again that unstable bureaucracy is a big hurdle in the
development of the country. Some senior officers and their subordinates working in
Government offices do not dispose of their official works within particular time period.
Many important files remain pending for months in Government Offices which in turn leads
to corruption. It is, therefore, necessary that a high powered permanent Bureau should be
set up to accelerate the pace of work of bureaucracy and ensure timely completion of work.
This will also help in rooting out corruption.
Hence this Bill.
MOHAN SINGH

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish a Bureau of
Accountability. It further provides that the Central Government shall appoint such number
of officers and staff as is considered necessary for the efficient functioning of the Bureau.
It also provides that the office of the Bureau shall be located at New Delhi. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore per annum. A non-
recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—6702RS(S3)—-28-02-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a Bureau of Accountability to suggest measures to uproot
corruption; making the administration efficient and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P .)