AS INTRODUCED IN THE Rajya SABHA

Bill No. LXVI of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
A
BILL.
Surther to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title and
. commencement.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In article 85 of the Constitution, in clause (/),— Amendment of
article 85.

(a) for the words "six months" the words "three months" shall be substituted;
and

(0) the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:—

“Provided that the House of the People and the Council of the States shall
remain in Session and transact Parliamentary business for not less than one
hundred and sixty days in a calendar year."

3. In article 123 of the Constitution, to clause (/) the following proviso shall be | Amendment of
added, namely:— article 123.

“Provided that no Ordinance shall be repromulgated nor any Ordinance
reproducing substantially the provisions of a repealed or lapsed Ordinance shall
be promulgated within a period of three years from the date of the promulgation
of the earlier Ordinance."


89609/981311उ2४9

2
Amendment of 4. In article 174 of the Constitution, in clause (/),—
article 174,
(व) for the words "six months" the words “three months" shall be substituted;
and
(0) the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:—

"Provided that the House or each House of the Legislature, as the case
may be, shall remain in Session and transact business for not less than one
hundred and twenty days in a calendar year."

Amendment of 5. In article 213 of the Constitution, ip clause (/) after the existing proviso the follow-
article 213.

ing proviso shall be added, namely:—

“Provided further that no Ordinance shall be repromulgated nor any Ordi-
nance reproducing substantially the provisions of a repealed or a lapsed Ordi-
nance shall be promulgated within a period of three years from the date of the
promulgation of the earlier Ordinance.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In our country Parliament at the Union level and the Legislature at the State level are
the law making bodies. In the Parliament and the State Legislatures not only laws are
enacted but other issues of public importance are also discussed through questions, resolu-
tions, motions, calling attention motions, short duration discussions etc. Through these
discussions, ways and means to solve the national and local problems are found. These
legislative bodies put a check on the Executive also. The performance of the Government
is also assessed through various ways such as while passing the budgetary grants or discuss-
ing no-confidence motion etc. At the Union level, Rajya Sabha also discusses the working
of various Ministries.

All these require a lot of time in the Parliament. But unfortunately the duration of
Parliament is curtailed very systematically. The Session period is being reduced consistantly
since the Sixties, particularly after the sad demise of our first Prime Minister Pandit Jawaharlal
Nehru. It was in the year 1956 when the Parliament sat for 165 days in one calendar year.
Thereafter the number of sittings has been drastically reduced. As a result even the Legisla-
tive business is not completed in the life of one Lok Sabha. The working of same of the
important Ministries like Finance, Defence etc. is never subjected to the discussion in the
Parliament.

As a result the importance of Parliament has been minimised. The business is rushed
through in a hurry without proper or thorough consideration of a measure. As such, the
highest institution of our democracy has been virtually reduced to the status of a stamping
authority. We ought to give a serious thought in assigning to the Parliament the role of the
most effective institution for conducting the affairs of the nation.

‘The position in the States has become more alarming. Sessions are summoned for 1 or
2 weeks or even for 2 or 3 days. This tendency facilities the State Governments to govern
the States by ordinances. A study reveals that article 213 has been misused by the States on
several occasions. If an Ordinance lapses on technical reasons it is repromulgated repeat-
edly. For example, the Bihar Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Ordinance
which was first promulgated on January 13, 1968, and repromulgated thereafter as many as
thirty eight times until the 31st December, 1981, covering a span of about 14 years. What
‘was meant to cope with an emergency situation has become a general rule of practice. This
tendency is spreading to other States also but, fortunately, the Union Government has not
been affected so intensely yet except on’a few occasions when it took to questionable
recourse to promulgation of an Ordinance.

Hence, it is proposed in this Bill to fix the minimum days of sittings for the Parlia-
ment and State Legislatures in a calendar year and restrict the scope of misusing the Ordi-

nance promulgating power of the respective Governments.

Hence, this Bill. S.S. AHLUWALIA


Sessions of
Parliament,
prorogation and
dissolution.

Powerof
President to
promulgate
Ordinances
during recess of
Parliament.

Sessions of the
state Legisla-
ture, proroga-
tion and
dissolution.

Power of
Governor to
promulgate
Ordinances
during recess of
Legislature.

ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITULION OF INDIA
* * * * *
85. (7) The President shall, from time to time, summon each House of Parliament

to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene

between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the
next session.

* * * * *

123. (/) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the
President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take
immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to
him to require.

* * * * *

174, (1) The Governor shall from time to time summon the House or each House of
the Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months
shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its
first sitting in the next session.

* * * * *

213. (1) If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly of a State is in
session, or where there is a Legislative Council in a State, except when both Houses of the
Legislature are in session, the Governor is satisfied that circumstances exist which render
it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the
circumstances appear to him to require:

Provided that the Governor shall not, without instructions from the President,
promulgate any such Ordinance if—

(a) a Bill containing the same provisions would under this Constitution
have require the previous sanction of the President for the introduction thereof
into the Legislature; or

(6) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill containing the
same provisions for the consideration of the President; or

(©) an Act of the Legislature of the State containing the same provi-
sions would under this Constitution have been invalid unless, having been
reserved for the consideration of the President, it had received the assent of
the President.

* * * * *


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4609RS—1 4-11-2000.