Bill No. LXVI of 2019
THE TRAFFICKING OF PERSONS (PREVENTION, PROTECTION
AND REHABILITA TION) BILL, 2019
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
N
ATIONAL ANTI-TRAFFICKING BUREAU
3. National Anti-Trafficking Bureau.
4. Functions of Bureau.
5. Investigation by Bureau.
CHAPTER III
STATE ANTI-TRAFFICKING OFFICERS
6. State Nodal Officer.
7. State Police Nodal Officer.
8. District Police Nodal Officer.
9. Anti-Trafficking Police Officers.
10. Anti-Trafficking Unit.
CHAPTER IV
R
ELIEF AND REHABILITA TION AUTHORITIES
11. National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee.
12. State Anti-Trafficking Committee.
13. District Anti-Trafficking Committee.
14. Powers of District Anti-Trafficking Committee.
CHAPTER V
S
EARCH, RESCUE AND POST-RESCUE ACTIVITIES
15. Search and seizure.
16. Rescue and medical examination of persons.
17. Safety, care and protection of person rescued.
18. Investigation and evidence.
19. Presumption as to offences.
CHAPTER VI
P
REVENTIVE MEASURES
20. Preventive measures by State and District Anti-Trafficking Committees.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019

CLAUSES
CHAPTER VII
PROTECTION AND REHABILITATION OF VICTIMS
21. Protection Homes.
22. Rehabilitation Homes.
23. Registration.
24. Application for providing care and protection.
25. Rehabilitation not to be contingent on criminal proceedings.
CHAPTER VIII
R
EPATRIATION
26. Repatriation of victims.
CHAPTER IX
MONETARY RELIEF AND COMPENSATION
27. Interim relief.
28. Relief.
CHAPTER X
FORFEITURE AND ATTACHMENT OF PROPERTY
29. Forfeiture and attachment of property.
CHAPTER XI
REHABILITATION FUND
30. Rehabilitation Fund.
CHAPTER XII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
31. Aggravated form of trafficking of persons.
32. Punishment for aggravated form of trafficking of persons.
33. Trafficking of persons on more than one occasion.
34. Punishment for keeping or allowing premises to be used as place for trafficking of
persons.
35. Closure of premises and eviction of offenders from premises.
36. Punishment for promoting or facilitating trafficking of person.
37. Punishment for abetment.
38. Punishment for omission of duty.
39. Buying or selling of any person.
40. Hiring or obtaining possession, etc., for trafficking of person.
41. Offences related to media.
42. Punishment for disclosure of identity.
43. Applicability of punishment.
44. Punishment for attempt to commit offence under this Act.
45. Act committed by victim under coercion, compulsion, etc.
CHAPTER XIII
D
ESIGNATED COURTS
46. Designated courts.
(ii)

CLAUSES
47. Special Public Prosecutors.
48. Period and manner for recording of evidence of person who is trafficked and disposal of
cases.
49. Payment to the victim.
50. Appeal.
CHAPTER XIV
PROTECTION OF VICTIM, WITNESS AND COMPLAINANT
51. Protection of victim, witness and complainant.
CHAPTER XV
MISCELLANEOUS
52. Cognizance of offences.
53. Protection of action taken in good faith.
54. Power of Central Government to make rules.
55. Power of State Government to make rules.
56. Power to remove difficulty.
57. Section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the provisions of the Probation
of Offenders Act, 1958 not to apply.
58. Sections 193, 195, 199 and 203 of Indian Penal Code to apply.
59. Act not in derogation of any other law.
(iii)

1
THE TRAFFICKING OF PERSONS (PREVENTION, PROTECTION
AND REHABILITA TION) BILL, 2019
By
DR. SASMIT PATRA, M.P.
A
BILL
to prevent trafficking of persons, especially women and children and to provide care,
protection and rehabilitation to the victims of trafficking, to prosecute offenders
and to create a legal, economic and social environment for the victims and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Trafficking of Persons (Prevention, Protection and
Rehabilitation) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different States and any reference in any
of the provisions to the commencement of this Act shall be construed in relation to any State
as a reference to the coming into force of that provision in that State.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LXVI of 2019
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Anti-Trafficking Police Officer- means a police officer referred to in section 9;
(b) "Anti-Trafficking Unit" means a unit set up in the Districts by the appropriate
Government under section 10;
(c) "appropriate Government" means, in respect of matters relating to,—
(i) a Union territory without legislature, the Central Government;
(ii) the Union territories with legislature, the Government of the National
Capital Territory of Delhi or, as the case may be, the Government of Union
territory of Puducherry;
(iii) a State, the State Government;
(d) "Bureau" means the National Anti-Trafficking Bureau established by the
Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 3;
(e) "child" means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen years;
(f) "Child Welfare Committee" shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 27
of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015;
(g) "designated court" means a court designated under section 46;
(h) "District Anti-Trafficking Committee" means a committee constituted by the
appropriate Government under section 13;
(i) "District Police Nodal Officer" means a police officer referred to in section 8;
(j) "Magistrate" means a District Magistrate or Additional District Magistrate or
a Sub-Divisional Magistrate;
(k) "narcotic drugs" and "psychotropic substances" shall have the meanings,
respectively assigned to them in the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985;
(l) "National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee" means a
committee established by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 11;
(m) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
term notify shall be construed accordingly;
(n) "premises" means any building, conveyance, land, location, place, structure
or any part thereof and includes any source, transit or destination of trafficking;
(o) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate Government
under this Act;
(p) "Protection Home" means the Protection Home referred to in sub-section (1)
of section 21;
(q) "rehabilitation" means all measures and processes of physical, psychological
and social well-being of a person who is trafficked and includes access to education,
skill development, health care including psychological and physiological support,
medical services, economic empowerment, legal aid and assistance, safe and secure
accommodation;
(r) "Rehabilitation Fund" means the fund established under sub-section (1) of
section 30;
(s) "Rehabilitation Home" means the Rehabilitation Home, referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 22;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Definitions.
2 of 2016
61 of 1985

3
(t) "State Nodal Officer" means an officer appointed by the State Government
under sub-section (1) of section 6;
(u) "State Anti-Trafficking Committee" means a Committee established by the
appropriate Government under sub-section (1) of section 12;
(v) "State Police Nodal Officer" means a police officer appointed by the State
Government under sub-section (1) of section 7;
(w) "trafficking of person" shall have the meaning assigned to it in sub-section (1)
of section 370 of the Indian Penal Code;
(x) "victim" means any person on whom an offence of trafficking has been
committed or attempted by any other person or persons:
Provided that for the purpose of receiving compensation or relief under this Act, any
dependent or legal heir, as the case may be, of a deceased victim, shall also be construed as
a victim.
(2) The words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Information Technology Act,
2000 and the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
CHAPTER II
N
ATIONAL ANTI-TRAFFICKING BUREAU
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a Bureau to be called
the National Anti-Trafficking Bureau for exercising the powers and discharging its functions
under this Act.
(2) The Bureau shall have police officers and other officers of such appropriate ranks,
as may be necessary, for the discharge of its functions.
(3) The manner of selection, deputation, functioning and reporting of the officers and
employees of the Bureau shall be in such as may be prescribed.
4. The Bureau shall perform the following functions in relation to trafficking of persons,
namely: —
(i) co-ordinate and monitor surveillance and preventive efforts along with the
known or probable routes;
(ii) facilitate surveillance, enforcement and preventive steps at source, transit
and destination points;
(iii) maintain co-ordination between various law enforcement agencies and non-
Governmental organisations and other stakeholders;
(iv) strengthen the intelligence apparatus to improve the collection, collation,
analysis and dissemination of operational intelligence;
(v) increase international co-operation and co-ordination with concerned
authorities in foreign countries and international organisations, in operational and
long term intelligence in investigation, mutual legal assistance, to facilitate universal
action for prevention and suppression and to implement any obligation under the
various international conventions and protocols that are in force in respect of counter
measures;
(vi) co-ordinate actions and enforcement by various bodies or authorities
established under this Act;
National Anti-
Trafficking
Bureau.
Functions of
Bureau.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
21 of 2000.
2 of 2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(vii) co-ordinate actions taken by the concerned Ministries, Departments
organisations of the Government, especially linking the source of transit to destination
and connecting all stakeholders;
(viii) review measures for combating, preventing and formulating co-ordinated
strategy of action by various law enforcement agencies;
(ix) make sustained efforts for capacity building and training of agencies;
(x) bring out resource material including education curriculum for children,
Panchayat Raj institutions, enforcement agencies, judicial officers and other
stakeholders;
(xi) co-ordinate investigating activities among the Districts, States and with
other countries in case of cross-border trafficking of persons;
(xii) co-ordinate the investigation, where international ramifications are reported
or suspected;
(xiii) co-ordinate investigation, where inter-State ramifications are reported or
suspected across two or more States or Union territory Administrations;
(xiv) undertake and facilitate other investigators for investigating offences from
the organised crime perspective;
(xv) develop and monitor a database on every crime under this Act;
(xvi) co-ordinate with any national or international investigating or law
enforcement agencies and civil society organisations;
(xvii) facilitate inter-State and international transfer of evidence in investigation
as well as video conferencing in judicial proceedings;
(xviii) facilitate frequent meetings of the State Police Nodal Officers to facilitate,
20 monitor and evaluate the establishment and functioning of Anti-Trafficking Units;
(xix) provide necessary support for investigation by the Anti- Trafficking Units,
where such requests are made;
(xx) undertake steps to enhance the professional skills of Anti-Trafficking Police
Officers, Anti-Trafficking Units and all concerned with the investigation and
prosecution of cases;
(xxi) facilitate inter-State and trans-border transfer of evidence and materials,
witnesses and others for expediting prosecution;
(xxii) protection of witnesses, where referred by any State Government, victims,
complainants and affected families, as the case may be;
(xxiii) undertake steps for timely and effective action on post-rescue care and
protection of any person who is trafficked, including steps towards rehabilitation by
the concerned agencies, so that their rights are ensured, and that they are not re-
trafficked;
(xxiv) monitor and facilitate victim and witness protection protocols, rules and
procedures including video conferencing during trial of offences which have
ramifications across States and beyond borders; and
(xxv) develop minimum standards of care and advice for all concerned, in matters
of compliance.
5. (1) The Bureau may take over investigation of any offence under this Act, where
referred to it by two or more States.
Investigation
by Bureau.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(2) Where an offence is referred to the Bureau under sub-section (1), the State
Government shall not proceed with the investigation of the offence and shall forthwith
transmit the relevant documents and records to the Bureau.
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that till the Bureau takes up the
investigation of the case, it shall be the duty of the officer-in-charge of the police station to
continue the investigation of an offence under this Act.
(4) While investigating any offence under this Act, the Bureau, having regard to the
gravity of the offence and other relevant factors, may—
(a) if it is expedient to do so, request the State Government to associate with the
investigation; or
(b) with the previous approval of the Central Government, transfer the case to
the State Government for investigation and trial of the offence.
(5) While investigating any offence under this Act, the Bureau may also investigate
any other offence under any law for the time being in force, which the accused is alleged to
have committed, if the offence is connected with such other offence.
(6) The State Government shall extend assistance and co-operation to the Bureau for
investigation of an offence under this Act.
(7) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, nothing contained in this Act shall affect
the powers of the State Government to investigate and prosecute any offence under this Act
or other offences under any other law for the time being in force.
CHAPTER III
S
TATE ANTI-TRAFFICKING OFFICERS
6. (1) The State Government shall appoint a State Nodal Officer, not below the rank of
Director in the State Government.
(2) The State Nodal Officer shall be responsible for follow up action under this Act, as
per the directions of the State Anti-Trafficking Committee and co-ordinate with other
Government agencies and civil society organizations.
(3) The State Nodal Officer shall provide relief and rehabilitation services through
District Anti-Trafficking Unit and other Government agencies as well as civil society
organisations.
(4) The State Nodal Officer shall liaison with the State Police Nodal Officer and the
National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee, for all matters relating to relief
and rehabilitation.
7. (1) The State Government shall appoint a State Police Nodal Officer of such rank as
may be specified by that Government.
(2) The State Police Nodal Officer shall be responsible for all the activities in the
prevention and combating of trafficking of persons in the State and shall also monitor the
functioning of Anti-Trafficking Police Officers and Anti-Trafficking Units in the State.
(3) The State Police Nodal Officer shall also co-ordinate and monitor inter-State and
trans-border transfer of persons rescued, witnesses, evidence and offenders under this Act.
(4) The State Police Nodal Officer shall liaison with State Nodal Officer and shall
perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
8. (1) The State Government shall designate one police officer not below the rank of
 Superintendent of Police of the District to be the District Police Nodal Officer on matters
relating to trafficking of persons and responsible for all the activities in the District concerned
and perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
State Nodal
Officer.
State Police
Nodal Officer.
District Police
Nodal Officer.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(2) The District Police Nodal Officer shall be the convener of the District Anti-Trafficking
Committee and shall report to the State Police Nodal Officer in every matter relating to an
offence of trafficking of persons including rescue, investigation and inter-State transfer of a
person who is trafficked and the offenders.
(3) The District Police Nodal Officer shall monitor the functioning of Anti-Trafficking
Unit and provide necessary assistance to them for the effective discharge of their duties.
9. (1) The State Government shall designate for each District such number of Anti-
Trafficking Police Officers for matters related to trafficking of persons, including prevention
of trafficking, rescue and protection of the victims, investigation and prosecution.
(2) The State Government shall designate for each District such number of Anti-
Trafficking Police Officers for matters related to trafficking of persons, including prevention
of trafficking, rescue and protection of the victims, investigation and prosecution.
10. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up for each District or a group of Districts,
such number of Anti-Trafficking Units, for dealing with all matters of prevention, rescue,
protection and care of victims and witnesses and of investigation and prosecution of any
offence under this Act.
(2) Every local police station shall, where Anti-Trafficking Unit is not functional,
undertake every activity in matters of rescue, investigation, prevention and protection of
persons trafficked under this Act.
(3) The State Government shall appoint for every Anti-Trafficking Unit such number
of subordinate police officers including women police officers as it deems necessary for the
discharge of the functions of the Anti-Trafficking Unit and vest in them with all the powers
to investigate any offence committed within its local jurisdiction under this Act:
Provided that the officer-in-charge of a police station after registering the First
Information Report under section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall take all
necessary steps for immediate rescue and protection and then transfer the case to the Anti-
Trafficking Unit.
CHAPTER IV
R
ELIEF AND REHABILITA TION AUTHORITIES
11. (1) The Central Government shall establish a National Anti-Trafficking Relief and
Rehabilitation Committee, by notification for providing relief and rehabilitation services to
the victims.
(2) The composition of the National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee
shall be as follows, namely:—
(i) Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development — Chairperson:
(ii) Representative, Ministry of Home Affairs — Member;
(iii) Representative, Ministry of External Affairs — Member;
(iv) Representative, Ministry of Labour and Employment — Member;
(v) Representative, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment — Member;
(vi) Representative, Ministry of Panchayati Raj —Member;
(vii) Representative, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare — Member;
(viii) Representative, Legislative Department — Member;
(ix) Four representatives from registered civil society organisations active in
the prevention, rescue and rehabilitation of victims — Members;
Anti-
Trafficking
Police
Officers.
Anti-
Trafficking
Unit.
National Anti-
Trafficking
Relief and
Rehabilitation
Committee.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(x) such other representatives of the Ministries or Departments or experts
representing different States, as may be prescribed — Members; and
(xi) Head, National Anti-Trafficking Bureau — Member Secretary.
(3) The National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee shall perform
the following functions, namely:—
(i) facilitate and ensure rehabilitation and relief services including compensation,
repatriation, re-integration to the victims through concerned 45 Ministries, Departments
and statutory bodies;
(ii) provide for Protection Homes and Rehabilitation Homes to enable the
immediate and long term sustainable rehabilitation of victims;
(iii) ensure the effective co-ordination between the concerned authorities both
within the country as well as with other countries for the repatriation of victims;
(iv) seek reports from appropriate Goverment, State Anti-Trafficking Committee,
District Anti-Trafficking Committee, on the quality of services and the functioning of
the Protection Homes and Rehabilitation Homes;
(v) maintain and monitor the Rehabilitation Fund established under section 30;
and
(vi) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
12. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish a State Anti –Trafficking Committee
to oversee the implementation of this Act and advise the State Government and District
Anti-Trafficking Committees on matters relating to prevention of trafficking, protection,
repatriation and rehabilitation of victims.
(2) The State Anti-Trafficking Committee shall consist of the following, namely:—
(i) Chief Secretary — Chairperson;
(ii) Director General of Police — Member;
(iii) Secretary, Department of Women and Child — Member;
(iv) Secretary, Home Department — Member;
(v) Secretary, Labour Department — Member;
(vi) Secretary, Health Department — Member;
(vii) Secretary, State Legal Services Authority —Member;
(viii) Secretary, Law Department — Member;
(ix) Protector of Emigrants, Ministry of External Affairs — Member;
(x) State Police Nodal Officer — Member;
(xi) Two social workers out of which one shall be a woman — Member;
(xii) such other persons as may be prescribed — Members; and
(xiii) State Nodal Officer — Member Secretary.
(3) The State Anti-Trafficking Committee shall perform the following functions,
namely:—
(i) identify the roles and responsibilities of each Department at State or District
level for effective implementation of the Act and the rules made thereunder;
(ii) arrange for appropriate training and sensitisation of functionaries of all
personnel including Governmental and non-Governmental;
State Anti-
Trafficking
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
(iii) develop effective networking and linkages with local non-Governmental
organisations for specialised services and technical assistance like vocational training,
education, healthcare, nutrition, mental health intervention, drug de-addiction and
legal aid services;
(iv) review and monitor the functioning of the District Anti-Trafficking
Committee;
(v) make necessary funds available to the District Anti-Trafficking Committee
for providing or setting up of required facilities for the implementation of the Act; and
(vi) perform such other functions and duties as may be prescribed.
(4) The State Anti-Trafficking Committee shall co-ordinate with Bureau and National
Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee to provide all necessary assistance
and inputs as may be required to prevent offences of trafficking of persons especially, those
that have inter-State and international ramifications and have features of an organised crime.
13. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification, constitute for every District,
a District Anti-Trafficking Committee for exercising the powers and performing such functions
and duties in relation to prevention, rescue, protection, medical care, psychological assistance
and need-based rehabilitation of victims.
(2) The District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall consist of the following,
namely:—
(i) District Magistrate or Additional District Magistrate — Chairperson;
(ii) District Officer for Women and Child Development — Member;
(iii) Representative, District Legal Services Authority — Member;
(iv) Representative, Child Welfare Committee — Member;
(v) Two Civil Society Organisations or Non-Governmental Organisations working
in the field of prevention of trafficking and related issues — Members;
(vi) such other members as may be prescribed — Members; and
(vii) District Police Nodal Officer — Member Secretary.
(3) The District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall perform the following functions,
namely :—
(i) direct and facilitate the person in-charge of the Protection Home or
Rehabilitation Home, as the case may be, to submit an individual care plan to it;
(ii) ensure care, protection, appropriate rehabilitation or restoration of all victims,
based on each victims' individual care plan by passing necessary directions to
Protection Homes and Rehabilitation Homes;
(iii) co-ordinate with other State Departments and Panchayati Raj institutions,
to keep a check on the children who drop out from schools and those children who are
covered by various schemes and have stopped accessing the benefits of those schemes
and inform such cases to the State Anti-Trafficking Committee and take appropriate
actions;
(iv) facilitate in a time bound manner or in the manner as may be prescribed, the
inter-State repatriation of victims or persons subjected to bonded labour;
(v) facilitate survey of the areas and vulnerable population to identify source,
transit and destination areas of trafficking of persons and based on the information
received, draw up an action plan for the prevention and protection of people who are
vulnerable to trafficking and implementation of the action plan;
District Anti-
Trafficking
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(vi) create programmes for awareness generation, community mobilisation and
empowerment of vulnerable social groups against trafficking of persons;
(vii) assist the Anti-Trafficking Police Officer, the Anti-Trafficking Unit or the
local police, as the case may be, in conducting rescue operation, transferring victims
to the nearest Protection Home, in connection with prevention of trafficking of persons,
protection of victims and their rehabilitation, etc.; and
(viii) such other functions as may be prescribed.
(4) The appropriate Government shall provide adequate resources to the District Anti-
Trafficking Committee for carrying out prevention, protection and rescue procedures.
(5) The District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall furnish a report to the State Anti-
Trafficking Committee on quarterly basis.
14. The District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall have the final authority to dispose of
cases for the care, protection, treatment, development and rehabilitation of the victims under
this Act and in case of child victim, the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Proction
of Children) Act, 2015 shall apply.
CHAPTER V
S
EARCH, RESCUE AND POST-RESCUE ACTIVITIES
15. The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall mutatis mutandis
apply in relation to a search and seizure in respect of an offence under this Act.
16. (1) Where a police officer or Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or Anti-Trafficking
Unit has reason to believe that it is necessary to rescue a person without undue delay due
to the imminent danger that may cause to his life and person, he or it may remove such
person from any place or premises and produce him before the Magistrate or Child Welfare
Committee, as the case may be, and shall take all necessary steps for the medical examination
of such person for the purposes of determination as to the age, the assessment or detection
of trauma, injury or illnesses incidental thereto.
(2) The provisions of section 164A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and section
27 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 shall mutatis mutandis apply
in relation to a medical examination of any person under this section.
(3) The Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or Anti-Trafficking Unit or the Police Officer, as
the case may be, shall inform the District Anti-Trafficking Committee about the rescue
conducted under this section and the said Committee shall take appropriate actions for
providing interim relief and further rehabilitation services to the person rescued.
17. (1) The District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall assist the Anti-Trafficking Police
Officer or the Anti-Trafficking Unit or any police officer, as the case may be, in rescue
operation and transferring any person to the nearest Protection Home or any other suitable
institution, as deemed fit.
(2) The Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or Anti-Trafficking Unit or any police officer, as
the case may be, shall produce the person rescued before the Magistrate or the Child
Welfare Committee, as the case may be, without any delay but within twenty-four hours of
the rescue.
(3) The Magistrate may, after making an inquiry as to the age of the person rescued
and if it is found that the person is a child, pass such orders as he deems necessary for the
care and protection of the person.
(4) Where the Magistrate is satisfied, after making an inquiry as to the age of the
victim and it is found that the victim is not a child, the Magistrate may, make an order that the
victim be placed,for such reasonable period, in a Rehabilitation Home:
Powers of
District Anti-
Trafficking
Committee.
Search and
seizure.
Rescue and
medical
examination
of persons.
Safety, care
and protection
of person
rescued.
2 of 2016.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
32 of 2012.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
Provided that, if the victim or any person rescued is not a child and he voluntarily
makes an application supported by an affidavit for his release and if the Magistrate is of the
opinion that such application has not been made voluntarily, the Magistrate may reject such
application after recording his reasons in writing.
(5) In discharging the functions under this section, a Magistrate may summon a
mental healthcare professional, or psycho social counsellor, or clinical psychologist, or
psychotherapist, as the case may be, to assist him and may, for this purpose, in consultation
with the District Anti-Trafficking Committee and District Legal Services Authority, maintain
a list of experienced social workers.
18. (1) The Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or Anti-Trafficking Unit or any police officer,
as the case may be, shall ensure that investigation including search and seizure must be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and
any other law for the time being in force.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or the officer-in-charge of the police station, as the case may
be, shall forward the report on completion of investigation to the court having jurisdiction
within ninety days from the date of registration of first information report.
(3) The investigating officer, while forwarding the report on completion of investigation
of an offence under this Act, punishable with imprisonment of more than two years, has
reason to believe that any amount suspected to have been obtained by the accused by way
of commission of the offence and held by him in any bank account, the investigating officer
may submit an application before the designated court for freezing of such amount.
(4) The designated court, on satisfaction, after an inquiry made in this behalf, may
freeze such amount in any such bank account and may, upon conviction, order that such
amount lying in such bank account, shall be remitted to the Rehabilitation Fund.
19. Where a person is prosecuted for committing or abetting or attempting to commit
any offence under this Act in respect of a child or a woman or a person suffering from
physical or mental disability, unless it is specified, the designated court shall presume that
such person has committed or abetted or attempted to commit the offence, as the case may
be, unless the contrary is proved.
CHAPTER  VI
P
REVENTIVE  MEASURES
20. (1) The State and the District Anti-Trafficking Committees shall undertake all
measures and recommend strategies and plans to protect and prevent vulnerable persons
from being trafficked.
(2) The measures referred to in sub-section (1) shall include—
(i) co-ordinating the implementation of all the programmes, schemes and plans
relating to the prevention of trafficking of persons with any statutory bodies,
organisations or agencies as well as Panchayati Raj Institutions;
(ii) facilitating the implementation of livelihood and educational programmes for
vulnerable communities;
(iii) facilitating the implementation of programmes and schemes sponsored by
various Ministries and Departments of the appropriate Government;
(iv) co-ordinating with corporate sector to implement various schemes,
programmes for the prevention of trafficking of persons;
(v) ensuring accountability of the concerned agencies, by regular review and
appropriate action;
Investigation
and evidence.
Preventive
measures by
State and
District Anti-
Trafficking
Committees.
Presumption
as to offences.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(vi) developing appropriate law and order framework to ensure prevention of
trafficking of persons;
(vii) undertaking vulnerability mapping of the State and give focus and attention
to the challenging areas;
(viii) commissioning independent research on various aspects of trafficking
and ensure follow up action;
(ix) organising interface between law enforcement agencies, other Government
Departments and agencies with the voluntary organisations or non-Governmental
organisations in matters of prevention of trafficking of persons;
(x) preparing an annual report on trafficking of persons in the State;
(xi) co-ordinating with the Bureau and other State Anti-Trafficking Committees,
especially with those States where source-transit-destination linkages exist, and
undertake all activities for joint action programmes by bringing in common policies
and programmes;
(xii) linking with the Bureau and the Central Government and other concerned
agencies, in case of trans-border trafficking of persons and ensure appropriate action.
CHAPTER  VII
P
ROTECTION  AND  REHABILITATION  OF  VICTIMS
21. (1) The appropriate Government shall maintain either directly or through voluntary
organisations or non-Governmental organisations as many Protection Homes as necessary
and to be managed in the manner, as may be prescribed for the immediate care and protection
of the victims or any person rescued.
(2) The Protection Homes shall provide for shelter, food, clothing, counselling and
medical care that is necessary for the victims or any person rescued and such other services
in the manner, as may be prescribed.
22. (1) The appropriate Government, as it deems fit, shall maintain either directly or
through voluntary organisations or non-Governmental organisations, one or more
Rehabilitation Homes in each District managed in the manner as may be prescribed for the
purpose of providing long-term rehabilitation of victims or any person rescued.
(2) The appropriate Government may also utilise any existing shelter home for the
purposes of rehabilitation under sub-section ( 1).
23. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, a Protection Home and Rehabilitation Home shall be registered under this Act in such
manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(2) If any person in-charge of Protection Home and Rehabilitation Home providing
shelter and rehabilitation to victims or any person rescued contravenes any of the provisions
of sub-section (1), he shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to one year or
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, or with both.
24. (1) A victim or any person rescued on behalf of him may make an application to the
Magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the victim or such other person is
trafficked or suspected to be trafficked for an order that he may be kept in a protection:
Provided that in case the victim or any person rescued is a child, the provisions of
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 shall apply.
(2) The Magistrate may, pending inquiry under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of
section 17 having regard to the circumstances of the case direct that the victim or any person
rescued to be kept in such care and protection as he may consider proper.
Protection
Homes.
Rehabilitation
Homes.
Registration.
Application
for providing
care and
protection.
2 of 2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(3) The Magistrate shall consult the District Anti-Trafficking Committee before taking
a final decision with respect to the rehabilitation of the victim or such other person.
25. Where the person rescued is a victim, the District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall
ensure that the rehabilitation of the person is not contingent upon criminal proceedings
being initiated against the accused or the outcome thereof.
CHAPTER  VIII
R
EPATRIATION
26. (1) The District Anti-Trafficking Committee or the Child Welfare Committee, as the
case may be, shall be responsible for the repatriation of victims by co-ordinating with their
counterparts in any other District.
(2) Where the State Anti-Trafficking Committee is of the opinion that a victim from a
foreign country needs to be repatriated to the country of origin, it may deal with the matter
under any law for the time being in force.
(3) The State Nodal Officer shall obtain informed written consent from the victim for
repatriation purposes, and where needed, shall make arrangements for the counselling of the
victim by trained psycho-social professionals.
(4) The repatriation of the victims shall be completed within three months for inter-
State repatriation, and within six months in case of cross border repatriation, from the date of
rescue by the District Anti-Trafficking Committee, or the Child Welfare Committee, or State
Police Nodal Officer, as the case may be:
Provided that any delay in repatriation shall be recorded for reasons in writing and
shall be reported to the National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee and
the Bureau forthwith.
CHAPTER  IX
M
ONETARY RELIEF AND COMPENSATION
27. (1) Upon application for interim relief by the victim, the District Anti-Trafficking
Committee or Child Welfare Committee, as the case may be, shall take immediate steps to
award interim relief to the victim as deemed appropriate not later than thirty days, taking into
consideration all aspects, including physical, mental trauma and the other requirements of
the victim.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide adequate funds at the disposal of the
District Anti-Trafficking Committee for the purposes under sub-section (/), within a period
of one month from the date of commencement of this Act.
28. ( 1) The District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall take steps to ensure that
appropriate relief is provided to the victim, within sixty days from the date of filing of  charge-
sheet.
(2) The relief amount shall be in addition to any other compensation including any
amount or benefit payable by way of any scheme of the appropriate Government or pursuant
to any order of the court under any law for the time being in force.
CHAPTER  X
F
ORFEITURE  AND  ATTACHMENT  OF  PROPERTY
29. (1) Where any property is, or is likely to be, used for the commission of an offence
under this Act and the property is concealed, transferred or dealt with, in any manner which
may result in frustrating any proceedings under this Act, the designated court may attach
such property:
Rehabilitation
not to be
contingent on
criminal
proceedings.
Repatriation
of victims.
Interim relief.
Relief.
Forteiture and
attachment of
property.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
Provided that the designated court shall give an opportunity to be heard to the person
who is the owner or occupier of the property.
(2) Where a person has been convicted of any offence under this Act, the designated
court shall, in addition to awarding any punishment, declare that any property, movable or
immovable or both, belonging to such person or held by any person on his behalf, which has
been used for the commission of that offence or accrued thereby, or which has been attached
under sub-section (1), shall stand forfeited to the appropriate Government and the same may
be authorised for the purpose of realisation of any fine imposed by the designated court and
the proceeds shall be remitted to the Rehabilitation Fund.
CHAPTER XI
R
EHABILITATION FUND
30. (1) There shall be constituted a fund by the Central Government to be called the
Rehabilitation Fund for the welfare and rehabilitation of the victims under this Act and there
shall be credited thereto—
(a) any grants and loans made by the appropriate Government;
(b) any voluntary donations, contributions or subscriptions, whether or not for
any specific purpose as may be decided upon by the Central Government;
(c) any fine recovered for the commission of an offence under this Act which may
include recovery of fine specified in section 421 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(d) the amount seized from any bank account frozen under sub-section ( 4) of
section 18; and
(e) any other sums as may be received.
(2) The State Government may supplement the Rehabilitation Fund.
(3) The Rehabilitation Fund shall be utilised under this Act by the appropriate
Government for —
(i) the establishment and administration of Protection Homes and Rehabilitation
Homes;
(ii) supporting innovative programmes for the welfare and rehabilitation of the
victims;
(iii) strengthening legal assistance and support;
(iv) providing entrepreneurial support, skill development training or vocational
training;
(v) providing aftercare facilities for capital and infrastructure to the victims who
are ready to integrate into mainstream society by setting up small business or
profession;
(vi) providing victim and witness protection;
(vii) awareness generation programmes for the prevention of trafficking of
persons;
(viii) creating community-based programmes to identify, report and prevent
trafficking of persons;
(ix) providing specialised professional services, counsellors, translators,
interpreters, social workers, mental health care professionals, vocational trainers or
such other specialised professionals for the victims; and
(x) any other activity which may be required for effective implementation of this
Act.
Rehabilitation
Fund.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(4) The Rehabilitation Fund shall be maintained and monitored by the National Anti-
Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee.
(5) The Rehabilitation Fund shall be made available to the State and District Anti-
Trafficking Committees towards prevention, protection and prosecution of matters relating
to trafficking of persons.
(6) Any fine recovered for the commission of an offence under this Act shall also be
remitted to the Rehabilitation Fund which includes recovery of fine specified in section 421
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(7) The generation, dissemination and utilisation of Fund shall be regulated in the
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
CHAPTER XII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
31. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever commits an offence of trafficking of person—
(i) for the purpose of forced labour or bonded labour by using violence,
intimidation, inducement, promise of payment of money, deception or coercion or by
subtle means including, allegations of accumulated debt by the person, retention of
any identity paper, threats of denunciation to authorities; or
(ii) for the purpose of bearing child, either naturally or through assisted
reproductive techniques; or
(iii) by administering any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or alcohol
on a person for the purpose of trafficking or forcing him to remain in exploitative
condition; or
(iv) by administering any chemical substance or hormones on a person for the
purpose of early sexual maturity; or
(v) for the purpose of marriage or under the pretext of marriage trafficks a woman
or child after marriage; or
(vi) by causing serious injury resulting in grievous hurt or death of any person,
including death as a result of suicide as a consequence of trafficking of person; or
(vii) who is a pregnant woman or the offence results in pregnancy of the person;
(viii) by causing or exposing the person to a life-threatening illness including
acquired immuno deficiency syndrome or human immuno deficiency virus; or
(ix) for the purpose of begging; or
(x) who is a mentally ill person as defined in clause (l) of section 2 of the Mental
Health Act, 1987 or a person with disability as defined in clause (s) of  section 2 of the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, or as a consequence of trafficking, the
person becomes mentally ill or disabled; or
(xi) by encouraging or abetting any person to migrate illegally into India or
Indians in to some other country,
is said to commit an offence of aggravated form of trafficking of the person.
32. Whoever commits the offence of aggravated form of trafficking of a person shall
be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be
less than one lakh rupees.
Aggravated
form of
trafficking of
persons.
Punishment
for aggravated
form of
trafficking of
persons.
2 of 1974.
14 of 1987.
49 of 2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

15
33. Whoever is convicted of the offence of trafficking on more than one occasion
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder
of that person's natural life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than
two lakh rupees.
34. (1) Whoever keeps or manages, or acts or assists in the keeping or management of
a premises to be used as a place for trafficking of any person shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine which may extend
to one lakh rupees and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years and with fine which may
extend to two lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever—
(i) being a tenant, lessee, occupier or person in-charge of any premises, uses, or
knowingly allows any other person to use, the premises or any part thereof as a place
for trafficking of persons; or
(ii) being the owner, lessor or landlord of any premises, or the agent of such
owner, lessor, or landlord, lets out the same, or any part thereof with the knowledge
that the same or any part thereof is intended to be used as a place of exploitation of the
victim, or is wilfully a party to the use of the premises or any part thereof as a place for
trafficking of persons,
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in the event of a
second or subsequent conviction, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend
to five years and with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section ( 2), it shall be presumed until the
contrary is proved that any person referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) of that sub-section
has not exercised due diligence in allowing to use or letting out the premises or in allowing
the premises or any part thereof to be used as a place of exploitation or, as the case may be,
and has knowledge that the premises or any part thereof was being used as a place of
exploitation of the victim.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
on conviction of any person referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) of sub-section (2) of any
offence under this Act in respect of any premises or any part thereof, any lease or agreement
under which such premises have been leased out or held or occupied at the time of the
commission of the offence, shall become void with effect from the date of the said conviction.
35. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Magistrate shall, on receipt of information from the police or otherwise, that any
premises or any part thereof is being used for the purpose of trafficking of persons, issue
notice to the owner, lessor or landlord of the premises or part thereof, or the agent of the
owner, lessor or landlord, or on the tenant, lessee, occupier of, or any other person in charge
of such premises or part thereof, to show cause within seven days of the receipt of the notice
why the same should not be sealed or attached for improper use thereof; and, after hearing
the person concerned, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the premises or part thereof is being
used for trafficking of persons, then, the Magistrate may pass an order—
(i) directing eviction of the occupier or any person from the premises, within
seven days of the passing of the order;
(ii) directing that the owner, lessor, or landlord, or the agent of the owner, before
letting out the premises or any part thereof, which, during the rescue or search has
been found to be used for the purpose of trafficking, shall obtain the previous permission
of the Magistrate and the Magistrate shall pass appropriate orders within thirty days
Trafficking of
persons on
more than one
occasion.
Punishment
for keeping or
allowing
premises to be
used as place
for trafficking
of persons.
Closure of
premises and
eviction of
offenders
from
premises.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
from the date of order and where no permission is granted within such period, the
permission shall be deemed to have been granted.
(2) If the Magistrate, after the notice issued under sub-section ( 1), finds that the
premises or any part thereof was used for trafficking of any person, the owner, lessor,
landlord the agent of the owner, lessor, landlord exercised due diligence in letting out premises
or any part thereof, then, the same shall be restored to the owner, lessor or landlord, or the
agent of the owner or lessor or landlord as the case may be, with an undertaking that the
premises or any part thereof shall not be leased out, or otherwise given possession of, or for
the benefit of the person who was allowing the improper use therein, within two months from
the date of issuing the notice by the Magistrate.
(3) If the Magistrate is satisfied that the premises or part thereof was not used for
trafficking of any person, he shall cause the same to be restored to the owner, lessor or
landlord, or the agent of the owner, lessor, landlord, tenant, lessee, occupier or any other
person in-charge of the premises or part thereof within two months of the issuance of the
notice.
(4) When an owner, lessor or landlord, or the agent of the owner, lessor or landlord
fails to comply with a direction given under clause (ii) of sub-section (1), he shall be punished
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
36. (1) A person is said to promote, procure or facilitate the commission of trafficking
of person, if that person—
(i) produces, prints, issues or distributes unissued, tampered or fake certificates,
registration or stickers as proof of compliance with Government requirements; or
(ii) advertises, publishes, prints, broadcasts or distributes, or causes the
advertisement, publication, printing or broadcast or distribution by any means,
including the use of information technology or any brochure, flyer or any propaganda
material that promotes trafficking of person or exploitation of a trafficked person in
any manner; or
(iii) assists in the conduct of misrepresentation or fraud for the purposes of
procuring or facilitating the acquisition of clearances and necessary documents from
Government agencies for the purpose of trafficking of any person.
(2) Whoever commits an offence under sub-section (1) shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
seven years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one laldi rupees.
37. Whoever abets any person to commit any offence under this Act and if the act
abetted is in consequence of the abetment, shall be punished with the punishment provided
for that offence.
38. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other  law for the time being in force,
whoever knowingly or having reason to believe that a person has been trafficked, fails to
perform a duty, which he is entrusted under this Act for providing care, protection and
rehabilitation to a victim or performs duty but knowingly causes physical or mental injury or
hardship or trauma to the victim shall be punished with fme which shall not be less than fifty
thousand rupees and in the event of a second or subsequent offence with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less
than one lakh rupees.
39. (1) Whoever buys or sells any person for a consideration, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever solicits or publicises electronically, taking or distributing obscene
photographs or videos or providing materials or soliciting or guiding tourists or using
Punishment
for promoting
or facilitating
trafficking of
person.
Punishment
for abetment.
Punishment
for omission
of duty.
Buying or
selling of any
person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
agents or any other form which may lead to the trafficking of a person shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to tine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees
but which may extend to one lakh rupees.
40. Whoever hires or otherwise obtains possession, or lets to hire, or in any manner
disposes of a person, for the purpose of trafficking of person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than three years but may
extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees.
41. (1) Whoever commits trafficking of a person with the aid of media, including, but
not limited to print, internet, digital or electronic media, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but may extend to ten years
and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever distributes, or sells or stores, in any form in any electronic or printed
form showing incidence of sexual exploitation, sexual assault, or rape for the purpose of
extortion or for coercion of the victim or his family members, or for unlawful gain shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but
may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one
lakh rupees.
42. (1) No report or newspaper or magazine or news-sheet or audio-visual media or
any other form of communication regarding any inquiry or investigation or judicial
proceedings at any stage shall disclose the name, address or any other particulars, which
lead to the identification of a victim or witness of trafficking of person under this Act  shall
be published:
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the designated court may permit
such disclosure, if in its opinion, such disclosure is in the best interest of the victim.
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend
to one lakh rupees, or with both:
Provided that in case, the victim is a child, the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 shall apply.
43. (1) Where an act or omission constitutes an offence punishable under this Act and
also under any other law for the time being in force, then, notwithstanding anything contained
in any such law, the person found guilty of such offence, shall be liable to punishment under
such law which provides for punishment which is greater in degree.
(2) A designated court convicting a person of any offence under this Act may also
pass an order for the auction of the premises or any part thereof and the proceeds of such
auction shall be ordered to be remitted to the Rehabilitation Fund.
(3) When an occupier or any other person fails to comply with a direction given under
clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 35, he shall be deemed to have committed an offence
under section 34 and shall be punished accordingly.
44. Whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable by this Act with imprisonment
or to cause such an offence to be committed, and in such attempt does any act towards the
commission of the offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of any description provided
for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the imprisonment or, as the case
may be, one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such
fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.
Hiring or
obtaining
possession,
etc. for
trafficking of
person.
Offences
related to
media.
Punishment
for disclosure
of identity.
Applicability
of
punishment.
Punishment
for attempt to
commit
offence under
this Act.
2 of 2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
45. Nothing is an offence which is committed or attempted to have been committed by
a victim, punishable with death or imprisonment for life or for imprisonment for ten years, if
the offence is committed or attempted to have been committed, under coercion or compulsion
or intimidation or threat or undue influence by any person and where, at the time of committing
the offence, the victim is subjected to reasonable apprehension of his death, grievous hurt
or any other injury to him or to any other person whom he is interested in.
CHAPTER  XIII
D
ESIGNATED COURTS
46. For the purposes of providing speedy trial of any offence under this Act, the State
Government shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification,
within two months from the date of commencement of this Act, designate in each district, the
court of session as a Designated Court.
47. ( 1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint Special Public
Prosecutors for every designated court for conducting cases under this Act.
(2) Every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under sub-section (1) shall
be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause (u) of section 2 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and provisions of that Code shall have effect accordingly.
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in section 301 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, the victim shall be entitled to the assistance of a legal counsel of his choice for any
offence under this Act:
Provided that if the victim is unable to afford a legal counsel, the Legal Services
Authority shall provide a counsel to him.
48. (1) The designated court shall complete the trial, as far as possible, within a period
of one year from the date of taking into cognizance of any offence under this Act.
(2) The designated court may record the statement of any victim through video
conferencing in any case, where the victim is unable to appear before the court for the
reasons of safety or confidentiality.
(3) In all matters of trans-border and inter-State crimes where the victim has been
repatriated to any other State or country is unable to attend the court proceedings, the court
may order video conferencing to record his statement.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the inquiry and trial of offences
under this Act, may be conducted in camera, if an application is made in this regard by the
victim.
49. (1) The designated court may order, where applicable, any backwages of the victim
to be paid to him.
(2) The designated court shall on its own motion or on an application filed by or on
behalf of the victim, award compensation under section 357A of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, or under any other law for the time being in force or otherwise at any stage
of the proceedings.
(3) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the relief ordered by the designated
court is paid within sixty days from the date of receipt of the order.
50. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
an appeal shall lie from any judgment, sentence or order, not being an interlocutory order, of
the designated court to the High Court.
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of sixty days from
the date of judgment, sentence or order appealed against:
Act
committed by
victim under
coercion,
compulsion,
etc.
Designated
courts.
Special Public
Prosecutors.
Period and
manner for
recording of
evidence of
person who is
trafficked and
disposal of
cases.
Appeal.
Payment to
the victim.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

19
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period
if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the
said period.
CHAPTER  XIV
P
ROTECTION OF VICTIM, WITNESS AND COMPLAINANT
51. (1) The designated court, if on an application made by a victim, witness or a
complainant in any proceeding before it or by the Special Public Prosecutor in relation to
such victim, witness or a complainant or on its own motion, is satisfied that the life of such
victim, witness or a complainant is in danger, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
take such measures to protect such victim, witness and the complainant.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1), the measures which a designated court may take under that sub-section may
include—
(a) the holding of the proceedings at a place to be decided by the designated court;
(b) the avoiding of the mention of the names and addresses of the witnesses in
its orders or judgments or in any records of the case accessible to public;
(c) the issuing of any directions for securing that the identity and address of the
witnesses are not disclosed; and
(d) a decision that it is in the public interest to order that all or any of the
proceedings pending before such a court shall not be published in any manner.
Period and manner for recording of evidence of person who is trafficked and
disposal of cases.
CHAPTER  XV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
52. (1) All offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973—
(a) nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply in relation to any case involving
the arrest of any person on an accusation of having committed an offence under this
Act with imprisonment of more than two years.
(b) no person accused of committing an offence under this Act shall be released
on bail or on his own bond unless—
(i) the Special Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose
the application for such release;
(ii) where the Special Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court
is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is
not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while
on bail; and
(c) the victim shall have a right to be heard in all bail matters.
(3) The conditions for granting of bail specified in clause (b) of sub-section (2) shall
be in addition to the conditions provided under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
53. No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or the State Government or any person acting under the directions of the
Central Government or the State Government as the case may be, acting in good faith, or
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act, or of any rules made thereunder.
Protection of
victim,
witness and
complainant.
Cognizance of
offences.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
402 of 1974.

20
54. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
55. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two
Houses, or where such State Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
56. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removal of the difficulty:
Provided, that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
57. The provisions of section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the
provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 shall not apply to any person who is
found guilty of having committed an offence under this Act.
58. The provisions of section 193, 195, 199 and 203 of the Indian Penal Code shall
apply to any person who is guilty of having committed an offence under this Act.
59. The provisions of this Act, shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any inconsistency, the
provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on the provisions of any such law to the
extent of the inconsistency.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
Power of State
Government
to make rules.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Section 360 of
the Code of
Criminal
Procedure,
1973 and the
provisions of
the Probation
of Offenders
Act, 1958 not
to apply.
Sections 193,
195, 199 and
203 of Indian
Penal Code to
apply.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
2 of 1974.
20 of 1958.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Trafficking in human beings is one of the largest organised crime violating basic
human rights. Trafficking in human beings may be for sexual and physical exploitation and
also for other forms of exploitation like forced labour, etc. This is primarily fueled by poverty,
illiteracy and lack of livelihood options. Majority of the Trafficking is within the country.
However, there are instances where large number of persons are trafficked from neighboring
countries and to other countries especially Middle East.
2. Presently, the subject matter of trafficking of persons is dealt with under the provisions
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956. Section 370 of
Indian Penal Code, 1860 only defines and penalises the offence of trafficking of persons and,
whereas, the provisions of the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 deals with trafficking
of persons for the purpose of commercial sexual exploitation and it does not recognise
trafficing of persons for the purpose of physical and other forms of exploitation.
3. Keeping in view of the above deficiencies in the existing legislations and after
considering the issues relating to prevention, rescue and rehabilitation of victims of trafficking,
it has been considered necessary to bring a comprehensive legislation, namely, the Trafficking
of Persons (Prevention, Protection and Rehabilitation) Bill, 2019 covering all related aspects
of trafficking of persons.
4. The salient features of the Trafficking of Persons (Prevention, Protection and
Rehabilitation) Bill, 21, inter alia, are as follows:—
(a) it aims to prevent the trafficking of persons, to prosecute offenders and to
provide care, protection and rehabilitation to the victims of trafficking;
(b) it creats a conducive legal, economic and social environment for the victims
of trafficking and also addresses the transnational nature of the crimes;
(c) provides for dedicated institutional mechanism at District, State and National
level for prevention, protection, investigation and rehabilitation aspects relating to
trafficking;
(d) it provides for new offences with stringent punishment and fine, which are
aggravated in nature and not addressed in existing laws;
(e) it provides for timely disposal of cases and repatriation of the victims;
(f) it provides for the confidentiality of victims, witnesses and complainants by
not disclosing their identity. The confidentiality of the victims is maintained by recording
their statement through video conferencing and by in camera proceedings.
(g) it also provides for Rehabilitation Fund for the welfare and rehabilitation of
victims to ensure timely relief to the victims and also addresses their physical, mental
trauma etc.;
(h) in order to break the organised nexus, both at national and international
level, the Bill proposes for attachment and forfeiture of property and to remit the
proceeds of crime in the Rehabilitation Fund;
(i) it also provides for immunity to victims for certain criminal actions against
them; and
(j) it is also proposed to designate a Sessions Court in each district for speedy
disposal of the cases under the proposed legislation and for this purposes provides
for appointment of Special Public Prosecutors to deal with such cases in a time bound
manner.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
DR. SASMIT  PATRA
21

Notes on clauses
Clause 2 of the Bill defines various expressions used in the Bill and provides that
words and expressions used but not defined in the proposed Bill and defined in the Indian
Penal Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Information Technology Act,
2000 and the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of the National Anti-
Trafficking Bureau by the Central Government, by notification, having police officers and
other officers of such appropriate ranks as may be necessary for the discharge of its functions.
Sub-clause (3) further provides that the manner of selection, deputation, functioning and
reporting of the officers and employees of the Bureau, shall be in the manner as may be
prescribed.
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide for the functions of the Bureau including the
function to co-ordinate and monitor surveillance and preventive efforts alongwith the known
or probable routes; facilitate surveillance, enforcement and preventive steps at source,
transit and destination points; maintain co-ordination between various law enforcement
agencies and non-Governmental organisations and other stakeholders; strengthen the
intelligence apparatus to improve the collection, collation, analysis and dissemination of
operational intelligence; increase international co-operation and co-ordination with concerned
authorities in foreign countries and international organisations, in operational and long-
term intelligence in investigation, mutual legal assistance, to facilitate universal action for
prevention and suppression and to implement any obligation under various international
conventions and protocols that are in force in respect of counter measures; co-ordinate
actions and enforcement by various bodies or authorities established under the Act; co-
ordinate actions taken by the concerned Ministries, Departments or organisations of the
Government, especially linking the source of transit to destination and connecting all
stakeholders; review measures for combating, preventing and formulating co-ordinated
strategy of action by various law enforcement agencies; make sustained efforts for capacity
building and training of agencies; bring out resource material including education curriculum
for children, Panchayat Raj institutions, enforcement agencies, judicial officers and other
stakeholders; co-ordinate investigating activities among the Districts, States and with other
countries in case of cross-border trafficking of persons; co-ordinate the investigation, where
international ramifications are reported or suspected; co-ordinate investigation, where inter-
State ramifications are reported or suspected across two or more States or Union-territory
Administrations; undertake and facilitate other investigators for investigating offences from
the organised crime perspective; develop and monitor a database on every crime under this
Act; co-ordinate with any national or international investigating or law enforcement agencies
and civil society organisations; facilitate inter-State and international transfer of evidence in
investigation as well as video conferencing in judicial proceedings; facilitate frequent meetings
of the State Police Nodal Officers to facilitate, monitor and evaluate the establishment and
functioning of Anti-Trafficking Units; provide necessary support for investigation by the
Anti-Trafficking Units, where such requests are made; undertake steps to enhance the
professional skills of Anti-Trafficking Police Officers, Anti-Trafficking Units and all concerned
with the investigation and prosecution of cases; facilitate inter-State and trans-border transfer
of evidence and materials, witnesses and others for expediting prosecution; protection of
witnesses, victims, complainants and affected families, as the case may be; undertake steps
for timely and effective action on post-rescue care and protection of any person who is
trafficked, including steps towards rehabilitation by the concerned agencies, so that their
rights are ensured, and that they are not re-trafficked; monitor and facilitate victim and
witness protection protocols, rules and procedures including video conferencing during
trial of offences which have ramifications across States and beyond borders; and develop
minimum standards of care and advice for all concerned, in matters of compliance.
22

23
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to provide for the investigation by the Bureau which includes
that the Bureau may take over investigation of any offence under this Act, referred to it by
two or more States; sub-clause (2) provides that where an offence is referred to the Bureau
under sub-clause (1) of clause 5, the State Government shall not proceed with the investigation
of the offence and shall forthwith transmit the relevant documents and records to the Bureau;
till the Bureau takes up the investigation of the case, it shall be the duty of the officer-in-
charge of the police station to continue the investigation of an offence under this Act. Sub-
clause (4) provides that while investigating any offence under this Act, the Bureau, having
regard to the gravity of the offence and other relevant factors, may if it is expedient to do so,
request the State Government to associate with the investigation; or with the previous
approval of the Central Government, transfer the case to the State Government for
investigation and trial of the offence. Sub-clauses (5) and (6) provides that while investigating
any offence under this Act, the Bureau may also investigate any other offence under any law
for the time being in force, which the accused is alleged to have committed, if the offence is
connected with such other offence and the State Government shall extend assistance and
co-operation to the Bureau for investigation of an offence under the Act. Sub-clause (7)
provides that save as otherwise provided, nothing contained in the Act shall affect the
powers of the State Government to investigate and prosecute any offence under the Act or
other offences under any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to provide that the State Government shall appoint a State
Nodal Officer, not below the rank of Director in the State Government, who shall be responsible
for follow up action under the Act, as per the direction of the State Anti-Trafficking Committee
and co-ordinate with other Government agencies and civil society organisations, provide
relief and rehabilitation services through District Anti-Trafficking Unit and other Government
agencies as well as civil society organisations and liaison with the State Police Nodal Officer,
National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee for all matters relating to relief
and rehabilitation.
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to provide that the State Government shall appoint a State
Police Nodal Officer of such rank as may be specified by that Government, who shall be
responsible for all the activities in the prevention and combating of trafficking of persons in
the State and also to monitor the functioning of Anti-Trafficking Police Officers and Anti-
Trafficking Units in the State and co-ordinate and monitor inter-State and trans-border
transfer of persons rescued, witnesses, evidence and offenders under this Act and liaison
with State Nodal Officer and such other functions as may be prescribed.
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to provide that the State Government shall designate one
police officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police of the District to be the District
Police Nodal Officer on matters relating to trafficking of persons and responsible for all the
activities in the District concerned and perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the District Police Nodal Officer shall be the convener of the
District Anti-Trafficking Committee and shall report to the State Police Nodal Officer in every
matter relating to an offence of trafficking of persons including rescue, investigation and
inter-State transfer of a person who is trafficked and also of the offenders. Sub-clause (3)
provides that the District Police Nodal Officer shall monitor the functioning of Anti-Trafficking
Unit and provide necessary assistance to them for the effective discharge of their duties.
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to provide that the State Government shall designate for
each District such number of Anti-Trafficking Police Officers for matters related to trafficking
of persons, including prevention of trafficking, rescue and protection of the victims,
investigation and prosecution and the State Government shall designate for each District
such number of Anti-Trafficking Police Officers for matters related to trafficking of persons,
including prevention of trafficking, rescue and protection of the victims, investigation and
prosecution.
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to provide that the appropriate Government shall set up for
each District or a group of Districts, such number of Anti-Trafficking Units, for dealing with

24
all matters of prevention, rescue, protection and care of victims and witnesses and of
investigation and prosecution of any offence under the Act. Sub-clause (2) provides that
every local police station shall undertake every activity in matters of rescue, investigation,
prevention and protection of persons trafficked under this Act and where the Anti-Trafficking
Unit is not functional. Sub-clause (3) provides that the State Government shall appoint for
every Anti-Trafficking Unit such number of subordinate police officers including women
police officers as it deems necessary for the discharge of the functions of the Anti-Trafficking
Unit and vest in them with all the powers to investigate any offence committed within its
local jurisdiction under the Act and the officer-in-charge of a police station after registering
the First Information Report under section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall
take all necessary action for immediate rescue and protection and then transfer the case to
the Anti-Trafficking Unit.
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of National Anti-Trafficking
Relief and Rehabilitation Committee by the Central Government and by notification. Sub-
clause (2) provides for the composition of the Committee which shall consist of a Chairperson,
who is the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Member-Secretary who is
the Head of National Anti-Trafficking Bureau, representatives from Ministry of Home Affairs,
Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Labour and Employment, Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Legislative Department, Four representatives from registered civil society organisations
active in the prevention, rescue and rehabilitation of victims and such other representatives
of the Ministries or Departments or experts representing different States, as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause (3) seeks to provide for the functions of the National Anti-Trafficking Relief and
Rehabilitation Committee, including to facilitate and ensure rehabilitation and relief services
including compensation, repatriation, re-integration to the victims through concerned
Ministries, Departments and statutory bodies; provide for Protection Homes and
Rehabilitation Homes to enable the immediate and long term sustainable rehabilitation of
victims, ensure the effective co-ordination between the concerned authorities both within
the country as well as with other countries for the repatriation of victims; seek reports from
appropriate Government, State Anti-Trafficking Committee, District Anti-Trafficking
Committee, on the quality of services and the functioning of the Protection Homes and
Rehabilitation Homes; maintain and monitor the Rehabilitation Fund established under
clause 30 and such other functions as may be prescribed.
Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to provide that the appropriate Government shall establish
a State Anti-Trafficking Committee to oversee the implementation of this Act and advise the
State Government and District Anti-Trafficking Committees on matters relating to prevention
of trafficking, protection, repatriation and rehabilitation of victims and shall consist of a
Chairperson, who is the Chief Secretary and other Members, such as Director General of
Police; Secretary, Department of Women and Child, Secretary, Home Department; Secretary,
Labour Department; Secretary, Health Department; Secretary, State Legal Services Authority:
Secretary, Law Department; Protector of Emigrants, Ministry of External Affairs; State Police
Nodal Officer; State Nodal Officer; two social workers out of which one shall be a woman
and such other members as may be prescribed. Sub-clause (3) provides for the functions of
the State Anti-Trafficking Committee to identify the roles and responsibilities of each
Department at State or District level for effective implementation of the Act and the rules
made under it; arrange for appropriate training and sensitisation of functionaries of all
personnel including Governmental and non-Governmental; develop effective networking
and linkages with local non-Governmental organisations for specialised services and technical
assistance like vocational training, education, healthcare, nutrition, mental health intervention,
drug de-addiction and legal aid services; review and monitor the functioning of District
Anti-Trafficking Committee; make necessary funds available to the District Anti-Trafficking
Committee for providing or setting up required facilities for the implementation of the Act,
and such other functions and duties as may be prescribed. Sub-clause (4) provides that the
State Anti-Trafficking Committee shall co-ordinate with Bureau and National Anti-Trafficking

25
Relief and Rehabilitation Committee to provide all necessary assistance and inputs as may
be required to prevent offences of trafficking of persons especially, those that have inter-
State and international ramifications and have features of an organised crime.
Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to provide that the appropriate Government shall, by
notification, constitute for every District, a District Anti-Trafficking Committee for exercising
the powers and performing such functions and duties in relation to prevention, rescue,
protection, medical care, psychological assistance and need-based rehabilitation of victims
and will consist of a Chairperson who is a District Magistrate or Additional District Magistrate,
a Convener who is a District Police Nodal Officer and District Officer for Women and Child
Development; representative from District Officer for Women and Child Development, District
Legal Services Authority and Child Welfare Committee; two Civil Society Organisations and
the Non-Governmental Organisations working in the field of prevention of trafficking and
related issues and other members as may be prescribed. Sub-clause (3) further provides for
the functions to be performed by the District Anti-Trafficking Committee, such as, direct and
facilitate the person in-charge of the Protection Homes and Rehabilitation Homes, as the
case may be, and submit an individual care plan to the District Anti-Trafficking Committee;
ensure care, protection, appropriate rehabilitation or restoration of all victims, based on each
victims' individual care plan and by passing necessary directions to Protection Homes and
Rehabilitation Homes, co-ordinate with other State Departments and Panchayati Raj
institutions, to keep a check on the children who drop out from schools and those children
who are covered by various schemes and have stopped accessing the benefits of those
schemes and inform such cases to State Anti-Trafficking Committee and take appropriate
actions; facilitate in a time bound manner or in the manner as may be prescribed, the inter-
State repatriation of victims or persons subjected to bonded labour; facilitate survey of the
areas and vulnerable population to identify source, transit and destination areas of trafficking
of persons and based on the information received, draw up an action plan for the prevention
and protection of people who are vulnerable to trafficking and implementation of the action
plan; create programmes for awareness generation, community mobilisation and
empowerment of vulnerable social groups against trafficking of persons; assist the Anti-
Trafficking Police Officer, the Anti-Trafficking Unit or the local police, as the case may be, in
conducting rescue operation, transferring victims to the nearest Protection Home, in
connection with prevention of trafficking of persons, protection of victims and their
rehabilitation, etc., and such other functions as may be prescribed. Sub-clause (4) and (5)
provides that the appropriate Government shall provide adequate resources to the District
Anti-Trafficking Committee for carrying out prevention, protection and rescue procedures
and the District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall furnish a report to the State Anti-Trafficking
Committee on quarterly basis.
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to provide that the District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall
have the final authority to dispose of cases for the care, protection, treatment, development
and rehabilitation of the victims and in case of child victim, the provisions of the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 shall apply.
Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to provide that the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 shall mutatis mutandis apply in relation to a search and seizure in respect of
an offence under this Act.
Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to provide that where a police officer or Anti-Trafficking
Police Officer or Anti-Trafficking Unit has reason to believe that it is necessary to rescue a
person without undue delay due to the imminent danger that may cause to his life and
person, he or it may remove such person from any place or premises and produce him before
the Magistrate or Child Welfare Committee, as the case may be, and shall take all necessary
steps for the medical examination of such person for the purposes of determination as to the
age, the assessment or detection of trauma, injury, illnesses incidental thereto to him and the
provisions of section 164A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and section 27 of the
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 shall mutatis mutandis apply in relation

26
to a medical examination of any person under this section. Sub-clause (3) provides that the
police officer or Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or Anti-Trafficking Unit, as the case may be,
shall inform the District Anti-Trafficking Committee about the rescue conducted under this
section and the Committee shall take appropriate actions for providing interim relief and
further rehabilitation services to the person rescued.
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to provide that the District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall
assist the Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or the Anti-Trafficking Unit or any police officer, as
the case may be, in rescue operation and transferring any person to the nearest Protection
Home or any other suitable institution, as deemed fit by the District Anti-Trafficking
Committee. Sub-clause (2) provides that the Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or Anti-Trafficking
Unit or any police officer, as the case may be, shall produce the person rescued before the
Magistrate or the Child Welfare Committee, as the case may be, without any loss of time but
within twenty-four hours of the rescue. Sub-clause (3) provides that the Magistrate may,
after making an inquiry as to the age of the person rescued and if it is found that the person
is a child, pass such orders as he deems necessary for the care and protection of the person,
and where the Magistrate is satisfied, after making an inquiry as to the age of the victim and
it is found that the victim is not a child, the Magistrate may, make an order that the victim be
placed, for such reasonable period, in a Rehabilitation Home and if the victim or any person
rescued is not a child and he voluntarily makes an application supported by an affidavit for
his release and if the Magistrate is of the opinion that such application has not been made
voluntarily, the Magistrate may reject such application after recording his reasons in writing
and in discharging his functions, a Magistrate may summon a mental healthcare professional,
or psycho social counsellor, or clinical psychologist, or psychotherapist to assist him and
may, for this purpose, in consultation with the District Anti-Trafficking Committee and District
Legal Services Authority, maintain a list of experienced social workers.
Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or Anti-
Trafficking Unit or any police officer, as the case may be, shall ensure that investigation
including search and seizure must be conducted in accordance with the provisions laid
down in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and any other law for the time being in force.
Sub-clause (2), provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, the Anti-Trafficking Police Officer or the officer-in-charge of the police
station, as the case may be, shall forward the report on completion of investigation to the
court having jurisdiction within ninety days from the date of registration of first information
report. Sub-clause (3) provides that the clause provides that the investigating officer, while
forwarding the report on completion of investigation of an offence under this Act, punishable
with imprisonment of more than two years, has reason to believe that any amount suspected
to have been obtained by the accused by way of commission of the offence and held by him
in any bank account, the investigating officer may submit an application before the designated
court for freezing of such amount and the designated court, on satisfaction, after an inquiry
made in this behalf, may freeze such amount in any such bank account and may, upon
conviction, order that such amount lying in such bank account, shall be remitted to the
Rehabilitation Fund.
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to provide that where a person is prosecuted for committing
or abetting or attempting to commit any offence under this Act in respect of a child or a
woman or a person suffering from physical or mental disability, unless it is specified, the
designated court shall presume that such person has committed or abetted or attempted to
commit the offence, as the case may be, unless the contrary is proved.
Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to provide that the State and the District Anti-Trafficking
Committees shall undertake all measures and recommend strategies and plans to protect and
prevent vulnerable persons from being trafficked and such measures shall include,
coordinating the implementation of all the programmes, schemes and plans relating to the
prevention of trafficking of persons with any statutory bodies, organisations or agencies as
well as Panchayati Raj institutions; facilitating the implementation of livelihood and

27
educational programmes for vulnerable communities; facilitating the implementation of
programmes and schemes sponsored by various Ministries and Departments of the
appropriate Government; co-ordinating with corporate sector to implement the various
schemes, programmes for the prevention of trafficking of persons, ensuring accountability
of the concerned agencies, by regular review and appropriate action; developing appropriate
law and order framework to ensure prevention of trafficking of persons; undertaking
vulnerability mapping of the State and give focus and attention to the challenging areas,
commissioning independent research on various aspects of trafficking and ensure follow up
action; organising interface between law enforcement agencies, other Government
Departments and agencies with the voluntary organisations or non-Governmental
organisations in matters of prevention of trafficking of persons; bringing out annual report
on trafficking of persons in the State, networking with the Bureau and other State Anti-
Trafficking Committees, especially with those States where source-transit-destination
linkages exist, and undertake all activities for joint action programmes by bringing in common
policies and programmes; linking with the Bureau and the Central Government and other
concerned agencies, in case of trans-border trafficking of persons and ensure appropriate
action.
Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to provide that the appropriate Government shall maintain
either directly or through voluntary organisations or non-Governmental organisations as
many Protection Homes as necessary and to be managed in the manner, as may be prescribed
for the immediate care and protection of the victims or any person rescued and the Protection
Homes shall provide for shelter, food, clothing, counselling and medical care that is necessary
for the victims or any person rescued and such other services in the manner, as may be
prescribed.
Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to provide that the appropriate Government, as it deems fit,
shall maintain either directly or through voluntary organisations or non-Governmental
organisations, one or more Rehabilitation Homes in each District managed in the manner as
may be prescribed for the purpose of providing long-term rehabilitation of victims or any
person rescued. Sub-clause (2) provides that the appropriate Government may also utilise
any existing shelter home for the purposes of rehabilitation.
Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to provide that notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, a Protection Home and Rehabilitation Home shall be
registered under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government
and if any person in-charge of Protection Home and Rehabilitation Home providing shelter
and rehabilitation to victims or any person rescued contravenes any of the provisions of
sub-clause (1) of clause 23, he shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to one
year or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, or with both.
Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to provide that a victim or any person rescued on behalf of
him may make an application to the Magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction
the victim or such other person is trafficked or suspected to be trafficked for an order that he
may be kept in a Rehabilitation Home and in case the victim or any person rescued is a child,
the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 shall apply.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Magistrate may, pending inquiry under sub-clause (3) or (4)
of clause 17, direct that the victim or any person rescued be kept in such care and protection
as he may consider proper, having regard to the circumstances of the case and the Magistrate
shall consult the District Anti-Trafficking Committee before taking a final decision with
respect to the rehabilitation of the victim or such other person.
Clause 25 of the Bill provides that where the person rescued is a victim, the District
Anti-Trafficking Committee shall ensure that the rehabilitation of the person is not contingent
upon criminal proceedings being initiated against the accused or the outcome thereof.
Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to provide that the District Anti-Trafficking Committee or
the Child Welfare Committee, as the case may be, shall be responsible for the repatriation of

28
victims by co-ordinating with their counterparts in any other District and where the State
Anti-Trafficking Committee is of the opinion that a victim from a foreign country needs to be
repatriated to the country of origin, it may deal with the matter under any law for the time
being in force. Sub-clause (3) provides that the State Nodal Officer shall obtain informed
written consent from the victim for repatriation purposes, and where needed, shall make
arrangements for the counselling of the victim by trained psycho social professionals.
Sub-clause (4) provides that the repatriation of the victims shall be completed within a
period of three months for inter-State repatriation, and within six months in case of cross
border repatriation from the date of rescue by the District Anti-Trafficking Committee, or the
Child Welfare Committee, or State Police Nodal Officer, as the case may be, and any delay in
repatriation shall be recorded for reasons in writing and shall be reported to the National
Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee and the Bureau forthwith.
Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to provide that upon application for interim relief by the
victim, the District Anti-Trafficking Committee or Child Welfare Committee, as the case may
be, shall take immediate steps to award interim relief to the victim as deemed appropriate not
later than thirty days, taking into consideration all aspects, including physical, mental trauma
and the other requirements of the victim and the appropriate Government shall provide
adequate funds at the disposal of the District Anti-Trafficking Committee for the purposes
under sub-clause (1) of clause 27, within a period of one month from the date of commencement
of this Act.
Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to provide that the District Anti-Trafficking Committee shall
take steps to ensure that appropriate relief is provided to the victim, within sixty days from
the date of filing of charge sheet and the relief amount shall be in addition to any other
compensation including any amount or benefit payable by way of any scheme of the
appropriate Government or pursuant to any order of the court under any law for the time
being in force.
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to provide that where any property is, or is likely to be, used
for the commission of an offence under this Act and the property is concealed, transferred or
dealt with in any manner which may result in frustrating any proceedings under this Act, the
designated court may attach such property and the designated court shall give an opportunity
to be heard to the person who is the owner or occupier of the property. Sub-clause (2)
provides that where a person has been convicted of any offence under this Act, the designated
court shall, in addition to awarding any punishment, declare that any property, movable or
immovable or both, belonging to such person or held by any person on his behalf, which has
been used for the commission of that offence or accrued thereby, or which has been attached
under sub-clause (1), shall stand forfeited to the appropriate Government and the same may
be authorised for the purpose of realisation of any fine imposed by the designated court and
the proceeds shall be remitted to the Rehabilitation Fund.
Clause 30 of the Bill provides for Rehabilitation Fund by the Central Government for
the welfare and rehabilitation of the victims under this Act and there shall be credited thereto
any grants and loans made by the appropriate Government, any voluntary donations,
contributions or subscriptions, whether or not for any specific purpose as may be decided
upon by the Central Government, any fine recovered for the commission of an offence under
the Act which may include recovery of fine specified in section 421 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. 1973, the amount seized from any bank account frozen under sub-clause (4) of
clause 18 and any other sums as may be received. Sub-clause (2) provides that the State
Government may supplement the Rehabilitation Fund and the Rehabilitation Fund shall be
utilised under this Act by the appropriate Government for the establishment and administration
of Protection Homes and Rehabilitation Homes, supporting innovative programmes for the
welfare and rehabilitation of the victims, strengthening legal assistance and support,
providing entrepreneurial support, skill development training or vocational training, providing
aftercare facilities for capital and infrastructure to the victims who are ready to integrate into
mainstream society by setting up small business or profession, providing victim and witness

29
protection, awareness generation programmes for the prevention of trafficking of persons,
creating community-based programmes to identify, report and prevent trafficking of persons,
providing specialised professional services, counsellors, translators, interpreters, social
workers, mental health care professionals, vocational trainers or such other specialised
professionals, for the victims and any other activity that may be required for effective
implementation of the Act. Sub-clause (4) provides that the Rehabilitation Fund shall be
maintained and monitored by the National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee
and shall be made available to the State and District Anti-Trafficking Committees towards
prevention, protection and prosecution of matters relating to trafficking of persons.
Sub-clause (6) provides that any fine recovered for the commission of an offence under the
Act shall also be remitted to the Rehabilitation Fund which includes recovery of fine specified
in section 421 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the generation, dissemination and
utilization of Fund shall be regulated in the manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to provide for the offence of aggravated forms of trafficking,
such as trafficking for the purpose of forced labour or bonded labour by using violence,
intimidation, inducement, promise of payment of money, deception or coercion or by subtle
means including, allegations of accumulated debt by the person, retention of any identity
paper, threats of denunciation to authorities, or for the purpose of bearing child, either
naturally or through assisted reproductive techniques, or by administering any narcotic
drug or psychotropic substance or alcohol on a person for the purpose of trafficking or
forcing him to remain in exploitative condition, by administering any chemical substance or
hormones on a person for the purpose of early sexual maturity, or for the purpose of marriage
or under the pretext of marriage trafficks a woman or child after marriage, or by causing
serious injury resulting in grievous hurt or death of any person, including death as a result
of suicide as a consequence of trafficking of person, or who is a pregnant woman or the
offence results in pregnancy of the person, or by causing or exposing the person to a life-
threatening illness including acquired immuno deficiency syndrome or human
immunodeficiency virus, or for the purpose of begging, or who is a mentally ill person as
defined in clause (1) of section 2 of the Mental Health Act, 1987 or a person with disability as
defined in clause(s) of section 2 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, or as a
consequence of trafficking, the person becomes mentally ill or disabled, or by encouraging
or abetting any person to migrate illegally into India or Indians in to some other country.
Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever commits the offence of aggravated
form of trafficking of a person shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to life imprisonment and shall also be
liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever is convicted of the offence of
trafficking on more than one occasion shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which
shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and shall also be
liable to fine which shall not be less than two laldi rupees.
Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever keeps or manages, or acts or
assists in the keeping or management of a premises to be used as a place for trafficking of
any person shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
five years and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in the event of a
second or subsequent conviction with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than seven years and with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees. Sub-clause (92)
also provides that whoever being a tenant, lessee, occupier or person in-charge of any
premises, uses, or knowingly allows any other person to use, the premises or any part
thereof as a place for trafficking of persons, or being the owner, lessor or landlord of any
premises, or the agent of such owner, lessor, or landlord, lets out the same, or any part
thereof with the knowledge that the same or any part thereof is intended to be used as a
place of exploitation of the victim, or is wilfully a party to the use of the premises or any part

30
thereof as a place for trafficking of persons, shall be punished on first conviction with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to
one lakh rupees and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction, with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine which may extend
to two lakh rupees. The clause further provides for an explanation, that for the purposes of
sub-clause (2) of clause 34, it shall be presumed until the contrary is proved, that any person
referred to in items (i) or (ii) of sub-clause (2) has not exercised due diligence in allowing to
use or letting out the premises or in allowing the premises or any part thereof to be used as
a place of exploitation or, as the case may be, and has knowledge that the premises or any
part thereof was being used as a place of exploitation of the victim. The clause also provides
that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, on
conviction of any person referred to in items (i) or (ii) of sub-clause (2), of any offence under
this Act in respect of any premises or any part thereof, any lease or agreement under which
such premises have been leased out or held or occupied at the time of the commission of the
offence, shall become void with effect from the date of the said conviction.
Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to provide that notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, the Magistrate shall, on receipt of information from the
police or otherwise, that any premises or any part thereof is being used for the purpose of
trafficking of persons, issue notice to the owner, lessor or landlord of the premises or part
thereof, or the agent of the owner, lessor or landlord, or on the tenant, lessee, occupier of, or
any other person in charge of such premises or part thereof, to show cause within seven
days of the receipt of the notice why the same should not be sealed or attached for improper
use thereof; and, after hearing the person concerned, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the
premises or part thereof is being used for trafficking of persons, then, the Magistrate may
pass an order by directing eviction of the occupier or any person from the premises, within
seven days of the passing of the order; directing that the owner, lessor, or landlord, or the
agent of the owner, before letting out the premises or any part thereof, which, during the
rescue or search has been found to be used for the purpose of trafficking, shall obtain the
previous permission of the Magistrate and the Magistrate shall pass appropriate orders
within thirty days from the date of order and where no permission is granted within such
period, the permission shall be deemed to have been granted. Sub-clause (2) provides that if
the Magistrate, after the show cause notice issued under sub-clause (1) of clause 35, finds
that the premises or any part thereof was used for trafficking of any person, the owner,
lessor, landlord as well as the agent of the owner, lessor, landlord exercised due diligence in
letting out premises or any part thereof, then, the same shall be restored to the owner, lessor
or landlord, or the agent of the owner with an undertaking that the premises or any part
thereof shall not be leased out, or otherwise given possession of, or for the benefit of the
person who was allowing the improper use therein, within two months of the issuing of the
show cause notice by the Magistrate. Sub-clause (3) provides that if the Magistrate is
satisfied that the premises or part thereof was not used for trafficking of any person, he shall
cause the same to be restored to the owner, lessor or landlord, or the agent of the owner
lessor, landlord, tenant, lessee, occupier or any other person in-charge of the premises or
part thereof within two months of the issuance of the show cause notice and when an owner,
lessor or landlord, or the agent of the owner, lessor or landlord fails to comply with a
direction given under item (ii) of sub-clause (1), he shall be punished with fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees.
Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to provide that a person is said to promote, procure or
facilitate the commission of trafficking of person, if that person, produces, prints, issues or
distributes unissued, tampered or fake certificates, registration or stickers as proof of
compliance with Government requirements, or advertises, publishes, prints, broadcasts or
distributes, or causes the advertisement, publication, printing or broadcast or distribution
by any means, including the use of information technology or any brochure, flyer or any
propaganda material that promotes trafficking of person or exploitation of a trafficked person
in any manner, or assists in the conduct of misrepresentation or fraud for the purposes of

31
procuring or facilitating the acquisition of clearances and necessary documents from
Government agencies for the purpose of trafficking of any person. Sub-clause (2) provides
for rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees for the punishment for promoting or facilitating trafficking of person.
Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever abets any person to commit any
offence under this Act and if the act abetted is in consequence of the abetment, shall be
punished with the punishment provided for that offence.
Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to provide that notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, whoever knowingly or having reason to believe that a
person has been trafficked, fails to perform a duty, which he is entrusted under this Act, for
providing care, protection and rehabilitation to a victim or performs duty but knowingly
causes physical or mental injury or hardship or trauma to the victim shall be punished with
fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees and in the event of a second or
subsequent offence with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever buys or sells any person for a
consideration, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than seven years but may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine which shall
not be less than one lakh rupees. Sub-clause (2) provides that whoever solicits or publicises
electronically, taking or distributing obscene photographs or videos or providing materials
or soliciting or guiding tourists or using agents or any other form which may lead to the
trafficking of a person shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than five years but may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine which
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees and may extend to one lakh rupees.
Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever hires or otherwise obtains
possession, or lets to hire, or in any manner disposes of a person, for the purpose of
trafficking of person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which shall not be less than three years but may extend to five years and shall also be liable
to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever commits trafficking of a person
with the aid of media, including, but not limited to print, internet, digital or electronic media,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven
years but may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than
one lakh rupees. Sub-clause (2) provides that whoever distributes, or sells or stores, in any
form in any electronic or printed form showing incidence of sexual exploitation, sexual assault,
or rape for the purpose of extortion or for coercion of the victim or his family members, or for
unlawful gain shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than three years but may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine which
shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to provide that no report or any newspaper or magazine or
news-sheet or audio-visual media or any other form of communication regarding any inquiry
or investigation or judicial proceedings at any stage shall disclose the name, address or any
other particulars, which may lead to the identification of a victim or witness of trafficking of
person under this Act shall be published and for reasons to be recorded in writing, the
designated court may permit such disclosure, if in its opinion, such disclosure is in the best
interest of the victim. It also provides that any person who contravenes the provisions of
sub-clause (1) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both: and in case, the
victim is a child, the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2015 shall apply.

32
Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to provide that where an act or omission constitutes an
offence punishable under this Act and also under any other law for the time being in force,
then, notwithstanding anything contained in any such law, the person found guilty of such
offence, shall be liable to punishment under such law which provides for punishment which
is greater in degree. Sub-clause (2) provides that a designated court convicting a person of
any offence under this Act may also pass an order for the auction of the premises or any part
thereof and the proceeds of such auction shall be ordered to be remitted to the Rehabilitation
Fund. Sub-clause (3) provides that when an occupier or any other person fails to comply
with a direction given under item (i) of sub-clause (1) of clause 35, he shall be deemed to have
committed an offence under clause 34 and shall be punished accordingly.
Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to provide that whoever attempts to commit an offence
punishable by this Act with imprisonment, or to cause such an offence to be committed, and
in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the offence, shall be punished with
imprisonment of any description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to
one-half of the imprisonment or, as the case may be, one-half of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or
with both.
Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to provide that nothing is an offence which is committed or
attempted to have been committed by a victim, punishable with death or imprisonment for
life or for imprisonment for ten years, if the offence is committed or attempted to have been
committed, under coercion or compulsion or intimidation or threat or undue influence by any
person and where, at the time of committing the offence, the victim is subjected to reasonable
apprehension of his death, grievous hurt or any other injury to him or to any other person
whom he is interested in.
Clause 46 of the Bill seeks to provide for Designated Courts for the purposes of
providing speedy trial of any offence under this Act. It further provides that the State
Government shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification,
designate for each district, a Court of Session, within two months from the date of
commencement of this Act, to try any offence under this Act.
Clause 47 of the Bill seeks to provide that the appropriate Government may, by
notification, appoint Special Public Prosecutors for every designated court for conducting
cases under this Act and every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this
section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause (u) of section
2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and provisions of that Code shall have effect
accordingly. Sub-clause (3) provides that subject to the provision contained in section 301
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the victim shall be entitled to the assistance of a
legal counsel of his choice for any offence under this Act and if the victim is unable to afford
a legal counsel, the Legal Services Authority shall provide a counsel to him.
Clause 48 of the Bill seeks to provide that the designated court shall complete the trial,
as far as possible, within a period of one year from the date of taking into cognizance of any
offence under this Act and may record the statement of any victim through video conferencing
in any case, where the victim is unable to appear before the court for the reasons of safety or
confidentiality. It also provides that in all matters of transborder and inter-State crimes where
the victim has been repatriated to any other State or country is unable to attend the court
proceedings, the court may order video conferencing to record their statement. It also provides
that notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the inquiry into and trial of offences
under this Act, may be conducted in camera, if an application is made in this regard by the
victim.
Clause 49 of the Bill seeks to provide that the designated court may order, where
applicable, any back wages of the victim to be paid to him. Sub-clause (2) provides that the
designated court shall on its own motion or on an application filed by or on behalf of the
victim, award compensation under section 357A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or

33
under any other law for the time being in force or otherwise at any stage of the proceedings
and the appropriate Government shall ensure that the relief ordered by the designated court
is paid within sixty days from the date of receipt of the order.
Clause 50 of the Bill provide that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, an appeal shall lie from any judgment, sentence or order, not being
an interlocutory order, of the designated court to the High Court and every appeal under this
section shall be preferred within a period of sixty days from the date of judgment, sentence
or order appealed against and the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the
said period if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the
appeal within the said period.
Clause 51 of the Bill seeks to provide that the designated court, if on an application
made by a victim, witness or a complainant in any proceeding before it or by the Special
Public Prosecutor in relation to such victim, witness or a complainant or on its own motion,
is satisfied that the life of such victim, witness or a complainant is in danger, it may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, take such measures to protect such victim, witness and
the complainant. Sub-clause (2) provides that in particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the provisions of sub-clause (1) of clause 51, the measures which a designated
court may take under that sub-section may include, the holding of the proceedings at a place
to be decided by the designated court; the avoiding of the mention of the names and
addresses of the witnesses in its orders or judgments or in any records of the case accessible
to public; the issuing of any directions for securing that the identity and address of the
witnesses are not disclosed; and a decision that it is in the public interest to order that all or
any of the proceedings pending before such a court shall not be published in any manner.
Clause 52 of the Bill seeks to provide that all offences under this Act shall be cognizable
and non-bailable. Sub-clause (2) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (a) nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply in
relation to any case involving the arrest of any person on an accusation of having committed
an offence under this Act with imprisonment of more than two years, (b) no person accused
of committing an offence under this Act shall be released on bail or on his own bond
unless—(i) the Special Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the
application for such release,(ii) where the Special Public Prosecutor opposes the application,
the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not
guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail, (c) the
victim shall have a right to be heard in all bail matters. Sub-clause (3) provides that the
conditions on granting of bail specified in item (b) of sub-clause (2) are in addition to the
conditions provided under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Clause 53 of the Bill seeks to provide that no suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding
shall lie against the Central Government or the State Government or any person acting under
the directions of the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, acting
in good faith, or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act, or of any rules made thereunder.
Clause 54 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Central Government may, by notification,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. It also provides that every rule made
under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Clause 55 of the Bill provide that the State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. Sub-clause (2) provides

34
that every rule made by the State Government, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of the State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses or where
such State Legislature consistes of One House, before that House.
Clause 56 of the Bill seeks to provide that any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removal of the difficulty and no such order shall
be made under this section after the expiry of the period of two years from the commencement
of this Act. Sub-clause (2) provides that every order made under this section shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 57 of the Bill seeks to provide that the provisions of section 360 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 shall
not apply to any person who is found guilty of having committed an offence under this Act.
Clause 58 of the Bill seeks to provide that the provisions of sections 193, 195, 199 and
203 of Indian Penal Code shall apply to any person who is guilty of having committed an
offence under this Act.
Clause 59 of the Bill seeks to provide that the provisions of this Act, shall be in
addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in
force and, in case of any inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding
effect on the provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall, by notification, establish
a National Anti-Trafficking Bureau, having police officers and other officers of such
appropriate ranks as may be necessary for the discharge of its functions.
2. Sub-clauses (1) and (2) of clause 29 provides that the designated court shall, in
addition to awarding any punishment, declare that any property, movable or immovable or
both, belonging to such person or held by any person on his behalf, which has been used
for the commission of that offence or accrued thereby, or which has been attached under
sub-clase (1), shall stand forfeited to the appropriate Government and the same may be
authorised for the purpose of realisation of any fine imposed by the designated court and
the proceeds shall be remitted to the Rehabilitation Fund.
3. Clause 30 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall constitute a
Rehabilitation Fund for the welfare and rehbilitation of the victims under this Act. It also
provides that the State Government may supplement the Rehabilitation Fund. Besides, the
Rehabilitation Fund may also be credited through grants and loans made by the appropriate
Government; any voluntary donations, contributions or subscriptions; any fine recovered
for the commission of an offence under the Act which may include recovery of fine specified
in section 421 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. Further, the proceeds through freezing
of the bank accounts, as prescribed under sub-clauses (3) and (4) of clause 18, shall be
remitted to the Rehabilitation fund.
4. Sub-clause (2) of clause 43 provides that the designated court convicting a person
may also pass an order for the auction of the premises or any part thereof and the proceeds
of such auction shall be ordered to be remitted to the Rehabilitation Fund.
5. The financial implication arising from the establishment of National Anti-Trafficking
Bureau is estimated as recurring expenditure of Rs. 10 Crores in the first year and
Rs. 20 crores each in the next two years and for Rehabilitation Fund it is estimated as an
initial allocation of Rs. 10 crores and to be augmented subsequently on need basis.
6. It would be difficult to indicate the exact expenditure incurred in the appointment of
officers of the National Anti-Trafficking Bureau etc. The Bill does not envisage any other
expenditure of recurring or non-recurring.
35

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Sub- clause (3) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for the manner of selection, deputation,
functioning and reporting of the officers and employees of the National Anti-Trafficking
Bureau.
2. Sub-clause (4) of clause 7 of the Bill provides that the State Nodal Officer shall
perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
3. Sub- clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill provides that the police officer not below the
rank of Superintendent of Police of the District to be the District Police Nodal Officer on
matters relating to trafficking of persons and responsible for all the activities in the District
concerned, as may be prescribed.
4. Item (x) of sub-clause (2) of clause 11 of the Bill provides for inclusion of other
representatives of the Ministries or Departments or experts representing different States in
the composition of National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee as may be
prescribed. Item (vi) of sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides for prescribing other
functions of National Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee as may be
prescribed.
5. Item (xii) of sub-clause (2) of clause 12 of the Bill provides for nomination of such
other members in the State Anti-Trafficking Committee. Item (vi) of sub-clause (3) of the said
clause provides for the functions of the State Anti-trafficking Committee, including the
nomination of such other members as may be prescribed.
6. Item (vi) of sub-clause (2) of clause 13 of the Bill provides for nomination of other
members in the District Anti-Trafficking Committee, as may be prescribed. Item (iv) of
sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides for inter-State repatriation of victims or persons
subjected to bonded labour by the District Anti-trafficking Committee in a time bound manner
or in the manner as may be prescribed. Item (vii) of sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides
for any other function as may be prescribed.
7. Sub-clause (1) of clause 21 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government
shall maintain either directly or through voluntary organisations or non-Governmental
organisations as many Protection Homes as necessary and to be managed in the manner, as
may be prescribed for the immediate care and protection of the victims or any person rescued.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Protection Homes shall provide shelter,
food, clothing, counselling and medical care that is necessary for the victims or any person
rescued and such other services in the manner, as may be prescribed.
8. Sub-clause (1) of clause 22 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government, as
it deems fit shall maintain either directly or through voluntary organisations or non-
Governmental organisations, one or more Rehabilitation Homes in each District managed in
the manner as may be prescribed for the purpose of providing long-term rehabilitation to the
victims or any person rescued.
9. Sub-clause (l) of clause 23 of the Bill provides that the Protection Homes and
Rehabilitation Homes shall be registered under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed
by the appropriate Government.
10. Sub-clause (7) of clause 30 of the Bill provides that the generation dissemination
and utilisation of Fund shall be regulated in the manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
11. The matters in respect of which rules may be made relate to matters of procedure or
administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
36

RAJYA  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to prevent trafficking of persons, especially women and children and to provide care,
protection and rehabilitation to the victims of trafficking, to prosecute offenders
and to create a legal, economic and social environment for the victims and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Dr. Sasmit Patra, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4339RS(S3)—11-12-2019.