AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
 ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. LXVII of 2024 
THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
A 
BILL 
5 
to amend the Code on Social Security, 2020. 
  BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows: —  
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code on Social Security (Amendment) Act,
2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment of 
section 15. 
2. In section 15 of the Code on Social Security, 2020 (hereinafter referred to
as Code), in sub-section (1), in clause (b), in sub-clause (iii), the following
provisos shall be inserted, namely: —
       “Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provision of this Code, the minimum monthly pension under the 
Employees’ Pension Scheme shall be at such rates as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government from time to time, which shall, in any 
circumstances whatsoever, be not less than nine thousand rupees; 
       Provided further that nothing contained in the preceding proviso shall 
be applicable to an employee unless he has been a member of the 
Employees’ Pension Scheme for not less than ten years or superannuates on 
attaining the age of fifty-eight years.”      
5 
10 
36 of 2020 
Amendment of 
section 16. 
3. In section 16 of the Code, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), ––
(a) in sub-clause (iii), the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the contribution by the Central Government to the
Pension Fund, shall not be less than eight and one-third per cent of the wages 
of the members of the Employees’ Pension Scheme. 
 Provided further that the Central Government shall, in addition to its 
existing contribution obligations under other provisions, contribute such 
sums at such rates to the corpus of the Pension Fund, as may be necessary 
to meet the short fall, if any, for the payment of minimum monthly pension 
of nine thousand rupees to the eligible members of the Employees’ Pension 
Scheme. 
 Provided also that the Central Government shall, in addition to its 
existing contribution under other provisions, contribute to the Pension Fund, 
at the rate of 1.16 per cent of the employees’ actual salary to the extent that 
such salary exceeds fifteen thousand rupees per month, or at such amounts 
and higher rates, as may be notified from time to time, to ensure seamless 
disbursement of higher pension to the members of the Employees' Pension 
Scheme, commensurate with their actual salary drawn while in service. 
(b) after sub-clause (iii), the following new sub-clauses shall be
inserted, namely: — 
       “(iv) such sums as the employee may voluntarily contribute from his 
salary to the Pension Fund at his own volition, over and above the 
employee’s contribution towards the Provident Fund referred to in clause 
(a) of sub-section (1).
Provided that every contribution payable under this section shall be
calculated to the nearest rupee, fifty paise or more to be counted as the next 
higher rupee and fraction of a rupee less than fifty paise to be ignored. 
(v) The pensionable salary shall be the average actual monthly pay
drawn in any manner including on piece rate basis during contributory 
period of service in the span of twelve months immediately preceding the 
date of exit from the membership of the Pension Fund plus the voluntary 
contribution by the employees to the Pension Fund referred to in sub-clause 
(iv) above;
   Provided that if a member was not in receipt of full wages during the 
period of twelve months preceding the day, he ceased to be the member of 
the Pension Fund, the average of previous twelve months full pay drawn by 
him during the period for which contribution to the Pension Fund was 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 

3 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
recovered, shall be taken into account as pensionable salary for calculating 
pension; 
   Provided further that if during the said span of twelve months there 
are non-contributory periods of service including cases where the member 
has drawn salary for a part of the month, the total wages during the twelve 
months span shall be divided by the actual number of days for which salary 
has been drawn and the amount so derived shall be multiplied by thirty to 
work out the average monthly pay; 
         Provided further that there shall be no ceiling on the maximum 
pensionable salary for employees, nor any restriction on joining the Pension 
Scheme based on their salary or date of joining the service, and the pension 
shall be computed on the basis of the actual wages drawn during the period 
of  twelve months preceding the day the employee ceased to be the member 
of the Pension Fund and by also reckoning the voluntary contribution, if 
any, by the employee to the Pension Fund as referred to in sub-clause (iv) 
above; 
   Provided also that, for the members of the Pension Fund who retire 
upon attaining the age of fifty-eight years, or have rendered twenty years or 
more of pensionable service, the pensionable service shall be increased by 
a weightage of two years, or by such higher periods as may be notified by 
the Central Government from time to time, and the weightage shall be 
computed on the basis of the pensionable salary immediately preceding the 
date of exit from membership of the Pension Fund; 
 Provided also that the members of the Employees' Pension Scheme 
shall be entitled to receive Dearness Allowance and periodic revisions of 
pension at such rates and intervals as may be notified by the Central 
Government, based on fluctuations in the Consumer Price Index (CPI), for 
the purpose of mitigating the effects of inflation and addressing the rising 
cost of living; 
(vii) The amount of monthly pension shall be computed in accordance
with the following factors, namely: — 
Monthly Member’s pension = (Pensionable salary x Pensionable service) / 50 
         Provided that the computation of pension shall be subject to the 
minimum pension referred to in sub-clause (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) of section 15 of the Code.” 
40 
4. In the Fifth Schedule of the Code, in part B under the heading ‘MATTERS
THAT MAY BE PROVIDED FOR IN THE PENSION SCHEME’, after
entry 2, the following new entry shall be inserted, namely: —
“2A. The manner in which the employees’ contribution referred to in sub-
clause (iv) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 16 shall be credited to
the Pension Fund and its rate of return.”
Amendment of 
the Fifth 
Schedule.  

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
     Work force in establishments, unorganised sectors, gig workers and 
platform workers are playing a key role in the economic advancement of our 
country. Their toil & sweat is the prime fuel which propels our economy; yet 
we, more often than not, ignore them and their contributions, knowingly or 
unknowingly. It is they who till the land, work in the mines and factories, 
teach our children, manage financial institutions, drive trucks and what not 
during their heydays. They are the wealth creators of our country.  Therefore, 
we, as a nation, should give them ample care and protection during their 
autumn years.  
    The Code on Social Security, 2020 [Act No. 36 of 2020] (hereinafter 
referred to as the ‘Code’) received the assent of the President on 28.09.2020. 
The Government notified the Code on 29.09.2020, but is yet to implement 
majority of the provisions of the Code by invoking the powers conferred 
under sub-section (3) of section 1 of the Code. 
  The Code was proclaimed to be formulated for amending and 
consolidating the laws relating to social security with the goal to extend 
social security to all employees and workers in the organised, unorganised 
and any other sectors. But it has in fact repealed nine employee benevolent 
legislations, including the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952, and contains several provisions which may affect the 
interests of the target class. Unfortunately, the Code is not envisioned as a 
legal frame to ensure reasonable minimum monthly pension amount to the 
members of the Employees’ Pension Scheme on the basis of the present cost 
of living, basic living requirements and hardships faced by the old age 
pensioners.     
It is deeply concerning that EPF pensioners continue to receive a 
pittance as their monthly pension, with many not even receiving the 
minimum amount of   one thousand rupees introduced by the Government 
of India in 2014.  At present, around 76 lakh pensioners are covered under 
the Employees’ Pension Scheme across India, out of which approximately 
36.50 lakh individuals are receiving less than   one thousand rupees per 
month as pension. This meager pension is subjecting these retirees to severe 
financial distress, with many enduring untold hardships. The pensioners 
have long been making an earnest and overdue appeal to raise the minimum 
monthly pension to nine thousand rupees. 
  In a written reply submitted by the Government in the Rajya Sabha 
on August 3, 2023, it was revealed that the Employees' Pension Fund had a 
corpus of 7,80,308.93 crore rupees at the end of the financial year 2022-23. 
The interest and income generated from this corpus during the same period 
amounted to 51,985.82 crore rupees. However, the total pension 
disbursement for that year by the EPFO stood at a mere 4,444.60 crore 
rupees, representing only 27.79% of the income earned from the fund, 
without even utilizing the corpus itself. It is to be read with the fact that, as 
of 31st March, 2022, the total amount held in inoperative accounts under the 
Employees' Provident Fund stands at 4,962.70 crore rupees. In light of these 
figures, the EPFO has sufficient funds to increase the minimum pension.  
Even in the event of any shortfall in the payment of the minimum pension 
of nine thousand rupees, the Central Government, in addition to its existing 
contribution obligations under other provisions, shall also contribute the 

5 
required amounts at such rates to the Pension Fund corpus as may be 
necessary to cover the deficit. 
   Likewise, the Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 04.11.2022 in 
the Employees Provident Fund Organisation & Anr V. Sunil Kumar B & Ors 
permitted the following categories of employees for higher pension [for 
whom Employer’s contribution has been on actual salary commencing prior 
to 1st September, 2014]: 
i. Employees who had retired before 1st September, 2014 after exercising
option under the 1995 scheme;
ii. Employees who had exercised option under the 1995 scheme and
continued to be in service as on 1st September, 2014; and
iii. Employees, who did not exercise option under the said old 1995 scheme
but continuing in service on or after 1st September, 2014 – subject to the
submission of a joint option afresh.
   In para 44 (v) of the said judgment, it has been commented that the 
employees who had retired prior to 1st September, 2014 without exercising 
any option under paragraph 11(3) of the pre-amendment scheme would not 
be entitled to the benefit of the judgment. It can be inferred that the said 
observation is on the applicability of this particular judgment and doesn’t 
extinguish the right of pensioners retired prior to 1st September, 2014 as per 
other judgments, since the operative portion of this judgment mainly dealt 
with some other aspects. The observation in the Sunil Kumar case couldn’t 
negate the right of higher pension of the  said category of employees, who 
had retired prior to 1st September, 2014 without exercising any option, by 
making use of the dicta laid down by the Supreme Court in R.C. Gupta and 
Others vs. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Employees Provident 
Fund Organisation and Other [(2018) 14 SCC  809],  wherein it was  
categorically observed that a beneficial scheme ought not to be allowed to 
be defeated by reference to a cut-off date in a situation where the employer 
was not following the ceiling limit of  five thousand rupees or  six thousand 
and five hundred rupees and had deposited 12 per cent. of the actual salary. 
Likewise, it was categorically mentioned by the larger Bench of the Supreme 
Court in the Sunil Kumar case that they agree with the reasoning of the two 
judge Bench in R.C Gupta Case that there was no cut-off date in proviso to 
paragraph 11(3)  as  it stood  before the  20 14 amendment  (for  filing  joint 
option). As such, since  2014 amendment  is  n ot applicable  to  those 
employees retired prior to 1st September, 2014, it should be interpreted that 
such retired employees are governed by R. C. Gupta Case Judgment and 
that they are eligible for submitting joint option afresh without any cut-off 
date at all.  Thus, this category of retired employees should not be 
denied the benefit of higher pension by the EPFO. 
 Another concern is that the employees who joined service afte r 
01.09.2014 and have a salary exceeding fifteen thousand rupees are now 
excluded by the EPFO from availing benefits under the higher salary pension 
scheme. This stance is detrimental to the interests of these employees. 
   These issues could  ha ve been  resolved  b y introducing  necessary 
amendments to  the  Employees' Provident Funds and  Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952. However, since the said Act has been repealed under 
Section 164 of  the  Code  on Social  Security, 202 0 and  even  though the 
Government has yet to  notify  the  majority o f the  Code's  provisions,  it 
becomes imperative  to  propose these  amendments to the  Code o n Social 
Security, 2020. 

6 
   The Code is also silent on permitting the employees to plan their 
retirement life by contributing from salary to the Pension Fund at their 
volition when they are at the zenith of their career, over and above the 
employees’ contribution towards the Provident Fund referred to in clause (a) 
of sub-section (1) of section 16 of the Code. Currently the corpus of the 
Employees’ Pension Fund is made up of (i) contribution by the employer @ 
8.33 per cent of wages; and (ii) contribution from Central Government 
through budgetary support @ 1.16 per cent. of wages, up to an amount of 
fifteen thousand rupees per month, as a ‘Defined Contribution-Defined 
Benefit’ Social Security Scheme. There is currently no provision in the Code 
permitting contribution by the employees towards Employees’ Pension 
Fund. The employee contributions are continued to be limited to Employees’ 
Provident Fund only. If the employees are allowed to contribute to the 
Pension Fund also at their discretion, in addition to their statutory 
contribution to the Provident Fund, they can draw a reasonable pension at 
the end of their service, proportionate to what they have contributed, over 
and above the minimum monthly pension. Similarly, there is demand from 
a part of the employees to increase the contribution of the Central 
Government to the Pension Fund from the current rate of 1.16%. Likewise, 
the Central Government shall, in addition to its existing contribution 
obligations under other provisions, contribute to the Pension Fund at the rate 
of 1.16 per cent of the employees’ actual salary to the extent that such salary 
exceeds of  fifteen thousand rupees per month, or at such amounts and higher 
rates as may be notified from time to time, to ensure the seamless 
disbursement of higher pension to the members of the Employees' Pension 
Scheme, commensurate with their actual salary drawn while in service. 
     Similarly, it is only just and equitable to determine the pensionable 
salary on the basis of the last 12 months’ service of the employee. It is 
equally pertinent to note that it is the need of the hour to revise the factors 
for computation of monthly pension prevailing under the existing pension 
scheme so as to ensure reasonable pension to employees.  
     The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives. 
JOHN BRITTAS 

7 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
   Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the minimum monthly pension 
under the Employees’ Pension Scheme shall not be less than rupees nine 
thousand.   Clause 3 of the Bill provides for enhanced contribution by the 
Central Government at or above eigh t and one-third per cent. of the wages 
of the members to the Pension Fund and for additional contribution by the 
Central Government to the Employees’ Pension Fund as may be necessary 
to meet the short falls, if any, for the payment of minimum monthly pension 
of Rs. 9,000/- to the members of the Employees’ Pension Scheme.  Clause 
4 of the Bill provides for additional contribution by the Central Government 
to the Employees’ Pension Fund at the rate of 1.16 per cent of the employees’ 
actual salary to the exten t that such salary exceeds Rs.15,000/ - per month, 
or at such amounts and higher rates as may be notified from time to time, to 
ensure the seamless disbursement of higher pension to the members of the 
Employees' Pension Scheme, commensurate with their actua l salary drawn 
while in service. 
  The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve additional expenditure, 
either recurring or non -recurring, from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, at this stage, it is difficult to make any estimate of the lik ely 
expenditure involved. 

8 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY, 2020 
    (36 OF 2020) 
* *                 *                             *                            * 
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification—
* *                 * *  * 
(b) frame a scheme to be called the Employees' Pension Scheme for the
purpose of providing for—
(i) superannuation pension, retiring pension or permanent total
disablement pension to the employees of any establishment or class of 
establishments to which this Chapter applies; 
(ii) widow or widower's pension, children pension or orphan pension
payable to the beneficiaries of such employees; and 
(iii) nominee pension;
* *                 * *  * 
16. (1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of—
* *                 * *  * 
(b) the Pension Scheme, establish a Pension Fund in the manner specified in
that scheme by that Government into which there shall be paid, from time to
time, in respect of every employee who is a member of the Pension Scheme,—
(i) such sums from the employer's contribution under clause (a) not
exceeding eight and one-third per cent. of the wages or such per cent. of wages 
as may be notified by the Central Government;  
(ii) such sums payable as contribution to the Pension Fund, as may be
specified in the Pension Scheme, by the employers of the exempted 
establishments under section 143 to which the pension scheme applies;  
(iii) such sums as the Central Government after due appropriation by
Parliament by law in this behalf, specify; 
*                          *                           *     *  * 
Schemes. 
Funds. 

RAJYA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Code on Social Security, 2020. 
________ 
(Dr. John Brittas., M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–083–  10.02.2025 