AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON 11TH AUGUST, 2006
THE PERSONS AFFECTED BY NAXALITE TERRORISM (RELIEF AND
REHABILITATION) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the relief, compensation and rehabilitation measures through
employment and other means for the persons affected by naxalites or maoist
terrorism in various parts of the country particularly in Orissa,
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, etc. and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Persons Affected by Naxalite Terrorism (Relief and
Rehabilitation) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. LXVII  of 2006
5

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government.
(2) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(3) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Unlawful Activi-
ties (Prevention) Act, 1967 shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in
those Acts.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the dependents of a citizen who loses his life in naxalite or maoist violence
shall be given relief by the appropriate Government by paying,—
(i) an ex-gratia grant in the form of compensation of such amount which
shall not be less than five lakh rupees in such manner as may be prescribed;
and
(ii) financial assistance at the rate of two thousand rupees per month for
such period as may be prescribed.
Explanation— For the purposes of this section "dependents" include spouse,
children and aged parents who are dependent on the deceased.
4. Any person who is attacked by naxalite or maoist terrorists but survives the
attack and receives severe injuries thereby permanently incapacitating him or
seriously injuring him, the appropriate Government shall,—
(i) bear the entire costs of his medical treatment; and
(ii) pay an ex-gratia grant as compensation of not less than two lakh rupees
in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Where the dwelling unit of any family is destroyed or damaged due to
torching or bombing by the naxalites or maoists the appropriate Government
shall,—
(a) provide a dwelling unit to such family in such manner as may be
prescribed; and
(b) bear the entire cost of repairs of the damaged dwelling unit.
(2) Where the livestock of a person is eliminated or killed or his standing
crop is destroyed by the naxalites, the appropriate Government shall pay adequate
compensation to the owner of the livestock or the crop, as the case may be, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Where the business establishment or shop or kiosk or hawking apparatus
of a person is destroyed or damaged in naxalite or maoist violence, the appropriate
Governments shall pay such compensation to the owner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government, as soon as may be, in consultation with the
Governments of the States affected by naxalite or maoist violence, shall formulate a
national policy for those naxalites who wish to shun violence and return to the
mainstream of the nation under the Constitution for their rehabilitation through
general amnesty and by providing them with employment, assistance for self
employment and other means as that Government may deem necessary to do so in
the national interest.
(2) The appropriate Government may, if it deems fit, expedient and necessary
to do so, promote village level security system through teams of volunteers for the
protection of their village from naxalite or maoist violence and provide the
Compensa-
tion to the
dependents of
persons killed
by naxalites.
Definitions.
Compensation
to persons
surviving but
wounded by
naxalite
violence.
Compensation
for other
losses.
Miscellaneous
provisions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45 of 1860
2 of 1974
37 of 1967

3
volunteers with necessary weapons, and ammunition from time to time in such manner as
may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall provide, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, adequate funds to the States affected by naxalite or maoist violence for
carrying out the purposes of this act.
8. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect not-
withstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being
in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
10

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Many parts of our country are in the grip of Naxalite violence being spearheaded by
disgruntled elements mostly youth who identify themselves with different names such as
naxalites, Peoples War Group (PWG), Maoists, Leninist-Maoist, etc. The worst affected
states are Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and parts of Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Maharashtra, Bihar,
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, etc. The Naxalites
are killing hundreds of innocent people, policemen, personnel of paramilitary and armed
forces, men, women and children every year just to create panic and spread terror. Houses
and shops are being torched or blown up. Even the thatched huts of the poorest of the poor
are not being spared. Crops too are being destroyed. They kidnap innocent people for
ransom. They attack Police Stations to loot the weapons and kill the Policemen. They blow
vehicles with mines. In Naxalite affected areas people do not venture out of their houses in
the evening or night time. They collect illegal taxes and in many areas they are running
parallel Governments.
Despite the fact that innocent people are killed or injured in Naxalite violence, they are
not compensated at all or a meagre sum is given as compensation with much hassles. Similar
is the case of losers of houses, livestock, crops, establishments of business, etc. In a demo-
cratic country like ours, it is the duty of the State to protect the life and property of its citizens
and if the State fails to give the required protection, the affected persons and their depen-
dents should be duly compensated by the State.
Similarly, the disgruntled and misguided youth who join these outfits for variety of
reasons should be brought back to the mainstream of the Nation. They should be given
amnesty, employment opportunities and other incentives. There should be a national policy
for these naxalites who too are the citizens of this nation.
Hence this Bill.
B. J. PANDA

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the compensation to the dependents of persons killed
by naxalites. Clause 4 provides for compensation to persons surviving but wounded by
naxalite violence. Clause 5 provides for compensation for other losses. Clause 6 provides
for miscellaneous provisions and clause 7 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to
provide funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five
hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA   SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the relief, compensation and rehabilitation measures through employment
and other means for the persons affected by naxalites or maoist terrorism in various
parts of the country particularly in Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand,
Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, etc. and for
 matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
————
(Shri B. J. Panda, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2222RS(S-1)—11.08.2006.