THE INDIAN EVIDENCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
A
BILL
Further to amend the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Evidence (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into effect with immediate effect.
2. In the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 after section 114A, the following shall be inserted,
namely:
"114B. (1) In a prosecution of a police officer for an offence constituted by an act
alleged to have caused death or bodily injury to a person, if there is evidence
that the death or injury was caused during a period when that person was in the
custody of the Police, the court may presume that the death or injury was caused
by the Police Officer having custody of that person during that period.
Bill No. LXVII of 2016
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
Insertion of new
section 114B in
Act 1 of 1872
Presumption in
prosecution of
custodian death
or injury.10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 10TH MARCH, 2017

2
(2) The Court in deciding whether or not it should draw a presumption under
sub-section (1), shall have regard to all the relevant circumstances, including in
particular,—
(i) The period of custody,
(ii) any statement made by the victim as to how the injuries were received,
being a statement admissible in evidence,
(iii) the evidence of any medical practitioner who migh have examined the
victims, and
(iv) evidence of any magistrate who might have recorded the victims
statement or attempted to record it."
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
As per data collected by the National Crime Record Bureau in the year 2013, 115 custodial
deaths were reported across the country, followed by 93 in 2014 and 97 in 2015. It is astonishing
to note that out of the 97 deaths in 2015, only 9, that is less than 10% were natural deaths and
the maximum were reported as suicides. It is alarming that most of these deaths occur in
police custody when such people have not been remanded by courts. People die in police
custody before they can even be presented in a court of law.
Our criminal justice system is particularly slow to act in such cases. Out of the 93
recorded deaths in 2014, only 28 cases were registered in which 26 policemen were
chargesheeted. In 2015, as against 97 recorded deaths, 35 cases were registered and 28
policemen were chargesheeted. However, both in 2014 and 2015, no policeman was convicted
for such offences.
In its 152nd report on Custodial Crimes in 1994, the Law Commission of India pointed
out that one of the reasons for low convictions in cases of custodial crimes is because they
are very difficult to prove as it happens only in the presence of an accused policeman. If the
victim has died, it becomes even more difficult to prove the crime. Therefore, the Commission
recommended that in such cases where there is evidence to show that death or injury
occurred while in custody, it be presumed that death or injury was caused by the police
officer having custody. This places the burden of proving innocence on the police officer
accused. While other recommendations of the Report, most notably, the rights of the arrestee
have been incorporated in the Code, this crucial provision has been left out. I, therefore,
intend to bring up an amendment to the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 by inserting a new
section, 114(B).
Hence this Bill.
HUSAIN DALWAI
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872
(1 OF 1872)
114. Court may presume existence of certain facts.—The court may presume the
existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the
common course of natural event, human conduct and public and private business, in their
relation to the facts of the particular case.
Illustrations
The court may presume—
(a) that a man who is in possesion of stolen goods soon after the theft is either
the thief or has received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account
for his possession;
(b) that an accomplice is unworthy or credit, unless he is corroborated in material
particulars;
(c) that a bill of exchange, accepted or endorsed, was accepted or endorsed for
good consideration;
(d)  that a thing or state of things which has been shown to be in existence within
a period shorter than that within which such things or states of things usually cease to
exist, is still in existence;
(e) that judicial and official acts have been regularly performed;
(f) that the common course of business has been followed in particular cases;
(g) that evidence which could be and is not produced would, if produced, be
unfavourable to the person who withholds it;
(h) that if a man refuses to answer a question which he is not complelled to
answer by law, the answer, if given would be unfavorable to him;
(i) that when a document creating an "obligation is in the hands of the obligor,
the obligation has been discharged;
But the Court shall also have regard to such facts as the following, in considering
whether such maxims do or do not apply to the particular case before it:—
as to illustrations (a)—a shop-keeper has in his bill a marked rupee soon after it
was stolen, and cannot account for its possession specifically, but is continually
receiving rupees in the course of his business;
as to illustration (b)—A, a person of the highest character is tried for causing a
man's death by an act of negligence in arranging certain machinery. B, a person of
equally good character, who also took part in the arrangement, describes precisely
what was done, and admits and explains the common carelessness of A and himself;
as to illustration (b)—a crime is committed by several persons. A, B and C, there
of the criminals, are captured on the spot and kept apart from each other. Each give an
account of the crime implicating D, and the accounts corroborate each other in such a
manner as to render previous concert highly improbable;

5
as to illustration (c)—A, the drawer of a bill of exchange, was a man of business,
B, the acceptor, was young and ignorant person ,completely under A's influence;
as to illustration (d)—it is proved that a river ran in a certain courses five years
ago, but it is known that there have been floods since that time which might change it
course;
as to illustration (e)—a judicial act, the regularity of which is in question, was
performed under exceptional circumstances;
as to illustration (f)—the question is, whether a letter was received. It is shown
to have been posted, but the usual course of the post was interrupted by disturbances;
as to illustration (g)—a man refuses to produce a document which would bear
on a contract of small importance on which he is sued, but which might also injure the
feelings and reputation of his family;
as to illustration (h)—a man refuses to answer a question which he is not
compelled by law to answer, but the answer to it might cause loss to him in matters
unconnected with the matter in relation to which it is asked;
as to illustration (i)—a bond is possession of the obligor, but the circumstances
of the cases are such that he may have stolen it.
'114A. In a prosecution for rape under clause (a),  clause (b), clause (c), clause
(d), clause (e), clause (f), clause (g), clause (h), clause (i), clause (j), clause (k), clause
(l), clause (m), clause (n), of sub-section (2) of section 376 of the Indian Penal Code,
where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and the question is whether it was
without the consent of the woman alleged to have been raped and such woman states
in her evidence before the court that she did not consent, the court shall presume that
she did not consent.
Explanation.—In this section "sexual intercourse" shall means any of the acts
mentioned in clause (a) to (d) of section 375 of the Indian Penal Code.'.
* * * *
Presumption
as to absence
of consent in
certain
prosecution
for rape.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
Further to amend the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
————
(Shri Husain Dalwai, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4941RS(S3)—10-03-2017.