As INTRODUCED IN THE Rajya SABHA

Bill No. LXVII of 2001

THE RESERVATION OF AGRO-BASED INDUSTRIES FOR THE
CO-OPERATIVE OF UNEMPLOYED YOUTH BILL, 2001
A
BILL
to provide for the reservation of agro-based industries for the co-operatives of unemployed
youth throughout the country to reduce unemployment and to provide financial

assistance to such co-operatives by the Central and the State Governments for setting
up agro-based industries and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) This Act uzay be called the Reservation of Agro-based Industries for the Co-
opearatives of Unempinyed Youth Act, 2001.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force at once,

Short title,
extent and
commence: *


Reservation of

industries for
the Youth Co-
operatives.
Financial
Assistance to.
Youth Co-
operatives.

Power to make
rales.

2

2. In this Act, unlcss the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “agro-based industries" include all the small scale industries based on agricultural
produce and their raw material such as Khandsari handmade papers, oilseeds based solvent
extraction units sericulture, handicrafts, potteries, brick kiln, Units manufacturing Jams,
Fruit Juice Concentrates Papads, Agarbattis, clay pot making, soap manufacturing, flour
mils, oil mills, pulses mills and such other industries delcared to be agro-based industries
by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, from time to time;

(b) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of that
State and in other cases the Central Government or the Union Territory administration,
as the case may be;

(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(व) "Youth Co-operatives" means Co-operative Societies formed by unemployed
youth and registered under any of the Co-operative laws for the time being in force.

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
the setting up of Agro-based Industries shail be exclusively reserved by the appropriate
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, for the youth co-operatives which are
cither existing or may be formed in course of time in its territorial jurisdiction.

4, (1) The Central and the State Governments, shall extend financial assistance, in
such manner and in the proportion, to be determined by the Central Government, to the
Youth Co-operatives for setting up of Agro-based industries.

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), it shall be the duty of the Central
Government to provide from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament, by law, adequate funds, for financial assistance to youth co-operatives.

5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
tules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

15

20

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

There are millions of unemployed youth in the rural parts in the country. Due to the
decrease in the agricultural land caused by divisions of such land among the members of
families, generation after generation, the youth are unable to engage themselves on the
cultivation of land. Due to the social causes they cannot compete in the examination for
jobs with the urban youth. Individually they cannot start their own ventures to create self-
employment due to lack of finances.

On the other hand human resource and raw materials based on agriculture and
available in abundance, are not properly utilised in rural areas. The big and medium
industries exploit the producers and force them to sell their raw material at throwaway
prices. This malady can be remedied if the rural youth is encouraged to form co-operatives
societies and they are given the opportunity to set up agro-based industries in rural areas.
Tt will not only solve the draconian problem of unemployment in the rural areas but will
also lead to overall economic development and self-sufficiency there. It will also reduce
the ever increasing migration of the people from rural areas to urban areas particularly in
search of employment.

But in the present age of stiff competition it is not possible to achieve the above
objects if we do not reserve agro-based industries for the youth co-operatives. There is no
doubt that we are committed to liberalised industrial development but at the same time
we cannot keep our eyes closed from the growing unemployment among the rural youth.
The liberalised policy may remain confined to big and medium industries in the country
and Government must reserve the agro-based small industries for the Youth Co-operatives.
‘Then only we can achieve the goals of welfare state.

Hence this Bill.
SURESH PACHOURI.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the financial assistance to Youth co-operatives by
the Central and the State Governments and also provides that the Central Government
shall provide adequate funds for this purpose. The Bill, it enacted, will involve expendi-
ture from the Consolidated Fund of India to the tune of one thousand crores rupees per
annum as recurring expenditure. No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA’?ED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carry-
ing out the purposes of the Bill which will relate to matiers of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the reservation of agro-based industries for the co-operatives of unemployed
youth throughout the country to reduce unemployment and to provide financial
assistance to such co-operatives by the Central and the State Governmeats for
setting up agro-based industries and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.

(Shri Suresh Pachouri, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—32 1 8RS—06.11.2001.