Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LXVIII of 2006
THE PROMOTION OF TWO CHILD NORM BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of two child norm to control population explosion by
the state so  as to make it commensurate with its economic and social
development and with the ecological balance through incentives
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Promotion of Two-Child  Norm Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "appropriate Government"
means in the case of a State, the Government of  that State and in other cases, the
Central Government.
Definition.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON 11TH AUGUST, 2006.

2
3. It is hereby declared that the provisions of this Act are for the purpose of
giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principles envisaged in
article 38 of the Constitution of India.
4. The Central Government shall with the co-operation of Governments of the
States promote two child norm amongst the eligible couples in the country and shall
adopt such  measures as may be necessary to achieve the objective.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force a
citizen shall be disqualified for being chosen as a Member of either House of Parliament, or of
the Legislature of a State, or a local body, as the case may be, if that citizen has more than two
living children:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in case of a citizen having
more than two living children on the date of commencement of this Act.
6. Every employee of the Government, a Public Sector Enterprise of semi Government,
local Government, or autonomous body or organization funded by the Government in any
manner, whatsoever, shall strictly follow two child norm and whoever has more than two
living children shall not be eligible for any further increment and promotion during the tenure
of his service:
Provided that the provision of this section shall not apply to an employee who has
more than two living children on the date of coming into force of this Act.
7. Notwithstanding any custom, tradition or anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, no person shall, after one year from the commencement of this Act,
procreate more than two children.
8. (1) A married couple who has no child shall be given following incentives by the
appropriate Government, namely:—
(a) a dwelling unit free of cost;
(b) one time out of turn promotion to the government employee;
(c) free medical facilities, pension, food and shelter in their old age.
(2) A married couple who have only one child and if either of them voluntarily undergo
sterilisation shall be given the following incentives by the appropriate Government, namely:—
(a) a dwelling unit at subsidised or concessional rates;
(b) free education including technical and medical education to the child;
(c) one time out of turn promotion to a government employee;
(d) one time cash reward, as may be prescribed;
(e) employment to the child after completion of his education.
(3) A married couple having two living children and if either of them voluntarily
undergoes sterilisation shall be given the following facilities by the appropriate Government,
namely:—
(a) free education including higher and technical education to both the children;
(b) job to the children after completion of their education;
(c) two extra increments to Government employees and one time cash reward of
ten thousand rupees to those who are not Government employees;
(d) preferential allotment of dwelling unit under  Government housing schemes;
(e) such other facilities as the appropriate Government may deem  necessary.
Declaration as
to policy of
the State.
Promotion of
two child
norm.
Disqualification
for being
elected to
Parliament,
State
Legislatures
and local
bodies.
Two child
norm for
Government
employees.
Two child
norm for the
general public.
Incentives for
adoption of
small family
norm.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, any
person who procreates more than two children after one year from the commencement of this
Act shall not be entitled to the following facilities, namely:—
(a) essential ration items including fuel like kerosene, etc. from public distribution
system;
(b) allotment of house from a housing scheme sponsored by the appropriate
Government or its agencies;
(c) availing of any welfare or social security scheme;
(d) free maternity facilities in any Government hospital, dispensary, etc.
(e) availing loan facility from any public sector Bank or Financial Institution;
(f) such other disincentives as may be prescribed.
10. The appropriate Government shall introduce population control as a compulsory
subject in all educational institutions in such manner as may be prescribed.
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
marriage shall be solemnised between a male who is less than twenty-five years of age and a
female who is less than twenty-one years of age and any marriage solemnised in contravention
of the provisions of this section shall be void.
12. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, provide adequate fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act from time to time.
13. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
14. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Disincentives
for violation
of the Act.
Introduction
of population
control as a
subject in
educational
institutions.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
Restriction on
age of
marriage.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT  OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
After China, ours is the most populous country and we have already crossed the one
billion mark and if this explosion of population is not checked effectively within another ten
to  fifteen  years, China will be left far behind and ours will become the most populous nation.
Having only 2.4 per cent of global land area we have more than 20 per cent of the world
population which has made our country one of the most densely populated nation in the
world. This has given rise to unparalled transformation of human values, social institutions
and economic structures. Due to overcrowding caused by population explosion, law and
order situation in most of the parts of the country is deteriorating day by day. Incidents of
Robberies, snatching, stealing, rapes, murders and other crimes are rising. Unemployment
among the youth more so amongst the educated ones is rising menacingly and the gap
between the haves and have-nots is creating explosive situations. In most parts of the
country, agricultural land holdings are fast becoming smaller and smaller and uneconomical
because of its division generation after generation. The housing needs in urban as well as in
rural areas are far beyond the available finances and educational facilities are hopelessly
inadequate to meet even with the existing demands let alone the future ones. The population
explosion is adversely affecting the ecological balance of our nation. The drinking water has
become scarce. The ground water level has alarmingly gone down and  has become
contaminated and poisonous. The jungles are fast depleting resulting in less rains causing
frequent droughts. Air, water and noise pollution has risen to dangerous levels. The civic
amenities have almost broken down throughout the country. Thus the entire scenario has
become alarming due to ever increasing population. Since there is no balance between
population growth and the available  resources, a developing nation like ours can hardly
expect to achieve a quality life by adding further to her numbers day by day.
Therefore, the time has come to check the population growth effectively and this
menance has to be tackled at all levels. The situation has become alarming due to apathy of
populace to foresee this population explosion time bomb which will create a havoc if strong
measures are not taken at the earliest to defuse this time bomb. For this, two child norm has
to be enforced stringently and incentives and disincentives have to be introduced otherwise
the growing population will certainly hamper the progress and prosperity of the nation.
Hence this Bill.
B. J.  PANDA
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for incentives for adoption of small family norm. Clause 12
of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law provide adequate fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act from time
to time. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one thousand crore may involve as recurring
expenditure per annum.
Non recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore may also involve
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matter will relate to details only, the delegation of powers is of
normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of two child norm  to control population explosion by
the state so as to make it commensurate with its economic and social
development and with the ecological balance through incentives
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri B.J. Panda, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2220RS—11.08.2006.