5

10

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No.LXVII of 2000

THE OLD PERSONS (OLD AGE ALLOWANCE AND
REHABILITATION BILL, 2000

A

BILL

to provide for payment of old age allowance and provision of other rehabilitation
facilities to old persons by the State and for matters connected therewith,

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (17) This Act may be called The Old Persons (Old Age Allowance and Rehabilitation)
Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
Notification in the Official Gazette, appoints.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;

(b) “old person” means any person who has attained the age of fifty-five years
or more; and

(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules under this Act.

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Payment of
old age
allowance.

Facilities to
old persons.

Power to
make rules.

3. (1) Every old person shail, on an application made in the prescribed form and
on the basis of such scrutiny as may be prescribed be paid rupees one thousand per
month if he is alone and rupees one thousand five hundred if he has a spouse as old age
allowance by the appropriate Government.

(2) The allowance referred to in sub-section (/) shall be disbursed to old
persons by the appropriate Government through Government Treasury or any
branch of Nationalised Banks as may be prescribed.

4. It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government in their respective
jurisdiction to provide to old persons,—

(a) free medical aid in Government hospitals and other nearest dispensaries
recognised by the appropriate Government;

(b) either one room residential accommodation free of cost or
accommodations in oid age homes set up by the Government.

5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Ours 1s one of the largest populated countries and has undergone drastic
socio-economic changes in the recent past. It has been customary for every son to give all
necessary comforts to his parents at old age and look after them honestly and sincerely. But
due to change of time it has been noticed that younger generation gencrally ignore the
parents at old age and they are left in miserable condition. More so, the present day
economic conditions make it difficult to support the parents. As a result people without
any source of income have to live in hunger and are left uncared. Our country being the
welfare State, should provide social security to such old and infirm persons.

Hence this Bill.

RUMANDLA RAMACHANDRAIAH


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the payment of pension at the different rates to both
husband and wife who have attained the age of fifty-five years or more. Clause 4 provides
for Medical aid and facilities of free residential accommodation. The Bill if enacted would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.

An annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crores is likely to be
involved from Consolidated Fund of India. Similarly, a non-recurring expenditure to the
tune of one hundred crore at the initial stage will also be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
to provide for payment of old age allowance and provision of other rehabilitation
facilities to old persons by the State and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Rumandla Ramachandraiah, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4855RS—22. 11.2000.