1
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Right of Children to free and compulsory Education Act, 2009, (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, after clause (g), the following shall be inserted,
namely,
"(ga) "level of learning" means the appropriate class for a child, as may be
assessed by the school to which the child above the age of six years is admitted
through a standardised diagnostic test conducted by the school;"
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. LXVII of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
5
Amendment of
Section 2.
35 of 2009.
10

2
3. In the principal Act, for section 4, the following shall be substituted, namely,—
"4. Where a child above six years of age has not been admitted in any school or
thouth admitted, could not complete his or her elementary education, then, he or she
shall be admitted in a class appropriate to his or her level of learning:
Provided that regardless of the class to which a child is admitted, he or she shall
have a right to receive special training, in such manner, and within such time-limits, as
may be prescribed:
Provided further that a child so admitted to elementary education shall be entitled
to free education till the completion of elementary education even after fourteen years
of age:
Provided also that the appropriate Government may prescribed the rules relating
to the conduct of standardised diagnostic tests by the school to determine the level of
learning of the child."
Amendment
of Section 4.
Special
provisions for
children not
admitted to or
who have not
completed
elementary
education.
5
10

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It has been observed that children who fall behind in school do not benefit from being
taught at a grade or class far above what their education levels allow them to understand and
comprehend. Learning outcomes are therefore negatively impacted when such a child is
unable to process teaching in his or her class, yet is promoted to a higher class. Such a child
is left without recourse and is at risk of dropping out of school without completing elementary
education.
2. The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, presently obligates
the school to admit to the age appropriate class for a child admitted above the age of six.
3. In order to teach children at the right level, importance must be placed on identifying
the appropriate level at which they should enter school and begin the learning process. This
cannot be determined purely on the basis of the age of the child. This Bill proposes to make
the requisite amendments to the Act to achieve this goal and improve learning outcomes in
elementary education which are presently unsatisfactory.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
DR. AMAR  PATNAIK

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to amend section 4 of the Act so as to enable the
appropriate Government to prescribe rules for the conduct of a standardized diagnostic test
to determine the level of learning which a child has achieved so that the appropriate class for
admission of the child may be determine.
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under the proposed legislation
are matters of procedure of administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  RIGHT  TO  FREE  AND  COMPULSORY  EDUCATION
ACT,  2009
(35 OF 2019)
4. Where a child above six years of age has not been admitted in any school or though
admitted, could not complete his or her elementary education, then he or she shall be admitted
in a class appropriate to his or her age:
Provided further that a child so admitted to elementary education shall be entitled to
free education till completion of elementary education even after fourteen years:
Provided that where a child is directly admitted in a class appropriate to his or her age,
then, he or she shall, in order to be at par with others, have a right to receive special training,
in such manner, and within such time-limits, as may as prescribed.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
————
(Dr. Amar Patnaik, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4336RS(S3)—11.12.2019.