AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. LXVIII of 2024 
 THE PUBLIC WORKS (QUALITY ASSURANCE AND 
 T
RANSPARENCY   BILL, 2024 
———— 
ARR
ANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
———— 
CH
APTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II 
 PUBLIC WORKS AND PROCEDURE FOR TENDERING AND MONITORING 
3. Notifying of Public Works.
4. Electronic Tendering System.
5. Mandatory public disclosure.
6. Standard quality certification.
7. Use of geotagging for monitoring.
CHA
PTER III 
PUBLIC WORKS QUALITY ASSURANCE AND TRANSPARENCY AUTHORITY
8. Establishment of the Public Works Quality Assurance and Transparency Authority.
9. Composition of the Authority.
10. Term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and members of the Authority.
11. Officers and other employees of the Authority.
12. Chairperson, members, officers and other employees of the Authority to be public servants.
13. Functions of the Authority.
14. Powers of the Authority.
15. Appeal and Review.

ii 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
16. Grants by the Central Government.
17. Accounts and Audit.
18. Annual Report.
 CH
APTER V 
PENALTIES
19. Penalties for non-compliance.
20. Offences by companies.
21. Crediting sums realised by way of penalties to the Consolidated Fund of India.
C
HAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
22. Responsibilities of the Central Government.
23. Protection of action taken in good faith
24. Power to remove difficulties.
25. Power to make rules and regulations.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. LXVIII of 2024 
THE PUBLIC WORKS (QUALITY ASSURANCE AND 
TRANSPARENCY) BILL, 2024 
A
BILL 
to ensure transparency, accountability and quality assurance in the execution of public 
works by the Central Government by  creation of a monitoring authority, 
 promotion of fair tendering practices and drafting of guidelines for 
 quality assurance and for matters connected therewith or 
 incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to enact legislation to ensure transparency, accountability, 
and quality assurance in the execution of public works by the Central Government; 
AND WHEREAS the intent is to prevent inefficiency and malpractices in the public 
works system through the use of technology, public involvement in the oversight 
of public works and establishment of a regulatory mechanism. 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Works (Quality Assurance and
Transparency) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “Authority” means the Public Works Quality Assurance and
Transparency Authority established under section 8 of this Act;
(b) “contractor” means any person, firm, or legal entity who
undertakes or is awarded a contract or a tender by any public body to
carry out the public works, as defined in clause(h);
(c) “designated Officer(s)” means any officer(s) of the public body
designated for the p urpose of preparing and submitting the list of
public works undertaken by that body to the Authority in such form
and manner within the stipulated timeframe and who will be
responsible for the supply and maintenance of such information;
(d) “geotagging” me ans the process of adding geographical
information, including latitude and longitude, to digital media for
location-based monitoring;
(e) “Monitoring Agency” means any government or autonomous
body assigned by the Authority for the inspection, supervisio n, and 
reporting of public works; 
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules and regulations made
under this Act;
(g) “public body” means anybody, organization or establishment, by
whatever  name called, owned, controlled or substantially financed 
by or under the jurisdiction of the Central Government that engages 
in public works and includes any non -Government organizati on, 
directly or indirectly by the funds provided by the Central 
Government; 
(h) “public works” means any civil/ electrical works including
infrastructure, construction, maintenance, or development work,
both original and repair work, funded or carried out by or under the
authority of the Central Government, or public bodies, as may be
notified by the Authority established under section 8 of this Act;
(i) “stipulated time” means the timelines or time frame as may be
prescribed in the rules or regulations framed under this Act;
(j) “tender” means the formal offer submitted by a contractor in
response to a government request for public works contracts; and
(k) “time-and-date-stamping” means the process of adding
information about when a photogra ph was taken on a photographic 
device, in the form of time and date, to the photograph. 
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
CHAPTER II 
PUBLIC WORKS AND PROCEDURE FOR TENDERING AND MONITORING
Notifying of 
public works. 
3. (1) Every public body shall, within a period of three months from the
date of commencement of this Act, and thereafter, at such intervals, as
may be prescribed, submit a list of public works undertaken by them,
along with the particulars of the Designated Officer(s), to the Aut hority
established under section 8 of this Act, in such form and manner as may
be prescribed.
(2) The Authority shall, upon receipt of the information under sub-
section (1), immediately notify the list of such public works and shall
cause the publication o f the same on its website, in such form and
manner, as may be prescribed.
 
40 
 
45 

3 
5 
 
10 
4. (1) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, irrespective of
the value of the tender, no public body shall  undertake public works or
procure public works services except by inviting tenders through
electronic tendering system in such manner as may be  prescribed under
this Act.
(2) The e -tendering portal shall be accessible to the general public for
scrutiny, and all relevant details of the tender, such as bidder
information, project estimates, and deadlines, shall be made available on
the portal.
(3) No tender shall be invited or processed or awarded by any public
body after the commencement of this Act except in accordance with the
procedure laid down under this Act or the rules and regulations made
there under.
Electronic 
tendering system. 
 
15 
 
20 
5. (1)Every public body shall make all tender -related documents, including
bid submissions, financial estimates, project timelines, and contract
awards including the name and details of the contractor(s), publicly
available on a designated Central Government website.
(2) Any revisions or modifications to the tender documents after
awarding the contract shall be disclosed on the designated Central
Government website within seven working days.
Mandatory public 
disclosure. 
25 
 
30 
6. (1) Every public work shall undergo a quality assessment before the
commencement, during the execution, and at the completion of the
project.
(2) A qualified Monitoring Agency, as may be authorised by the
Authority, shall certify the quality of materials, design, and compliance
with established standards, after due inspection in such form and manner
as may be prescribed and shall submit a report to the Authority within
the stipulated time frame, as may be prescribed.
(3) No payment shall be released to the contractor(s) without obtainin g
q
uality certification as provided under sub -section (2) at every such
milestone, as may be prescribed.
Standard quality 
certification. 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 
7. (1) Every public body shall, by the seventh day of every month, or by the
next working day, if the seventh day is not a working day, procure
geotagged and time -and-date-stamped photographs of relevant public
works and transmit such photographs to the Authority.
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to such public
works where the Central  Government has certified that releasing
geotagged and time -and-date-stamped photographs of a public work
may have adverse implications on national security.
(2) The photographs referred to in sub-section (1) shall—
(a) clearly communicate the progress or lack of progress made in the
relevant public work in the last month, as the case may be; and
(b) cover all major components of the relevant public work.
(3) The photographs referred to in sub- section (1) need not be procure d
and transmitted after the concerned public body has certified the
completion of the public work.
(4) The Authority shall, by the fifteenth day of every month, or by the
next working da y, if the fifteenth day is not a working day, upload the
photographs transmitted under sub -section (1) by the public bodies, on
their website in a conspicuous manner, which shall be freely accessible
to the public.
Use of 
geotagging for 
monitoring 

4 
CHAPTER III 
PUBLIC WORKS  QUALITY ASSURANCES AND TRANSPARENCY AUTHORITY
Establishment of 
the Public 
Works Quality 
Assurances and 
Transparency 
Authority. 
8. (1) With effect from such date as t he Central Government shall, by
notification in the Official Gazette appoint in this behalf, there shall
be established for the purposes of this Act, an Authority to be known
as the Public Works Quality Assurance and Transparency
Authority, to exercise the powers conferred upon it and to perform
the functions assigned to it under this Act.
Provided that until the establishment of an Authority under this
section, the Central Government shall, by order, designate any
Regulatory Aut hority or any officer, preferably the Secretary of the
Ministry dealing with Public Works, as the interim Regulatory Authority
for the purposes under this Act.
Provided also that after the establishment of the Authority, all
applications, complaints or cases pending with the  interim Regulatory
Authority or the officer so designated, as the case may be, shall stand
transferred to the Authority so established and shall be heard from the
stage such applications, complaints or cases are transferred.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with the power, subject
to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property,
both movable and immovable, and to contr act, and shall, by the said
name, sue or be sued.
(3) The Authority shall be responsible for monitoring, regulating, and
ensuring the quality of public works in the country.
(4) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
20 
25 
Composition of 
the Authority. 
9. (1) The Authority shall consist of the following members, to be
appointed by the Central Government, in such manner as may be
prescribed:–
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence with
experience in public works, infrastructure development, or
governance;
(b) not more than six members, including at least one legal
expert, one civil engineer, and one representative from the
public procurement sector; and
(c) an officer of the Central Government, not below the rank
of Joint Secreta ry, as Member Secretary of the Authority.
(2) The Chairperson and members shall hold office for a term of five
y
ears, subject to re-appointment.
(3) The qualifications for appointment of the Chairperson and other
members of the Authority and the manner of filling of vacancies among
the members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence
and direction in respect of all administrative matters of the Authority.
(5) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of
the Authority, exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the
Authority as may be delegated to him by the Authority and such other
powers and duties as may be prescribed.
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 

5 
(6) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe
such rules of procedure with regard to the transaction of business at its
meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by the
regulations made by the Authority under this Act.
 
5 
 
 
10 
10. (1) The term of office of, salaries, remuneration or other allowances
payable to, and other conditions of service of, the Chairperson and 
other members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Chairperson and any member may resign his office by giving
notice thereof in writing to the Central  Government and on suc h
resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed to have vacated his
office.
Terms of office 
and conditions of 
services of the 
Chairperson and 
members of the 
Authority. 
 
15 
11. (1)The Authority may appoint such officers and other employees, as
it deems necessary, for the efficient discharge of its functions under 
this Act. 
(2)The method of recruitment, the salary and allowances payable to
and the terms and conditions of service of the officers and other
employees of the Authority appointed under sub- section (1), shall be
such as may be prescribed.
Officers and other 
employees of the 
Authority. 
45 of
 2023 
 
20 
12. The Chairperson, members, officers and other employees of the
Authority shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance 
of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the 
meaning of sub-section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
2023. 
Chairperson, 
members, officers 
and other 
employees of the 
Authority to be 
public servants. 
25 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
13. (1) The Authority shall perform the following functions including, but not
limited to —
(a) formulation of draft guidelines for fair tendering and contracting
processes in public works, which shall include provisions for:
(i) examining the technical and financial capability of tender
applicants;
( ii) ensuring that tenders are awarded based on merit,
transparency, and efficiency;
(iii) standard contract formats and stipulated timelines for various
types of public works;
(iv) promoting the participation of small and medium enterprises
in public works; and 
(v) ensuring that due process laid down under section 4  of this
Act shall be followed scrupulously while inviting, processing and
granting tenders for public works.
(b
) dr
aft and periodically update quality guidelines for public works,
which shall cover:
(i) specifications for materials, construction techniques, and
safety standards;
(ii) mandatory inspection and certification at various stages of
project execution; and
(iii) quality control and assurance processes, with an emphasis on
durable and sustainable infrastructure development.
(c) formulate rules for the geotagging and real -time monitoring of
public works projects and ensure that every  public body timely
Functions of the 
Authority. 

6 
transmits the geotagged photographs, as required under section 7 of 
this Act, to the Authority;  
(d) advise the Central Government on policies and measures for
promoting transparency, accountability, and quality in public works;
and
( e) investigate complaints, disputes, or grievances concerning public
works and cases of violation of any of the provisions of the Act an d
r
ules and regulations made there under and take necessary action.
(2) The Authority, while discharging the functions under sub -clause (e)
of sub -section (1), shall have the power to summon and examine
witnesses, review documents, and issue orders for compliance, correction,
or imposing penalty, as deemed necessary.
 
5 
 
10 
 
Powers of the 
Authority.  
14. (1) The Authority shall have the powers of a civil court under the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, while discharging its
functions in matters related to public works under this Act, specifically
to:
(a) s ummon and enforce the attendance of any person;
(b) require the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receive evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisition any public record or copy thereof from any court or
office;
(e) issue commissions for the  examination of witnesses or
documents; and
(f) conduct inquiries and inspections into matters concerning public
works.
(2) The Authority shall have the power to initiate proceedings for non -
compliance of its orders.
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
46 of 2023. 
Appeal and 
review. 
15. (1) Any person aggrieved by a decision or an order of the Authority ma y
file an appeal to the Supreme Court within a period of sixty days from
the date of such decision or order.
P rovided that the Supreme Court may entertain the appeal after the
expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant
was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in time.
(2) The decision of the Supreme Court on the appeal shall be final and
binding.
30 
35 
        CHAPTER IV 
 FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
Gr
ants by the 
Central 
Government. 
16. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament in this behalf, make to the Authority, grants and loans of
such sums of money, as it may consider necessary, for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
40 
Accounts and 
audit. 
17. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may
be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller
and Auditor -General of India at such intervals as may be specified by
him and any  expenditure  incurred  in  connection with  such audit  shall
45 

7 
 
5 
be  payable  by  the  respective  Authority  to  the  Comptroller  and 
Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The accounts of t he Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this
behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually
t
o the Central Government by the Authority, who shall cause t he
acco
unts along with the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it
is received, before each House of Parliament.
10 
15 
18. (1) The Authority shall prepare once in every year, in such form and a t
such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual 
report giving a summary of all its activities during the previous year and 
copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government shall cause a copy of the report receiv ed
u
nder sub -section (1)to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received,
before each House of Parliament.
An
nual report. 
 CHAPTER V 
  PENALTIES 
 
20 
25 
19. (1) Any contractor, government officer, or public body found to be in
violation of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations 
made thereunder or the directions or orders or guidelines issued by the 
Authority, shall be liable to be punished with a fine not exceeding rupees 
ten lakh for each such violation.   
(2) In case of repeated violations, the Authority may recommend the
suspension or blacklisting of contractors or, as the case may be, initiation
of disciplinary proceedings against the c oncerned officers, as per the
relevant rules applicable to such officer.
Penalties for non-
compliance. 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
20. (1) Where an Offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
every person who, at the time, the offence was committed was in charg e
of
, or was responsible to the company for the conduct of, the business of
the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punishe d
accordingly:
P rovided that nothing contained in this sub -section, shall render any
such person liable to any punishment under this Act if he proves that th e
of
fence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercise d
a
ll due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub- section (1), where an
offence under this Act has been committed by a company,  and it is
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, suc h
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against an d
pu
nished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,— 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm, or other
association of individuals; and
(b) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
Offences by 
companies. 

8 
Crediting sums 
realised by way 
of penalties to 
the 
Consolidated 
Fund of India. 
21. All sums realized, by way of penalties, imposed by the Authority,
shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS
Responsibilities 
of the Central 
Government.  
22. (1) The Central Government shall––
(a) ensure that all public works under their jurisdiction comply with the
provisions of this Act and the directions or guidelines issued by the
Authority from time to time.
(b) ensure that e-tendering is scrupulously followed for all public works
projects and that public disclosures, including tender documents, project
timelines, and status updates, are carried out as laid down under the Act
and made available as required by the Authority.
(c) allocate necessary resources for the proper monitoring,
implementation, and enforcement of quality standards in public works.
5 
 
10 
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
23. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the
Central Government or the Authority or any officer of the Central 
Government or any member, officer or other employees of the Authority 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under 
this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
 
15 
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
24. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 
(2)Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
 
20 
25 
Power to make 
rules and 
regulations. 
25. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority may, with the previous sanction of the Central
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or
expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
(3) Every rule and every regulation made by the Central Government and
the Authority under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses
agree that the rule should not be ma de, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be withou
t
pr
ejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 

9 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 This legislation represents a major step forward in the governance of 
public works in India, with the goal of establishing a framework that prioritizes 
transparency, accountability, and quality in infrastructure initiatives. It tackles 
long-standing chall enges in public works and fosters a culture of integrity in 
resource management. A key component of this initiative is the creation of an 
independent Public Works Quality Assurance and Transparency  Authority, 
which will possess powers of  a civil court  to enforce compliance and impose 
penalties for any violations. This A
uthority will ensure that standards and 
regulations in public works are strictly followed. The legislation also highlights 
the necessity of standardizing tendering processes and quality cont rol measures 
to eliminate inefficiencies and enhance project outcomes, thereby increasing 
stakeholder confidence. Moreover, it acknowledges the importance of 
technology in improving oversight and management of public works. By 
advocating for advanced tools  for real-time monitoring, the legislation seeks to 
provide timely updates on project progress and quality, facilitating early 
detection of issues and reducing delays or cost overruns. Additionally, the 
legislation promotes public involvement in the oversight of public projects. 
Hence, this Bill. 
 AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE 

10 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
        Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the  establishment of the Public 
Works Quality Assurance and Transparency Authority and Clause 9 of the 
Bill provides for the composition of the Authority . Clause 10 provides for 
the salary and allowances of the Chairperson and members of the Authority, 
whereas Clause 11 provi des for the appointment of officers and other 
employees of the Authority and the salary and allowances payable to them. 
Clause 16 of the Bill provides that the Central  Government shall after due 
appropriation by Parliament, make grant and loans of such sums of money 
to the Authority, as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of 
the Bill . Clause 21 of the Bill provides that all sums realized by way of 
penalties by the Authority shall be  credited into the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non -recurring 
and recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at 
this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be 
involved. 

11 
 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
provisions by an order to remove any difficulties that might arise in giving 
effect to any of the p rovisions thereof.  Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the 
Central Governmen t to make r ules and the respective Authority to  make 
regulations for carry ing out the  purposes  of this Bill. As the rules , 
regulations and order(s) will relate to matters of details only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____
________ 
A 
BILL 
to 
ensure transparency, accountability and quality assurance in the execution of public works 
by the Central Government by   creation of a monitoring authority, promotion of fair 
 tendering practices and drafting of guidelines for quality assurance  
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
____
________ 
(Dr
. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade, M.P.) 
 RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—071—10.02.2025 