THE ACTS OF PARLIAMENT (APPLICATION TO NAGALAND)
BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for procedure for effectuating article 371 A (1)(a) of the Constitution of India
in relation to the State of Nagaland.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Acts of Parliament (Application to Nagaland) Act,
2010.
(2) It shall  come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Act means an Act made by Parliament in exercise of its ordinary and
constituent powers of legislation and includes an Ordinance promulgated by the
President of India under article 123 of the Constitution of India;
(b) "Committee" means the Joint Government's Committee constituted under
section 4 of this Act;
(c) "Government of Nagaland" means the Governor of Nagaland acting on the
aid and advice of the Council of Ministers of Nagaland; and
(d) "Report" means a report of the Joint Governments' Committee.
Definitions.
Short title and
commencment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2011
Bill No. LXVI of 2010
5
10

2
3. All Acts enacted hereafter, shall  contain a declaration that such Acts shall apply to
the State of Nagaland subject to article 371A(1)(a) of the Constitution of India read with this
Act.
4. All Acts enacted hereafter, shall, within Sixty days of their enactment, be referred to
a Joint Governments' Committee comprising such number of Ministers and officers both
from the Union Government and the Government of Nagaland, as may be determind, by
notification, by the Union Government in consultation with the Government of Nagaland:
Provided that the representatives of the Government of Nagaland to the Committee
shall be nominated by the Government of Nagaland.
5. The Joint Governments' Committee shall examine the question whether an Act, so
referred, requires a resolution of the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland for applying its
provisions, partly or fully, to the State of Nagaland or not, and present a report in that behalf
concurrently to the Union Government and the Government of Nagaland within sixty days of
reference of the Act to the Committee.
6. (1) If the report recommends that a resolution of the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland
is required for application of the Act to the State of Nagaland, then the necessary resolution
shall be passed by the Legislative Assembly within sixty days of the receipt of the report by
the Government of Nagaland and,—
(i) upon passing of the resolution, the Act shall be deemed to have applied to the
State of Nagaland from the date of its enactment;
(ii) upon failure to pass a resolution or failure of a resolution to be carried when
moved in the Legislative Assembly within the aforesaid period, the Act shall be deemed
to have applied to the State of Nagaland from the date on whether the said period of
sixty days expires.
(2) If the report recommends that a resolution of the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland
is not required for application of an Act to the State of Nagaland, then the Act shall apply to
the State of Nagaland at the expiration of sixty days from the date of receipt of the report by
the Government of Nagaland:
Provided that the report may be referred back to the Joint Governments' Committee for
further examination by a resolution of the legislative Assembly of Nagaland passed within
sixty days from the date of receipt of the report by the Government of Nagaland:
Provided further that the resolution of the Legislative Assembly so passed shall
enumerate the disputed points on which the Act is referred back to the Committee.
7.  (1) A report referred back to the Committee by a resolution of the Legislative
Assembly of Nagaland, shall be reconsidered by the Committee in the light of points
enumerated in the resolution within sixty days of receipt of the resolution.
(2) If the revised report recommends that a resolution of the Legislative Assembly of
Nagaland is required for application of the Act to the State of Nagaland, then the procedure
outlined in section 6(1) shall be followed.
(3) If the revised report recommends that a resolution of the Legislative Assembly of
Nagaland is not required for application of the Act to the State of Nagaland, then the Act
shall apply to the State of Nagaland at the expiration of sixty days from the date of receipt of
the revised report by the Government of Nagaland, unless the Legislative Assembly of
Nagaland passes a resolution before the expiration of the said period, directing that the Act
shall not apply to the State of Nagaland and upon passing of such a resolution, the Act shall
not apply to the State of Nagaland at any point of time.
Declaration to
be contained in
all Acts.
Joint
Governments'
Committee.
Report of the
Joint
Government's
Committee.
Actions on
Report.
Action on
reconsidered
report.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 371A(1)(a) of the Constitution of India accords Nagaland a special place in
regard to application of Acts of Parliament to the State.
2. Ever since the creation of the State on the 1st December, 1963, neither the State
Government nor the Union Government had paid due attention to the working of that special
provision in relation to Nagaland.
3. This Bill seeks to lay down a procedure for putting into effect article 371A(1)(a) in
relation to the State of Nagaland.
Hence this Bill.
KHEKIHO ZHIMOMI
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Section 4 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to issue notification
naming the Ministers and Officers who would constitute the Joint Governments' Committee
for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The notification will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
4

GMGIPMRND—6670RS(S3)—28-02-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for procedure for effectuating article 371A(1)(a) of the Constitution of India
in relation to the State of Nagaland.
————
(Shri Khekiho Zhimomi, M.P.)