THE  RENEWABLE  ENERGY  (PROMOTION  AND MISCELLANEOUS
PROVISIONS)  BILL,   2008
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of renewable energy on a large scale by establishing an
Authority to protect the environment and control the global warming being caused
due to burning of fossil fuels for energy production resulting in noxious emissions
therefrom and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act my be called the Renewable Energy (Promotion and Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government.
(b) "Authority" means the National Renewable Energy Authority of India
established under section 3;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008
Bill No. LXVII of 2008

2
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "renewable energy" means the energy obtained from non-conventional
sources other than fossil fuel such as sunlight, wind, urban waste, dung used for
biogas, geothermal sources, tides or waves or any other source from which the
renewable energy can be obtained.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an Authority to be called the National Renewable Energy Authority of
India for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The head office of the Authority shall be at Hyderabad in the State of Andhra
Pradesh and the Authority may establish offices at other places in the country as it may
deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members who shall be appointed by
the Central Government, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an expert scientist having adequate knowledge
and professional experience in the field of renewable energy;
(b) one Deputy Chairperson with such qualifications as may be prescribed;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from  Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective Presiding Officers of the two
Houses;
(d) five members to represent the Union Ministries of Environment and Forests
Science and Technology, New and Renewable Energy, Planning and Financial
respectively;
(e) four members to represent the Non Governmental Organisations working
for the protection of environment and promotion of renewable energy in the country;
(f) four members to be nominated by the Governments of the States to be rotated
amongst the States in alphabetical order.
(4) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(5) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority
shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such  officers and members of staff and
with such terms and conditions of services as may be prescribed from time to time.
4. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under the provisions
of this Act, the Authority shall perform and undertake such special steps in close coordination
with concerned Ministries, Departments and Public Sector Enterprise of the Central and
State Governments for the rapid and accelerated promotion and development of renewable
energy throughout the country as it may deem necessary and expedient to do so for the
promotion of renewable energy.
(2) Without prejudice to be generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority shall,
(a) formulate renewable energy policy, its goals and execution plan;
(b) develop indicative standards of renewable energy;
(c) support and encourage research and development through Government and
private sector participation involving all major Research Laboratories;
(d) work for greening of industry and create public awareness of climate change
and other environmental issues;
Establishment
of National
Renewable
Energy
Authority of
India.
Functions of
the Authority.

3
Miscellaneous
Provisions.
(e) facilitate infrastructure development of renewable energy in rural areas;
(f) make provision for small biomass based energy systems for rural areas;
(g) suggest ways for conversion of fossil fuel based on industrial heating to
solar thermal heating through new solar concentrator technology or its hybrids;
(h) suggest educational and other policy initiatives for renewable energy;
(i) create interactive web based resource maps of different renewable technologies
to facilitate speedy project development and market expansion;
(j) facilitate quick technology transfer and adoption of renewable energy;
(k) such other activities as may be assigned from time to time.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being inforce,
the appropriate Government shall in consultation with the Authority make it compulsory
for every establishment including Government establishments to,—
(a) use the photovoltaic energy in all public buildings;
(b) make provision for time-bound  solar water heating in all buildings with
defined floor area;
(c) set time-bound mandate for promotion of biomass energy  systems in the
nation;
(d) make it mandatory for electricity utilities for compulsory purchase of
electricity from renewable energy sources;
(e) reserve adequate land for setting up of renewable energy projects;
(f) such other steps as the appropriate Government may deem necessary.
(2) The appropriate Government shall as soon as may be, identify the exploitable
sources of renewable energy  in their respective territorial jurisdictions and send project
reports thereon to the Authority which shall depute a team of experts to verify and assess
the possibility of exploiting renewable energy sources.
(3) The Authority shall on the basis of the report submitted by the team of experts
work out the estimated expenditure on the projects submitted to it under sub-section (2) and
recommend the Central Government to implement the projects in a time-bound manner.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, pay to the Authority in each financial year such sums as may be considered
necessary and adequate for the performance of the functions of the Authority under this
Act.
7. The Authority shall prepare once in every calendar year in such form and at such
time as may be prescribed an Annual Report giving a true and full account of its activities
during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the President of India who
shall cause the same to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before both the Houses of Parliament.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
carry out the provisions of this Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Annual
Report.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The world Meteorological Organisation has reported that a series of record breaking
weather events have caused havoc in the world during the year 2007. Temperature records
were broken in western and central Russia in May and in South Eastern Europe in June and
July. In many European countries’  April was the warmest ever recorded month. China and
some parts of India were hit by the worst snowfall followed by avalanches. According to
research, even though temperatures are showing precarious rise, global warming is forecast
to set in with a vengeance only after 2009 with at least half of the five following years
expected to be hotter than 1998, the warmest year on record. The global warming is being
caused by human activities such as the burning of fossil fuels which releases greenhouse
gases. The accelerating rate of carbon dioxide emissions is largely due to rising energy
consumption notably coal and petroleum products resulting from an increasing population
and higher per capita GDP. The mitigation of global warming is possible only through a
transition to a low carbon economy, which means large-scale development of renewable
energy is the biggest imperative of our times for environmental protection.
Our country has vast potential of renewable energy. According to conservative estimate,
Mega Watt wind power potential is 4500 Mega Watt and with the growth in unit size of
turbines, greater land availability and expanded wind resource exploration this potential
should go up significantly up to one lakh Mega Watt. At the same time an urgent assessment
of the potential of power generation from solar energy in our country is essential. This is
more so because of the recent growth of Concentrating Solar Power (CSP). The desert area of
our country have the solar radiation required for CSP production. A 60 KM X 60 Kilometer
area can produce one lakh Mega Watt of power. We have a desert area of 208110 Square
Kilometer in Rajasthan and Gujarat. Even if we use only 15000 Square Kilometer of desert we
can produce three lakh Mega Watt of power. The renewable energy power production
potential in our country can easily be scaled up to six lakh Mega Watt in the future through
multifarious sources and new energy technologies. We are also capable of producing bio-
fuels. It is fell that an authority to tap these potentials should be established at the national
level.
Hence this Bill.
GIREESH  KUMAR  SANGHI
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Renewable Energy
Authority of India. Clause 5 makes it compulsory for every Central Government establishment
to take measures for using renewable energy by carrying out appropriate changes. Clause 6
of the Bill makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide necessary funds for the
purpose of the Bill. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a some of rupees twenty five thousand crore may involve as
recurring expenditure per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees sixty thousand crore may also involve
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of renewable energy on a large scale by establishing an Authority
to protect the environment and control the global warming being caused due to burning
of fossil fuels for energy production resulting in noxious emissions therefrom and for
matters connected therewith an incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4759RS(S-5)—29.12.2008.