AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 6TH FEBRUARY, 2026
Bi ll No. LXVIII of 2025 
THE NATIONAL RANKING AND ACCREDITATION 
A
UTHORITY FOR HIGHER EDUCATIONAL 
INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2025
A 
BILL 
t
o provide for the establishment of a statutory authority for ranking and 
accreditation of higher educational institutions in the country, 
 ensuring transparency, excellence, and alignment with 
national and global standards, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the National Ranking and Accreditation
Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
co
mmencement. 

2 
 
Definitions.  2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a)  “accreditation” means the certification of a higher  educational 
institution’s quality based on tiered levels as specified under this Act; 
(b)  “Authority” means the National Ranking and Accredit ation 
Authority established under section 3; 
(c)  “higher educational institution” means any universi ty, deemed 
university, college, or autonomous institution offe ring undergraduate, 
postgraduate, or research-level education, recognized by the University 
Grants Commission or any other regulatory body; 
(d)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(e)  “Public Dashboard” means a digital platform for tra nsparent 
access to institutional perfor mance data under clause (d) of section 5; 
and 
(f)  “ranking” means the assessment and public placement  of 
higher educational institutions based on customizab le parameters such 
as academic quality, research output, employability , inclusivity, 
governance, and innovation. 
5 
10 
15 
 
 
  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL RANKING AND ACCREDITATION AUTHORITY 
 FOR HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS  20 
 
Establishment 
of the National 
Ranking and 
Accreditation 
Authority. 
 
3. (1)  The Central Government shall, by notification in t he Official 
Gazette , establish an authority to be known as the Nationa l Ranking 
and Accreditation Authority for Higher Educational Institutions to 
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned 
to it under this Act.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body 
corporate, by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power,  subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold, and dispo se of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, b y the said name, sue or 
be sued.  
(3)  The headquarter of the Authority shall be at New Delhi. 
25 
30 
 
Composition of 
the Authority. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. (1)  The Authority shall consist of the following Members,– 
(a) a person having at least twenty five years of experience in 
the field of higher education or public administrat ion, to be 
appointed by the President of India by warrant unde r his hand and 
seal in consultation with the Central Government, as Chairperson;  
(b) the Secretary to the Government o f India in the Ministry 
of Education – Member ex-officio ;  
(c) the Chairperson of the University Grants Commission – 
Member ex-officio ;  
(d) one eminent Indian expert possessing global experie nce in 
education rankings, to be appointed by the Central Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed – Member;  
(e)  two representatives from State Universities, out o f which,  
one shall be from a rural or aspirational district,  to be appointed 
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed – 
Members;  
(f)  one person having expertise in data science and blo ckchain 
technology, to be appointed by the Central Governme nt in such 
manner as may be prescribed – Member;  
35 
40 
45 
50 
 

3 
 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
(g)  one woman educationist from a Tier- II city or rur al area 
to be appointed by the Central Government in such m anner as may 
be prescribed – Member;  
(h)  one representative from an industry-academia partn e rship 
body such as Confederation of Indian Industry or the Federation of 
Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, to be nom inated by 
the Central Government in such manner as may be pre scribed –  
Member;  
(i)  one student representative from a recognized nat ional 
student body to be nominated by the Central Governm ent in such 
manner as may be prescribed – Member; and  
(j)  one employer representative from a sectoral indust ry body 
to be nominated by the Central Government in such m anner as 
may be prescribed – Member: 
Provided that the Central Government shall ensure g ender, 
regional and sectoral diversity in the composition of the Authority. 
(2)  The Chairperson shall hold office for a term of fiv e years from the date 
on which he enters upon his office and shall b e eligible for reappointment 
for one more term:     
Provided that no person shall hold office as Chairp erson after attaining 
the age of seventy years. 
(3) 
The Central Government shall, from time to time, ap point such 
number of officers and staff to the Authority , as may be required, to 
assist it in its efficient functioning, in such man ner as may be 
prescribed. 
(4) 
The salary and allowances payable to, and other ter ms and 
conditions of service of the Chairperson, Members, officers and staff as 
well as the term of office of the Members other tha n the ex-officio  
Members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(5)  The Authority shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 of 2023. 
35 
40 
45 
50 
5. The Authority shall, perform all or any of the foll owing functions with 
respect to higher educational institutions in the country, namely, – 
(a) develop and publish in the Official Gaze tte annually a 
National Ranking Framework aligned with the Nationa l Education 
Policy, 2020, the Mission Statement of Viksit Bharat  2047, and 
globally recognized University rating systems and s tandards, in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 
(b) accredit institutions using a five - tiered system, with first four 
Levels as Institutions of National Excellence and t he fifth Level as 
Institutions of Global Excellence, in such manner a s may be prescribed, 
and lay down standards, norms and policies for asse ssment of the 
academic quality in higher educational institutions  for granting such 
accreditation;  
(c) undertake periodical review of norms and policies r eferred to 
in clause (b); 
(d) develop and maintain a blockchain- based Public 
Dashboard for real-time, tamper-p roof access to rankings, 
accreditation status, and performance metrics of hi gher 
educational institutions: 
Provided that any data processing done in this rega rd shall comply 
with the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 , including audit 
trails for co nsent management, and provisions for data anonymiza tion 
and opt-out consent for sensitive metrics; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Powers  and 
functions  of  the 
Authority. 

4 
 
(e) promote regional equity and innovation by designing  context-
specific metrics for institutions in rural and mino rity-serving areas, and 
aspirational districts;  
(f) collaborate with international organizations for be nchmarking 
and cross-border recognition;  
(g) develop outcome- based metrics, including graduate 
employability, economic impact, and student engagement;  
(h) recommend institutions to the Central Government fo r 
performance-based funding and incentives;  
(i) issue guidelines for data integrity, including pena lties for 
falsification, and establish a grievance redressal mechanism;  
(j) provide customized rankings based on user priorities such as 
teaching, research, affordability;  
(k) conduct risk- based assessments tailored to institutional type 
such as research universities, teaching colleges 
(l) levy of fees or other charges as may be required under this Act;  
(m) define, by rules made under this Act, the parameters for 
determining severity levels for penalties, proportionate to and 
differentiated according to the nature and gravity of the contraventions 
of the provisions of this Act, such as minor discre pancies, deliberate 
inaccuracies, or fraudulent manipulation; and 
(n) make policy recommendations for improving the stand ards of 
higher educational institutions to the Central and State Governments, as 
may be required, from time to time; 
(o) such other functions as may be required for implementing the 
provisions of this Act or as are assigned to it by the Central 
Government, from time to time. 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
  
CHAPTER III  
OBLIGATION OF HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS FOR PARTICIPATION 
IN THE RANKING AND ACCREDITATION PROCESS   30 
 
Mandatory 
participation in 
the ranking and 
accreditation 
process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. (1) Every higher educational institutions established, maintained or 
substantially financed by the Central Government, i nstitutions of national 
importance and every University established by a State Government, eithe r 
existing before commencement of this Act or establi shed thereafter, shall 
mandatorily partici pate in the ranking and accreditation process condu cted 
by the Authority, in such form and manner and withi n such time as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that a State University may, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, seek exemption from such participation , subject to approval by the 
Authority.  
(2) Any 
private institution, may also apply for participati on in the ranking 
and accreditation process conducted by the Authorit y in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that upon such application bei ng accepted, the private 
institution shall comply with all standards as may be specified by or under 
this Act. 
(3) The Authority on receipt of applications under sub- sections (1) and (2), 
shall after satisfying itself of the level of compl iance of the inst 
itution with 
the standards, norms and policies laid down under t he Act and the rules and 
35 
40 
45 
 

5 
 
 
5 
regulations made thereunder, accord ranking and acc reditation in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations 
made thereunder: 
Provided tha t the ranking and accreditation accorded shall be s ubject to 
periodic review by the Authority to ensure continue d compliance with the 
standards, norms and policies laid down under the A ct and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder.  
  CHAPTER IV  
OFFENCES , P ENALTIES  AND  APPEAL  
  
 10 
15 
20 
25 
7. (1) Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or ab ets the 
contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rules or regulations made 
thereunder, shall be punishable with fine which may  extend to ten lakh 
rupees: 
Provided that the quantum of penalty to be imposed shall be determined 
by the Authority based on the severity level propor tionate to and 
differentiated according to the nature and gravity of the contravention: 
Provided further th at no penalty shall be imposed without giving the 
concerned person or institution a reasonable opport unity of being heard and 
without establishing the nature and gravity of contravention beyond doubt. 
(2) Any higher educational institution aggrieved by the  imposition of a 
penalty under this Act may prefer an appeal in such  form and manner as 
may be prescribed, to such Appellate Authority, as may be established by 
the Central government by rules made under this Act, which shall dispose of 
the appeal within a period of sixty days from the date of its filing: 
Provided that the Appellate Authority may, for reas ons to be recorded 
in writing, extend period of filing of appeal by su ch further period as may 
be prescribed. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Penalties and 
Appeal. 
 
 
30 
35 
40 
45 
8. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committe d by a company, 
every person who at the time the offence was committed wa s in charge of, 
and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the 
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against  and punished 
accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub- section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in th is Act, if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he has exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manage r, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the of fence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a  
firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partne r in the 
firm. 
 Offences  by 
companies. 
 50 9. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committe d by a society or 
trust or agency or institution, every person who at  the time the offence was 
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to,  the society or trust or 
agency or institution for the conduct of the busine ss of the society or trust or 
 
 
 
 
 
Offences  by 
society, trust and 
institutions. 

6 
 
university, as well as the society or trust or agen cy or institution, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be lia ble to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub- section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in th is Act, if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he has exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a society or t rust or agency or 
institution and it is proved that the offence has b een committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attrib utable to, any neglect on the part of any 
governors, vice-chancellor, directors, committee, trustees, registr ar or other 
officer, such governors, directors, committee, trus tees, registrar or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the of fence an d shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
5 
10 
15 
  
CHAPTER V 
 GOVERNANCE  AND  FINANCE  
  
Funds  of  the 
Authority. 
 
10. (1)  The Central Government shall, after due appropriati on made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums o f money to the 
Authority, as it may think fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2)  The Authority may also receive grants, donations, a nd other 
contributions, including by way of consulta ncy service provided, with the 
approval of the Central Government and amounts accr ued on account of 
fees, charges and monetary penalties imposed. 
(3)  
The initial outlay and recurring expenditure shall be subject to review 
after five years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
20 
25 
 
Accounts  and 
Audit. 
 
11. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and ot her relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such  form as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller an d Auditor- General of 
India. 
(2) 
The accounts of the Authority, as audited and certi fied by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by 
him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually b y the Authority to the Central Government, which sh all cause the 
same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is rece ived, before each House of 
Parliament. 
30 
35 
 
Annual Report.  
12. (1) The Authority shall prepare every year, in such for m and within such 
time as may be prescribed by the Central Government , an annual report 
giving a true and full account of its activities du ring the previous year as 
well as the rankings and accreditation accorded, ac creditation outcomes, 
performance trends, policy recommend ations etc. and copies thereof shall 
be forwarded to the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be aft er its receipt, cause 
to be laid before each House of Parliament, the ann ual report along with a 
memorandum of action taken or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendation(s) of the Authority and the reasons,  if any, for non-
acceptance of the recommendation(s) made therein. 
(3)  
Where the report or any of part thereof relates to any  matter with which 
any State Government is conce rned, the Authority shall forward a copy of 
such report or part thereof  to the  concerned Stat e Government, who shall 
in turn, cause it to be laid before  each House of the State  Legislature, where 
it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislatur e consists of one Hous e, 
before that House,  along with an explanatory memorandum on the action 
taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendation (s) related to the State,  
and reasons, if any, for not accepting any of the r ecommendation(s) made 
therein. 
40 
45 
50 
55 
 

7 
 
  CHAPTER VI 
 MISCELLANEOUS  
  
 
5 
10 
13. 
 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2)  Every rule  under this section shall be laid, as so on as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament while it is i n session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one  session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry  of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule  or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall th ereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so howe ver, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without  prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
 Power to make 
rules. 
 15 14. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie agains t the Authority or its 
members or its officers for actions taken in good faith in pursuan ce of this 
Act or of any rules, regulations or orders made thereunder. 
 Protection  of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
  
15. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwit hstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in force. 
 Act to override 
other laws. 
 20 
25 
16. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the pr ovisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may make such order or give such  direction, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as ma y appear to be necessary 
or expedient for removing such difficulty. 
(2)  
Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
 Power to remove 
difficulties. 
 
  

8 
 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS   
  India’s aspiration to emerge as a global knowledge superpower by 2047 
necessitates the creation of a credible, transparen t, and statutory framework for 
evaluating the performance and potential of its hig her educational institutions. At 
present, mechanisms like the National Institutional  Ranking Framework (NIRF), 
while commendable, there is a need for a full-fledg ed legislation to regulate 
various aspects of the subject matter. Further, the se frameworks are often not 
sufficiently aligned with international benchmarkin g standards such as QS World 
Rankings or Times Higher Education (THE), leading t o underrepresentation of 
Indian institutions on the global stage.  
This Bill seeks to address these systemic deficienc ies by proposing the 
establishment of a National Ranking and Accreditati on Authority (NRAA), which 
would be an independent, statutory body under the a egis of the Ministry of 
Education, that will serve as the single-point nati onal authority for ranking, 
accrediting, and benchmarking all higher educationa l institutions across India. The 
Bill mandates compulsory participation for all cent rally funded institutions, 
institutes of national importance, and State Univer sities, thereby ensuring 
universal applicability and comparability.  
The proposed Authority will be empowered to develop  a multi-dimensional, 
outcome-oriented ranking framework, incorporating p arameters such as academic 
excellence, research output, industry linkages, emp loyability of graduates, 
inclusivity, governance, innovation, and societal i mpact. It will promote regional 
equity by integrating special weightages for instit utions in aspirational districts, 
Tier-2/Tier-3 cities, and minority-serving regions.  The inclusion of blockchain-
based data verification tools will significantly en hance data credibility and 
minimize manual intervention, while enabling third- party audits and full public 
transparency through digital dashboards.  
The NRAA will also work in close collaboration with  global ranking 
agencies, enabling Indian institutions to leapfrog onto international ranking 
platforms. Customizable ranking outputs, allowing s takeholders such as students, 
employers, and policymakers to prioritize different metrics, will make the rankings 
dynamic, inclusive, and user responsive. This will directly contribute to evidence-
based policy reforms, performance-linked funding me chanisms, and student-
centric decision-making, in line with the transform ative vision of the National 
Education Policy (NEP) 2020.  
In a time when global academic capital is increasin gly mobile and 
competitive, the absence of a robust, data-driven, and outcome-aligned National 
Ranking Authority has become a critical policy gap.  By filling this vacuum, the 
present Bill seeks to elevate India’s global academ ic reputation, empower students 
with accurate information, hold institutions accoun table, and incentivize 
excellence across the public and private spectrum of higher education. 
Hence, this Bill. 
SATNAM SINGH SANDHU. 
 
  
 
  

9 
 
  FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM    
  Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment  of the National Ranking 
and Accreditation Authority, while clause 4 provide s for its composition and for 
the appointment of officers, and staff to the Autho rity to assist it in the efficient 
discharge of its functions as well as for the salaries, allowanc es and service 
conditions of the Chairperson, Members, officers an d staff of the Authority . 
Clause 5 sets out the functions of the Authority, i ncluding, inter alia , to develop a 
blockchain-based Public Dashboard for real-time, ta mper-proof access to rankings, 
accreditation status, and performance metrics. Clau se 10 of the Bill provides that 
the Central Government shall provide funds to the A uthority for carrying out the 
purposes of the Bill. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expen diture, both of recurring 
and non- recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of Indi a.  At this stage, 
though the exact expenditure cannot be determined, the non-recurring expenditure 
on infrastructure, blockchain techn ology and data systems is estimated to be rupees 
six hundred crore, while the recurring expenditure for operations, data verification, 
stakeholder engagement and international collaborat ions is estimated to be rupees 
two hundred crore per annum. 
 
 
  
 
  

10  
 
  MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION   
  Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Gove rnment to make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 1 6 of the Bill empowers the 
Central Government to make such provisions through an order for removing any 
difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the  provisions of the Bill.  
As the rules or orders will relate to matters of pr ocedural and administrative 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is  of a normal character. 
 
  
 
 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a statutory authority for ranking and 
accreditation of higher educational institutions in the country, 
 ensuring transparency, excellence, and alignment with 
national and global standards, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
____________ 
(Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–065–10.02.2026.