1
Bill No. LXVII of 2022
THE PARLIAMENT (PRODUCTIVITY ENHANCEMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to provide for a framework for enhancing the performance of the Parliament by fixing
minimum number of sittings for each House of the Parliament, extending the hours
of a sitting, introduction of a short Session of Parliament in addition to the
existing practice of three Sessions, institution of a mechanism to
separately discuss opposition business, compensation for the
hours unutilised due to disruption and for matters
connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Parliament (Productivity Enhancement) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Goverment may, by notification,
appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Committee" means the Opposition Business Comiittee constituted under
section 7;
(b) "disruption" means the act of shouting of slogans or expressing violent
behaviour or coming to the well of the House which leads to substantial delays in
transaction of business or adjournment of the House;
(c) "Interruption" means interjection by a Member during the speech of another
member; and
(d) "Opposition business" means the agenda and debates brought forward by
the Members of the non-ruling parties.
(2) Words and expressions used in the Constitution and also in this Act, shall, unless
the context otherwise requires, have the meanings assigned to them in the Constitution.
CHAPTER II
S
ESSIONS OF EACH HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT
3. Subject to the provisions contained in article 85 of the Constitution, there shall be
at least four Sessions, including a short Session, of each House of Parliament in a year.
4. A short Session of each House of Parliament in a year shall entail the following,
namely:—
(a) the Session shall be of minimum fifteen days duration;
(b) the Session shall only be devoted to deliberation on at least two most urgent
matters of public importance and no other business including Government legislatie
business shall be conducted;
(c) the agenda for the Session may be decided by all political parties represented
in each House of Parliament;
(d) each political party may submit at least two matters for intended discussion
in the short Session to the Business Advisory Committee of the respective Houses in
accordance with the rules as may be prescribed; and
(e) the Business Advisory Committee of the respective Houses shall decide the
final topics for discussion and recommend allocation of time for such discussions in
each House.
CHAPTER III
S
ITTINGS OF THE PARLIAMENT
5. Each House of the Parliament shall compulsorily sit for not less than one hundred
and twenty days in a year.
6. (1) Except during Private Members' Business, a member may move a motion, without
a prior notice, to extend a sitting beyond the scheduled hour for its conclusion for the
purpose of considering a specified item of business subject to the following condition:
(a) the motion shall relate to the business being considered at that point of time;
(b) the motion shall be proposed in the last hour before the scheduled hour for
inclusion of the sitting; and
Definitions.
Number of
Sessions in a
year.
Short Session.
Minimum
number of
sittings of
each House of
Parliament in
a year.
Motion for
extension of a
sitting.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(c) the motion shall not be subject to debate or amendment.
(2) In putting the question on a motion, the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may
be, shall collect voices both of Ayes and Noes in such manner as may be prescribed and the
question before the House shall be determined accordingly.
CHAPTER IV
O
PPOSITION BUSINESS COMMITTEE
7. (1) The Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, shall, from time to time,
constitute an Opposition Business Committee in each house of Parliament consisting of
eight members to be nominated in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Committee constituted under sub-section ( 1) shall hold office until a new
Committee is nominated.
8. (1) The Chairman of the Committee shall be appointed by the Chairman or the
Speaker, as the case may, be from amongst the members of the Committee.
(2) If the Chairperson of the Committee is for any reason unable to act, the Chairman or
the Speaker, as the case may be, may appoint another Chairperson of the Committee in his or
her place.
(3) If the Chairperson of the Committee is absent from any meeting, the Committee
shall choose another member to act as a Chairperson of the Committee for the meeting.
9. The quorum of the Committee shall be four.
10. (1) It shall be the function of the Committee to recommend the Opposition Business
to be taken up on the respective House of a sitting on Monday during the Session periods
other than a short Session and also time that shall be allocated for the opposition business.
(2) The business recommended by the Committee shall have precedence over
Government business.
CHAPTER V
I
NTERRUPTION OR DISRUPTION OF BUSINESS
11. A member shall not be interrupted, except by the Chairman or the Speaker, or
another member who is—
(a) raising a point of order; or
(b) trying to clarify some matter raised by the member in his or her speech, but
only if the member speaking is willing to give way and resume his or her seat and the
member wishing to interrupt is called by the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may
be.
12. (1) The number of hours lost due to disruptions shall be compensated by extending
a Session of the respective House by as many hours for which the sittings were adjourned
due to disruptions.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may
be, shall have inherent powers to extend the Session of the respective House.
Constitution
of Opposition
Business
Committee.
Chairman of
Committee.
Quorum.
Functions of
Opposition
Business
Committee.
Exceptions for
interruption.
Extension of
session.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
13. The Rules of Procedure  and Conduct of Business in the Council of States (Rajya
Sabha) and the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha may be amended,
as deemed necessary, for the implementation of the provisions of this Act.
14. The Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, may by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Amendment of
the Rules of
Procedure.
Powers to
make rules.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
As the central institution of democracy, the India Parliament expresses the faith of the
people and embodies the will of those in the Government. As the representative of India's
diverse population, Parliament has a unique responsibility of balancing competing interests
and catering to the needs of the people through democratic means of deliberations and
discussions. The Indian Parliament which witnessed its most productive Session during the
initial decades suffers from a limited number of sittings, frequent disruptions, and high
absenteeism in the 21st century. The drastic reduction of Parliament productivity has seriously
deteriorated the quality of discussion and hampered overall efficiency effectively.
2. The Parliament is the sole institution that secures the interests of the country as a
whole. Apart from the regular legislative business, it also ensures that the Government is
fully accountable to the people through the participation of non-ruling parties. However, the
current framework does not adequately provide the members of the opposition parties with
means to intervene and lead discussions which lead to more delays and disruptions.
Consequently, both Houses of Parliament are not able to perform the crucial function of
parliamentary oversight.
3. It is imperative to urgently reform and strengthen the existing system which is only
possible by extending the number of days the Parliament functions. To keep up with the
rapidly changing needs of the people, the working hours of Parliamnet in no situation should
be reduced due to delays or disruptions. Further,a separate mechanism for the opposition
parties to put forward the most pressing issues of the people could substantially bring down
the incidences of disorder in both Houses of the Parliament.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above-stated objectives.
PROF. MANOJ KUMAR JHA.
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for at least four Session including a short Session to be
held in Parliament every year instead of the existing practice of three Sessions in a year. The
Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred and thirty five crore per annum is
likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 empowers Chairman, Rajya Sabha or Speaker, Lok Sabha, as the case may be
to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act. The matters in respect of which the
rules and regulations may be made are of procedure and administrative details and as such,
it is not practicable to provide for them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

MGIPMRND—1773RS(S3)—12-12-2022.
RAJY A SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a framework for enhancing the performance of the Parliament by fixing
minimum number of sittings for each House of the Parliament, extending the hours
of a sitting, introduction of a short Session of Parliament in addition to the
existing practice of three Sessions, institution of a mechanism to
separately discuss opposition business, compensation for the
hours unutilised due to disruption and for matters
connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
————
(Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha, M.P.)