1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill  No.  LXX of  2008
THE  NAGALAND  LEGISLATIVE  COUNCIL  BILL,  2008
A
BILL
to provide for the creation of Legislative Council for the State of Nagaland and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty- ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Nagaland Legislative Council Act, 2008.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, each of the words and expressions
used herein and not defined,—
(a) but defined in the Representation of the People Act, 1950, shall have the
same meaning as in that Act; and
(b) the rest shall have the same meaning as in the Constitution of India read with
the General Clauses Act, 1897.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2008
Definitions.
43 of 1950.
10 of 1897.

2
3. Immediately upon the commencement of this Act,
(i) there shall be a Legislative Council for the State of Nagaland;
(ii) in article 168, in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) after the words "Karnataka", the
word "Nagaland" shall be inserted; and
(iii) steps shall be taken to constitute the Legislative Council for the State of
Nagaland in accordance with the provisions of the Representation of the People Act,
1950 and the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and subject to the provision of
this Act.
4. The Legislative Council of the State of Nagaland, so created shall have forty members,
of which,—
(i) twenty shall be elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of
Nagaland from amongst those who are not members of the said Legislative Assembly;
and
(ii) twenty shall be nominated by the Governor on the advice of the Council of
Ministers of Nagaland which shall be binding on the Governor, of which—
(a) sixteen shall be, one each from the sixteen major tribes in the State of
Nagaland, as enumerated in the Schedule to this Act; and
(b) four shall  be from other minor tribes in Nagaland.
5. In section 10 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, in sub- section (2), the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely,—
"Provided that the allocation of seats in the Legislative Council of Nagaland shall  be
as specified in section 4 of the Nagaland Legislative Council Act, 2008."
6. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951,—
(1) after section 15A, the following section shall be inserted, namely,—
"15B. Notification for elections to Legislative Council of Nagaland.— For the purpose
of constituting the Legislative Council of the State of Nagaland under the Nagaland Legislative
Council Act, 2008, the Governor of Nagaland shall, by one or more notifications published in
the Official Gazette of the State on such date or dates as may be recommended by the
Election Commission, call upon the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State and
the Council of Ministers in Nagaland, to elect or nominate members, as the case may be, in
accordance with the said Act and with the provisions of this Act and the rules and orders
made thereunder".
(2) after section 16, the following section shall be inserted namely;—
"16A. Notification for biennial election to Legislative Council of Nagaland.— For the
purpose of filling the seats of members of the Legislative Council of Nagaland retiring on the
expiration of their term of office, the Governor, shall, subject to the proviso to section 16 of
this Act, by one or more notifications published in the Official Gazette of the State on such
date or dates as may be recommended by the Election Commission call upon the members of
the Legislative Assembly of the State and the Council of Ministers in Nagaland to elect
members in accordance with the provisions of the Nagaland  Legislative Council Act, 2008
and the rules and orders made thereunder".
Creation of
Legislative
Council for
Nagaland.
Composition
of Legislative
Council in
Nagaland.
43 of 1950.
43 of 1951.
Amendment to
Representation
of the People
Act, 1950.
Amendment to
Representation
of the People
Act, 1951.
43 of 1950.
43 of 1951.

3
SCHEDULE
[See section 4(ii) (a)]
1.Angami
2.A o
3.Chakhesang
4.Chang
5.Kachari
6.Khiamniungan
7.Konyak
8.Kuki
9.Lotha
10.Phom
11.Pochuri
12.Rengma
13.Sangtam
14. Sumi
15.Yimchunger
16.Zeliang

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND  REASONS
Nagaland is fully a tribal State with Sixteen major tribes and other minor tribes. The
unique culture and history of Nagaland embodies in it a tribal spirit of special nature with
inherent democratic features, which can hardly be four-cornered into Constitutional laws
but can appreciably discerned from the Naga customs, heritage and usages. The Constitution
of India, substantially, recognizes this in article 371-A. The democratic spirit and heritage of
the Nagas rest on deep-rooted ethnic, cultural, historical, sociological and  territorial
foundations of several centuries of  Naga civilization. It may however be sadly  noticed that
this spirit of democracy amongst the Nagas had gone untapped for a long time.
The period from 2003 to 2008 saw in Nagaland a State Government totally committed to
peace, progress and development in appropriate realization of the Nagas' aspirations,
ambitions and attempts at self-development through the invocation of the spirit of those
inherent democratic features of the Naga society. As part of that effort, the Nagaland
Legislative Assembly passed a resolution under article 169(1) of the Constitution of India for
creation of a Legislative Council in the State of Nagaland to broad-base Constitutional
structure for promotion of democracy in the State.
Creation of second chambers in the States in now an optional Constitutional exercise.
Even if a State Assembly passed a resolution for creation of a Legislative Council, the
effectuation of that resolution depends upon the Union Government.  Nagaland had passed
the resolution for creation of a Legislative Council way back on the 19th August, 2005, the
Legislative Council for Nagaland is yet to be created.
The problems of the States in the North East India are peculiar to the region and more
compounded by the snail-paced responses to the genuine demands of the people of that
region. In order to deep-root and broad-base democracy which is the top most priority in the
States in the North East in the generally vitiated atmosphere of disruption to peace and order
in that region, it is imperative that the Constitution is amended to provide for bicameral
legislatures specially for the States in the North East India, to preserve, formalize, contain
and continue the age old democratic wisdom of the tribal societies, in the form of
Constitutionally sanctioned legislative councils, not as an option as at present, but as a
necessity. Until that time, this Bill seeks to achieve the said object by creating a Legislative
Council for Nagaland in pursuance of the resolution of the Assembly passed under article
169(1) of the Constitution of India, on the 19th August, 2005.
KHEKIHO  ZHIMOMI
4
SER 5 \ BILL2008 \ RS \ 4441RS

ANNEXURE-I
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*** *** *** *** *** ***
168. Constitution of Legislatures in  States. —(1) For every State there shall be a
Legislature which shall consist of the Governor, and—
(a) in the States of Bihar, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh, two Houses;
(b) in other States, one House.
(2) Where there are two Houses of the Legislature of a State, one shall be known as the
Legislative Council and the other as the Legislative Assembly, and where there is only one
House, it shall be known as the Legislative Assembly.
*** *** *** *** *** ***
5
SER 5 \ BILL2008 \ RS \ 4441RS

6
ANNEXURE-II
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  REPRESENTATION  OF  THE  PEOPLE  ACT,  1950
*** *** *** ***
10. Allocation of seats in the Legislative Councils.—(1) The allocation of seats in the
Legislative Councils of the States having such Councils shall be as shown in the Third
Schedule.
(2) In the Legislative Council of each State specified in the first column of the Third
Schedule, there shall be the number of seats specified in the second column thereof opposite
to that State, and of those seats,—
(a) the numbers specified in the third, fourth and fifth columns shall be  the
number of seats to be filled by persons elected, respectively, by the electorates referred
to in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause (3) of article 171;
(b) the number of specified in the sixth column shall be the number of seats to be
filled by persons elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State from
amongst persons who are not members of that Assembly; and
(c) the number specified in the seventh column shall be the number of seats to
be filled by persons nominated by the Governor of the State in accordance with the
provisions of clause (5) of article 171.
*** *** *** ***
6
SER 5 \ BILL2008 \ RS \ 4441RS

ANNEXURE-III
EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  REPRESENTATION  OF  THE  PEOPLE  ACT,  1951
*** *** *** ***
15A. Notification for certain election to Legislative Councils.—For the purpose of
constituting the Legislative Council of the State of Madhya Pradesh under the States
Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956), and constituting the Legislative Council of the State
of Andhra Pradesh under the Legislative Councils Act, 1957 (37 of 1957), the Governor of
each of the aforesaid States shall, by one or more notifications published in the Official
Gazette of the State on such date or dates as may be recommended by the Election Commission,
call upon the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State and all the Council
constituencies to elect members in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of the
rules and orders made thereunder.
16. Notification for biennial election to a State Legislative Council.—For the purpose
of filling the seats of members of the Legislative Council of a State retiring on the expiration
of their term of office, the Governor shall, by one or more notifications published in the
Official Gazette of the State on such date or dates as may be recommended by the Election
Commission call upon the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State and all the
Council constituencies concerned to elect members in accordance with the provisions of
this Act and of the rules and orders made thereunder:
Provided that no notification under this section shall be issued more than three months
prior to the date on which the term of office of the retiring members is due to expire.
*** *** *** ***
7
SER 5 \ BILL2008 \ RS \ 4441RS

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the creation of Legislative Council for the State of Nagaland and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri  Khekiho Zhimomi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4771RS(S-5)—29-12-2008.