AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025
Bill No. LXX of 2024 
THE VIRTUAL COURT PROCEEDINGS BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for proceedings of all Courts, Tribunals and Commissions 
to be held virtually in order to facilitate efficient and timely  
 judicial proceedings, mitigate delays, reduce costs and  
increase convenience for all parties involved and  
for matters connected therewith and  
incidental thereto. 
       BE  it  enacted  by  Parliament in the  Seventy-fifth Year of  the  Republic  of 
India as follows: — 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Virtual Court Proceedings Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title 
and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 
 
Virtual court 
proceedings.
2. 
3. 
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires — 
(a) “Commissions” includes all Commissions established by the Acts
of the Parliament;
(b) “
Courts” means the Supreme Court of India and High Courts of the
States and includes a physical Court and a virtual Court;
(c) “live link” means and includes a live television link, audio -video
electronic means or other arrangements provided by the Courts or
Tribunals or Commissions, to the participants for participating in the
virtual court proceedings;
(d) “ participants” means and includes
(i) “advocates” and “senior advocates” defined under clause (a),
sub-section (1) of section 2 and sub -section (2) of section 16,
respectively of the Advocates Act, 1961, as well as government
pleaders/advocates and officers of the department of prosecution,
(ii) parties-in-person to the proceedings,
(iii) other parties to the proceedings,
(iv) litigants, officers connected to the proceedings,
(v) witnesses, and
(vi) any person who is to be examined, or in whose presence certain
proceedings are to be recorded or conducted or who is required to
make submissions or who intends to participate in the proceedings
on his or her own or on behalf of a party to the proceeding, third
party with authority or permission of the Courts or Tribunals or
Commissions, as the case may be;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules and regulations made under
this Act;
(f) “Tribunals” includes all Tribunals and Appellate Tribunals
established by the Acts of the Parliament;
(g) “vi rtual court proceedings” means a proceeding where participants
are not physically present in the Courts or Tribunals or Commissions,
as the case may be, but attend and participate through electronic mode
which may include video conferencing accessed through any electronic
device, by accessing a live link provided by the Courts , Tribunals and
C
ommissions.
(1) The proceedings of all Courts, Tribunals and Commissions   shall be
held, virtually in electronic mode, by use of electronic communication or
use of audio-video electronic means such as video conferencing, apart from
the regular physical hearings and such hearings shall be called as virtua l
c
ourt proceedings.
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 

3 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
(2) The proceedings mentioned in sub-section (1) shall include: —
(a) all trials, inquires and proceedings including issuance of notice or 
summons, recording of evidence, service an d execution of summons  
and warrant;
(b) examination of parties and witnesses;
(c) pronouncement of orders, judgments, awards; and
(d) all appellate proceedings o r any other proceedings as deemed  
appropriate by the Courts, Tribunals, or Commissions, as the case may 
be.
(3) The procedure and manner of conduct of the proceedings as given under 
sub-section (2) includ ing the determination or apportioning of costs  
involved in virtual cou rt proceedings and  the requisite facilities and  
arrangements to  b e made for smooth con duct of the virtual court  
proceedings in each Court, Tribunal and Commission shall be go verned by 
the rules and regulations framed by the Courts and the Central Government 
in the case of the Tribunals and Commissions.
(4) The Courts, Tribunals and Commissions, as the case may be, in order to 
enable access to virtual court proceedings,  shall provide a live link  to the 
participants via email address/mobile number furnished by the participants, 
or in any other manner, as may be prescribed.
(5) The Courts, Tribunals and Commissions, as the case may be, shall have 
the power to regulate appearan ces of particip ants du ring virtual court  
proceedings including removal or debarring any participant from further  
participation in such proceedings on any of the following grounds: —
(a) appearing from a vehicle;
(b)  appearing with a background not dignified for participation in 
virtual court proceedings;
(c) engaging in any activity other than the normal course of business;
(d) engaging in any act which  may be co nsidered inappropriate 
while participating in virtual court proceedings;
(e) occurrence of a technical glitch, either on the part of the participant 
or on the part of the Courts, Tribunals, or Commissions, as the case may 
be, which disables conduct of virtual court proceedings; 
(f) the participant is not authorized  by the Cou rt, Tribunal or 
Commission for participating in the virtual court proceedings; or 
(g) any other ground, as may be prescribed, through rules, regulations
and guidelines by the Court, Tribunal or Commission, as the case may
be.
(6) There shall be no unauthorized recording of the proceedings by any of
the participants or by any other person or entity.
(7) The Courts, Tribunals and Commissions may from time -to-time issue
directions or guidelines governing the access to and participation in virtual

4 
court proceedings including online etiquette and publish the same on their 
notice boards and   websites. 
(8) Subject to sub -sections (4) and (5), the Courts, Tribunals, or
Commissions, as the case may be, shall allow participants to appear in
virtual court proceedings, upon a request made by a participant in such form
and manner as may be prescribed.
(9) Subject to maintaining independence, impartiality and cr edibility
of judicial proceedings and subject to such rules, regulations, directions
or guidelines as the Courts or Central Government may issue with
respect to virtual court proceedings, the Courts, Tribunals and
Commissions may adopt such technological advances as may become
available from time to time, for improving the quality and efficiency of
the virtual court proceedings.
5 
10 
Facilities to 
be provided.
4. All Courts , Tribunals and Commissions  shall provide the following
facilities: —
(a) e-filing of pleadings and documents as required;
(b) e-verification of pleadings and documents as required; and
(c) virtual certified copies of the orders and judgements as required.
15 
Conduct of 
proceedings. 
5. (1) All virtual court proceedings conducted by the Courts, Tribunals, or
Commissions shall be judicial proceedings and all the courtesies and
protocols applicable to a physical Court shall apply to such proceedings.
(2) All relevant statutory provisions appl icable to judicial proceedings
including provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023,
the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, and the Information Technology Act,
2000, shall apply to virtual court proceedings.
20 
25 
45 of 2023 
46 of
 2023 
47 of 2023 
70 of 1971 
21 of 2000. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.
6. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear
to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
30 
Provisions 
of the Act to 
have an 
overriding 
effect.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force
or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law. 35 
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Courts shall have the
power to make rules, regulations, directions or orders, as may be required,
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power of Courts 
to make rules. 

5 
5
10 
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules with respect to the
Tribunals and Commissions for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised i n
one
 session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expir y
of
 the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
a
foresaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
H
ouses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power of Central 
Government to 
make rules. 

6 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
        The advent of COVID -19 pandemic had forced us to conduct court 
proceedings virtually. Virtual courts have enabled participation from remote 
areas irrespective of geographical or economic constraints, eliminating the need 
for individuals to bear significant financial burdens associated with physically 
attending court sessions. 
        However, just like the COVID- 19 times are behind us, the virtual courts 
are slowly becoming a thing of the past in some Tribunals and it is seen that 
even though Government had invested a huge amount of public money in the 
infrastructure for conducting and promoting virtual courts, this facility is not 
being utilized even though there is demand for the same.   
       The concept of access to justice has been etched in our Constitution. Virtual 
court can enable dispensation of justice to all citizens by mitigating delays, 
reducing costs and increasing convenience for all parties. Access to virtual court 
hearings not only help in reduced litigation costs, but also make comple x and 
time-consuming judicial procedures accessible and convenient to the lay man. 
It also prevents a litigant belonging to other parts of the country from bearing 
the cost of travel, lodging and extra fees of the lawyer since most of the 
Commissions, Tribunals and the Hon’ble Supreme Court are situated at Delhi. 
Each time a case is adjourned for want of a lawyer; it is the litigant who bears 
the expense. It is also pertinent to note that a common reason for adjournments 
at the Supreme Court of India, High Courts and appellate tribunals is that the 
counsels from various parts of the country cannot make it to the hearing due to 
various reasons. Therefore, mandatory virtual court proceedings would 
certainly aid in the effective delivery of justice to all sections of citizens. 
Furthermore, virtual courts proceedings could also make the legal process more 
streamlined by reducing paperwork and automating administrative tasks.  
       Therefore, the present Bill proposes to mandate virtual court hearings and 
achieve the above objectives. 
 Hence this Bill. 
P. WILSON.

7 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clause (8) of Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Courts, 
Tribunals and Commissions may, subject to the rules, regulations, directions or 
guidelines as the Courts or Central Government may issue with respect to 
virtual court proceedings, adopt such technological advances as may become 
available from time to time, for improving the quality and efficiency of the 
virtual court proceedings.    
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify 
the exact amount of recurring and non- recurring expenditure likely to be 
involved. 

8 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, make 
such order, as necessary for removing any d ifficulty to give effect to the 
provisions of this Bill. Clause 8 empowers the Courts to make rules, regulations, 
directions or orders, as may b e required, for carrying out the purposes of this 
Bill and Clause 9 empowers the Central Government to make rules with respect 
to the Tribunals and Commissions to carry out the provisions of this Bill. 
As the orders, rules, regu lations, directions etc. will relate to matters 
of details only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
___________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for proceedings of all Courts, Tribunals and Commissions 
to be held virtually in order to facilitate efficient and timely  
 judicial proceedings, mitigate delays, reduce costs and  
increase convenience for all parties involved and  
for matters connected therewith and  
incidental thereto. 
___________ 
(Shri P. Wilson, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS–PMB(E)–047–10.02.2025.