AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bi ll No. LXX of 2025 
THE ASTROLOGY (REGULATION AND PROMOTION)  
BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
 
to provide for the recognition of astrology as a scientific discipline, the 
registration and regulation of astrologers through a statutory 
Regulatory Authority, the promotion and development 
of astrology, and the prevention of fraudulent 
practices related thereto and for matters 
connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Astrology (Regulation and Promotion) Act,
2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a)  “astrology” means the study of the movement and relative 
positions of celestial bodies in the zodiac belt as  a means of 
understanding and interpreting their effects on hum an affairs and 
terrestrial events; 
(b)  “astrologer” means a person practicing astrology as a 
profession having obtained the minimum educational and professional 
qualifications or experience as may be prescribed under this Act; 
(c) “Authority” means the Regulatory Authority for Astrology 
established under section 6; 
(d) “Code” means the Code of Professional Conduct and Ethics 
for Astrologers to be formulated and notified by th e Authority under 
section 9; 
(e)  “Fund” means the Astrology Regulation and Promotion  Fund 
established under section 14; 
(f)  “fraudulent practice” means any act intended to dec eive, 
misrepresent, exploit, or obtain undue advantage in  the name of 
astrology; 
(g)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
and 
(h) “ Register” means the National Register of Licens ed 
Astrologers prepared and maintained under section 5. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
 
  
CHAPTER II 
RECOGNITION AND REGULATION OF THE STUDY 
AND PRACTICE OF ASTROLOGY  25 
 
Declaration of 
Astrology as a 
scientific 
discipline. 
 
3. Astrology is hereby declared as a scientific discipline of study, research, and 
practice concerning the effects of celestial bodies  on human life and 
terrestrial phenomena. 
  
Curriculum and 
standards for 
astrology. 
 
4. The Central Government shall, develop a curriculum and framework 
for the study of astrology in educational institutions in the country, set 
uniform standards for the practice of, and facilita te and promote 
conduct of research in astrology in such manner as may be prescribed. 
30 
 
National 
Register of 
Licensed 
Astrologers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. (1)  The Central Government shall, cause to be prepared and maintained, 
through the Authority established under section 7, a National Register of 
Licensed Astrologers containing the names, contact details, qualifications, 
place and mode of practice and such othe r details as may be specified, of 
persons qualified and recognized as astrologers, in  such form and manner as 
may be prescribed. 
(2) 
The Register shall be a public document, under sect ion 74 of the 
Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 and shall be publ ished on the website 
of the Authority for easy access of the general pub lic, in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) 
Any person practicing or desirous of practicing ast rology as a profession 
in the country, in whichever form and manner as may  be prescr ibed, shall 
mandatorily apply for registration and license to p ractice astrology as a 
profession, to the Authority, in such form and mann er and within such time 
from the date of commencement of the Act, as may be prescribed. 
(4) The applications so receive d shall be scrutinized by the Authority and if 
found in compliance with the conditions specified u nder this Act and the 
rules made thereunder, the applicant shall be issue d a registration number 
35 
40 
45 
50 
47 of 2023. 

3 
 
 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
along with a certificate of registration and licens e to pract ice astrology as a 
profession, in such form and manner as may be presc ribed and his name 
shall be entered in the Register: 
Provided that no such application shall be rejected  without providing 
the applicant with clear reasons thereof in writing  and a reaso nable 
opportunity of being heard: 
Provided further that such registration and license  shall be valid for 
such period as may be prescribed and after expiry o f the registration/license 
period, the registration/license shall be eligible for renewal for an ext ended 
period equivalent to the initial period. 
(5) The license issued under this section shall be susp ended or cancelled by 
the Authority, if the person concerned is found gui lty of professional 
misconduct or malpractice in violation of the Code issued und er this Act, 
depending on the gravity of the offence as establis hed by the Authority 
during the investigation of the charges of offence against him: 
 Provided that no such suspension or cancellation of  license shall be 
done without giving the accused perso n a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard. 
(6) 
No person shall, after the date of commencement of this Act, practice 
astrology as a profession in the country, unless he has been issued a 
registration number along with the certificate of r egistration and li cense and 
his name has been entered in the Register. 
(7)  
Registration under this section will, however, not confer any benefits or 
entitlements other than those expressly provided under this Act. 
 25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
6. (1)  The Central Government shall, by notification in t he Official 
Gazette, establish an authority to be known as the Regulatory 
Authority for Astrology to exercise the powers conf erred upon and to 
perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act. 
(2)  The headquarters of the Authority shal l be at such place in the 
country as may be notified by the Central Governmen t in the Official 
Gazette. 
(3) 
The Authority may, with the approval of the Central  Government 
and in consultation with the State Governments conc erned, establish its 
offices at su ch other places within the country, as it may deem 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(4)  The Authority shall consist of the following, to be  appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed:— 
(a)  a Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence and 
integrity possessing not less than twenty years experience in the 
field of astrology, education, or related disciplines; 
(b)  two Members representing recognized bodies of 
astrologers in the country; 
(c)  one Member with requisite experience as may be 
prescribed in the field of education or social sciences; and 
(d) an officer of the Central Government not below the rank 
of Joint Secretary, as the ex-officio  Member-Secretary. 
(5)  The Chairperson and Members, other than the ex officio  Member-
Secretary, shall hold office for a term of three ye ars and shall be eligible for 
re-appointment for one more term, subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed. 
(6) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the oth er terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Membe rs shall be such as 
may be prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
 Establishment 
of the 
Regulatory 
Authority for 
Astrology. 

4 
 
(7)  The Authority shall meet at such times and places a nd shall observe such 
procedure with regard to the transaction of its bus iness as may be 
prescribed. 
Officers and 
employees of 
the Authority. 
 
7. (1)  The Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central 
Government, appoint such number of officers and emp loyees as it 
considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions. 
(2)  The qualifications and method of appointment, the s alaries and 
allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and employees of the Authority shall be su ch as may be 
prescribed.  
5 
10 
 
Functions and 
powers of the 
Authority. 
 8. The Authority shall have the following powers and functions, namely — 
(a)  prescribing minimum educational and professional 
qualifications, guidelines and framework for the practice of astrology in 
the country; 
(b) receipt and scrutiny of applications for registrati on and grant 
of licence for the practice of astrology, issuing registration number and 
certificate of registration; 
(c) maintaining a National Register of Licensed Astrolo gers 
and publishing it on their website;  
(d)  granting, renewing, suspending, or cancelling licen ces to 
practise astrology in the country; 
(e) formulating a Code of Professional Conduct and Ethi cs for 
astrologers and notifying it on their website as we ll as ensuring strict 
compliance thereto; 
(f)  rec eiving and investigating complaints of professional  
misconduct or malpractice of registered and license d astrologers or any 
other matter related to the study, practice and res earch in the field of 
astrology; 
(g ) imposing penalties for fraudulent or unethic al practices, false 
representation and other proven violations or contr aventions of the 
provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder; 
(h ) levy of fees or other charges as may be required un der this 
Act; 
(i)  advising the Central Government on matters relating to the 
regulation, promotion and development of astrology as a scientific and 
professional discipline and any other matter incidental thereto; and 
(j) perform such other functions, as it may consider ne cessary, for 
implementation of the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder or as may be assigned by the Central Gov ernment, from 
time to time.  
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
 
Code of 
Professional 
Conduct and 
Ethics for 
astrologers. 
 
9. All registered and licensed astrologers shall stric tly adhere to the Code of 
Professional Conduct and Ethics for Astrologers formulated and notified by 
the Authority. 
  
  CHAPTER III 
PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT OF ASTROLOGY  45 
 
Measures for 
promotion and 
development of 
astrology. 
 
 
 
 
 
10. The Central Government shall take appropriate measures for the 
promotion and development of astrology, including but not limited to— 
(a) establishment of research institutions for the stud y and 
advancement of astrology; 
  

5 
 
5 
10 
(b) inclusion of astrology as a subject in higher educa tional 
institutions; 
(c) or ganization of national and international conference s, 
seminars, and workshops for the development of astrology;  
(d) encouraging collaboration with international instit utions for 
research and exchange programs; and 
(e) organise public awareness campaigns to disseminate  
correct knowledge of astrology and its significance  as a scientific 
and professional discipline and to warn sensitize t he general public 
against fraudulent and unethical practices in the p ractice of 
astrology.  
  CHAPTER IV 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
  
 
15 
20 
25 
11. (1)  Any person who, by misrepresentation, false promise , or deceptive 
means, induces another person to believe in astrolo gical predictions for the 
purpose of monetary gain or exploit any person emot ionally, financially, or 
otherwise in the name of astrology, shall be deemed to have committed an 
offence under this Act. 
(2) Any registered and licensed astrologer found to be repeatedly indulging 
in fraudulent or unethical practices in astrology i n violation of the Code 
shall be deemed to have committed an offence under this Act. 
(3) Any person or astrologer proven guilty of the offen ces under sub-
sections (1) and (2) shall be liable to imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years; or with fine which may exten d to five lakh rupees; or  
with both. 
 Fraudulent and 
unethical 
practices in 
astrology. 
  12. Any person who falsely represents himself as a registered and licensed 
astrologer or found practicing astrology without registration and license as 
required under the Act shall be punishable with fin e which may extend to 
two lakh rupees. 
 False 
representation 
and practice 
without 
registration 
and license. 
 30 
13. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under  this Act except upon a 
complaint made by the Authority or any officer authorized in this behalf. 
 Cognizance of 
offences. 
  CHAPTER V 
FINANCE AND GOVERNANCE  
  
 
35 
40 
45 
14. (1)  With effect from such date as the Central Governmen t may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in th is behalf, there shall be 
established for the purposes of this Act, a Fund to  be called the  
Astrology Regulation and Promotion Fund. 
(2) 
The Fund shall be administered by the Authority und er the supervision 
and control of the Central Government and there shall be credited thereto: — 
(a)  all grants, loans, and advances made to it by the C entral 
Government, from time to time, to carry out the purposes of the Act; 
(b)  all fees and charges received by it under this Act and amounts 
accrued on account of monetary penalties imposed under the Act; and 
(c)  any other sums received by the Authority, with the approval of 
the Central Government, in the course of discharge of its functions. 
 Funds of  the 
Authority. 
  15. The Central Government shall, after due appropriati on made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the 
Authority, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
 Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 

6 
 
Accounts and 
Audit. 
 
16. (1)  The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and ot her relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such  form as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller an d Auditor- General of 
India. 
(2)  The accounts of the Authority, as audited and cert ified by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by 
him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually by the Authority to the Centra l Government, which shall cause the 
same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is rece ived, before each House of 
Parliament. 
5 
10 
 
Annual Report.  17. The Authority shall prepare every year, in such for m and within such time 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report giving a 
true and full account of its activities during the previous year and copies 
thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Governmen t, which shall cause it, 
as soon as may be after its receipt, to be laid bef ore eac h House of 
Parliament. 
15 
 
  CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
  
Power to make 
rules. 
 
18. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one  session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry  of the session 
immed iately following the session or the successive sess ions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule  or regulation or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified for m or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment sh all be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
20 
25 
30 
 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
 
19. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the O fficial Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provision s of this Act as may 
appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty. 
(2)  Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soo n as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
35 
 
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
 
20. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie agains t the Authority or its 
members or its officers for actions taken in good faith in pursuan ce of this 
Act or of any rules, regulations or orders made thereunder.  
  
Act to override 
other laws. 
 
21. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwit hstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in force. 
40  
 
  

7 
 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS   
  Astrology has been practiced in India since ancient  times and continues to 
hold significance in contemporary society. However,  the absence of a regulatory 
framework has led to fraudulent practices by individuals who mislead the public 
for monetary gain. This Bill seeks to recognize ast rology as a scientific discipline, 
establish mechanisms for the registration of astrol ogers, establish a Regulatory 
Authority for the regulation of astrologers and the  practice of astrology as a 
profession in the country, promote research and education in astrology, and provide 
deterrents against fraudulent practices. The Bill a lso entrusts the Central 
Government with the responsibility o f developing a curriculum for the study of 
Astrology, setting standards, and overseeing regist ration and enforcement for the 
practice of Astrology. 
Hence, this Bill. 
AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE.  
  
 
  

8 
 
  FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM   
  Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Gove rnment shall develop a 
curriculum and framework for the study of astrology  in educational institutions in 
the country, set uniform standards for its practice , and facilitate and promote 
conduct of research in astrology. Clause 6 provides  for establishment of the 
Regulatory Authority for Astrology to exercise the powers conferred upon and to 
perform the functions assigned to it under this Act , its composition and the salaries 
and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Membe rs thereof as well as the 
other terms and conditions of their service. Clause  7 provides for the appointment 
of sufficient number of officers and employees to a ssist the Authority in the 
efficient discharge of its functions and for their salaries and allowances and other 
terms and conditions of their service. Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the functions 
and powers of the Authority. Clause 10 provides for the measures to be taken by 
the Central Government for the promotion and develo pment of astrology in the 
country , including establishment of research institutions for the study and 
advancement of astrology, organization of national and international conferences, 
seminars, and workshops for the development of astr ology and organizing public 
awareness campaigns to dis seminate accurate knowledge of astrology and to war n 
against fraudulent practices. Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the establishmen t of 
an Astrology Regulation and Promotion Fund whereas Clause 15 provides that the 
Central Government shall provide adequ ate funds to the Authority for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to invol ve expenditure, both of 
recurring and non-recurring nature, from the Consol idated Fund of India. However, 
at this stage, it is not possible to estimate the e xact amount of recurring and non-
recurring expenditure likely to be involved. 
 
  
 
  

9 
 
  MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION   
  Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Governme nt to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 19 provides that the Central 
Government may make such provisions, by order, as m ay be necessary for 
removing any difficulty in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill. 
As the rules or orders will relate to matters of pr ocedure and administrative 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
  
 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
 to provide for the recognition of astrology as a scientific discipline, the 
registration and regulation of astrologers through a statutory 
Regulatory Authority, the promotion and development 
of astrology, and the prevention of fraudulent 
practices related thereto and for matters 
connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
____________ 
(Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–313–08.12.2025 