10

AS INTRODUCED IN THE Rasya SABHA

Bill No. LXX of 2001

THE SPECIAL EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES FOR CHILDREN OF
MANUAL SCAVENGERS BILL, 2001
A

BILL
to provide special educational facilities to the children of scavengers or Safai Karamcharis
who were in the past engaged in or employed for manually carrying human excreta
in the country and for matter connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1, (7) This Act may be called the Special Educational Facilities for Children of
Manual Scavengers Act, 2001.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) “Attendance Authority” means Attendance Authorities appointed under
section 7;

Short title,
extent and


Survey to be
conducted by
appropriate

Goverment,

Special educa-
tional facilities
to children born
of scavenger
parents.

Responsibility
of Scavenger
parent to his
child to attend
schools etc,

Children of
Scavengers not
to be employed
3० as to prevent
them from
attending school
etc,

Attendance
Authorities.

Special
provision for
parttime
education in
certain cases.

Powerto make
rules.

2

(c) “parent” in relation to any child of a scavenger includes a guardian and
every person who has the actual custody of the child;

(व) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(e) “Scavenger” means a person who had been engaged or employed for
manually carrying human excreta before the commencement of the Employment of
Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993.

3. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to conduct survey in the
area under its jurisdiction to find out the children of scavengers and prepare a list of
such children in such manner as may be prescribed, who are to be imparted education
by such Government and shall cause the list to the revised at such intervals as may be
prescribed,

4. The appropriate Government shall provide following educational facilities to
every child born of a scavenger parent namely:—

(a) free education from school level to the post gzaduate level including higher
medical and technical education;

(b) free hostel facilities, uniform books, stationery, transportation and such other
assistance and facilities as are required for the proper education of the child;

(c) monthly scholarships in deserving cases at such rates as may be prescribed
while pursuing his studies.

5. It shall be the duty of the scavenger parent of every child to cause the child to
attend an approved school, college or institution, as the case may be.

6. No person shall employ a child of a scavenger in a manner which shall prevent
the child from attending a school or educational institution.

7. The appropriate Government may appoint as many persons as it thinks fit to
be Attendance Authorities for the purposes of this Act and may also appoint as many
persons as it considers necessary to assist the Attendance Authorities in the discharge
of their duties in carrying out the purposes of this Act.

8. If the attendance authority is satisfied that the child of scavenger parent, due to
economic or other circumstances connected with the family to which the child belongs is
unable to attend the school or educational institution, it may, by order and subject to such
conditions, if any, as it may think fit to impose, permit the child to attend any approved
school or institution established as a part time institution.

9, The Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

5
46 of 1993.

15

20

25

30


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

For centuries the practice of employing persons for carrying human excreta on theit
heads or like wise is in existence in every part of our country. In fact it has become a here-
ditary, profession and generation after generation the scavengers have no other option. but
to perform scavenging jobs for their subsistence. This has resulted in total illiteracy among
the children of scavengers who if given proper chance can prove to be genius and outstanding
students but they are forced to do the scavenging jobs which is a continuing stigma on our
social fabric. To do away with this dehumanising practice the Government have recently
got enacted through the Parliament a legislation titled the Employment of Manual
Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993 which makes the
employment or engagement of manual scavengers a punishable offence. But this is not
enough. This have to remove the causes from their roots. We have to educate the scavengers
particularly their children, majority of whom live below the poverty line. Their income is
meagre and they struggle throughout their lives just to make both ends meet so they can
not even think of primary education what to talk of higher education including technical
education.

It is, therefore, necessary that the Central and State Governments should provide
free educational facilities including higher studies to the children of scavengers for their
proper upliftment. They should be provided with books, uniforms, stationery, transportation
and hostel facilities to help them in getting better opportunities of employment and raise
their standard of living. Then only the abnoxious practice of manual scavenging can be
wiped out from our country.

Hence this Bill.

S.S. AHLUWALIA.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

.Clause 3 of the Bill provides that appropriate Goverament shall conduct a survey to
find out the children of scavengers who require education. Clause 4 provides for special
educational facilities for the children of Scavengers. Clause 7 provides for the appointment
of Attendance authorities. This Bill, if enacted and brought into operation will involve a
recurring expenditure of about one hundred crore rupees from the Consolidated Fund of
India per annum.

A non recurring expenditure of rupees ten crores is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to the matters of 0०४८७ only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

af


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to provide special educational facilities to the children of scavengers or Safai Karamcharis
who were in the past engaged in or employed for manually carrying human excreta in
the country and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri S. 3. Ahluwalia, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3224RS—06.11.2001.