Short title
and com-
mencement.
THE INDECENT REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN
(PROHIBITION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Indecent Representation of W omen (Prohibition) Act, 1986.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition)
Amendment  Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in section 2,—
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(a) “advertisement” includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper or other
document or any audio or visual representation made by means of any light,
laser light, sound, smoke, gas or electric form or through any other media, for
the purpose of promotion of any goods, service, place, person, event or
organisation;’;
Amendment
of section 2.
60 of 1986.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. LXX of 2012
5
10

2
(ii) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(aa) “electronic form” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (r) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000;’;
(iii) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(b) “distribution” includes all method of distribution, either by way of
samples or making available for public access through broadcast, transmission
or uploading on website or in any other printed or electronic form, whether for
profit or otherwise;’;
(iv) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(c) “indecent representation of women” means—
(i) publication or distribution in any manner, of any material depicting
women as a sexual object or which is lascivious or appeals to the prurient
interests; or
(ii) depiction, publication or distribution in any manner, of the figure
of a woman, her form or body or any part thereof in such a way as to have
the effect of being indecent or derogatory to or denigrating women or
which is likely to deprave, corrupt or injure the public morality or morals;’;
(v) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(da) “material” includes any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing,
drawing, painting, photograph, representation in any form, figure or any other
content in printed, audio, visual or electronic form;’;
(vi) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(g) “publish” includes—
(i) to prepare or print in any book, newspaper, magazine, poster,
graffiti, periodicals or any form of printed matter, digital or in any other
format; or
(ii) to distribute or broadcast through audio-visual media including
cable, computer, broadband satellite transmission or any other form,
to any person so as to communicate or make it available to the public;’.
3. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“4. No person shall publish or distribute or cause to be published or cause to be
distributed by any means any material which contains indecent representation of
women in any form:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to—
(a) any material,—
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the
public good on the ground that such material is in the interest of science,
literature, art or learning or other objects of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used for bona fide religious purposes; or
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise
represented on or in—
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958; or
21 of 2000.
Substitution of
new section
for section 4.
Prohibition of
indecent
representation
of women.
24 of 1958.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(ii) any temple, or any car used for the conveyance of idols, or kept
or used for any religious purpose; or
(c) any film in respect of which the provisions of Part II of the Cinematograph
Act, 1952 will be applicable.”.
4. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) in the opening portion, for the words beginning with “Subject to such rules”
and ending with “for which he is so authorised”, the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Notwithstanding anything in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, any
police officer not below the rank of  Inspector, or any other officer of the Central
Government or a State Government authorised by the Central Government or the
State Government may”;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words “seize any advertisement or any book, pamphlet,
paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph, representation or figure”, the
words “seize any advertisement or material” shall be substituted.
5. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“6. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 or section 4 shall be
punishable on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years and also with fine not less than fifty thousand rupees but
which may extend to one lakh rupees; and in the event of a second or subsequent
conviction with imprisonment for a term of not less than two years but which may
extend to seven years and also with a fine not less than one lakh rupees but which may
extend to five lakh rupees.”.
6. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of,
any other law for the time being in force.
12. The officers authorised under section 5 shall be deemed, while acting or
purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.”.
37 of 1952.
Amendment
of section 5.
Substitution of
new section
for section 6.
Penalty.
Insertion of
new sections
11 and 12.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Officers to be
public
servants.45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 (the Act) was enacted
to prohibit indecent representation of women through advertisements or in publications,
writings, paintings, figures or in any other manner. However, the Act in its present form
relates primarily to the print media. Since the enactment of the Act, technological revolution
has resulted in development of new forms of communication, such as, internet and satellite
based communication, multi-media messaging, cable television, etc. It has , thus, become
necessary to widen the scope of the Act so as to cover the above forms of media. Further,
considering that the National Crimes Records Bureau recorded a total number of  845, 895
and 453 cases of violation of the provisions of the Act in the years 2009, 2010 and 2011,
respectively, for the law to be more effective, stringent punishment which acts as deterrent
also becomes essential. It is also felt that the power to enter any premises and conduct
search and seizure of any material, if there is reason to believe that an offence under the Act
has been committed, should be made more effective and the officers conducting such searches
are given sufficient protection while carrying out their duties under the Act.
2. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Indecent  Representation of Women
(Prohibition) Act, 1986 to ensure more effective protection to women against their indecent
representation. The Bill, inter alia, provides to—
(a) define the “indecent represenation of women” to mean the depiction of the
figure or form or body or any part thereof, of a woman in such a way as to have the
effect of being indecent or derogatory to or denigrating women or is likely to deprave,
corrupt or injure public morality;
(b) amend the definitions of  “advertisement” and “distribution” and also to
define “electronic form”,  “material” and “publish”;
(c) prohibit the publication or distribution of any material, by any means, which
contains indecent representation of women in any form;
(d) increase the maximum imprisonment from two years to three years and fine
from two thousand rupees to a fine of not less than fifty thousand rupees which may
be extended to one lakh rupees for first offence; and increase the minimum imprisonment
for second or subsequent offence from six months to two years and maximum
imprisonment from five years to seven years and minimum fine from ten thousand
rupees to one lakh rupees and maximum fine from one lakh rupees to five lakh rupees;
(e) amend section 5 of the Act so as to authorise any police officer not below the
rank of Inspector to make investigation of offences under the Act.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; KRISHNA TIRATH
The 30th  November, 2012.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDECENT REPRESENTA TION OF WOMEN (PROHIBITION) ACT, 1986
(60 OF 1986)
*****
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “advertisement” includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper or other document
and also includes any visible representation made by means of any light, sound,
smoke or gas;
(b) “distribution” includes distribution by way of samples whether free or
otherwise;
(c) “indecent representation of women” means the depiction in any manner of
the figure of a woman, her form or body or any part thereof in such a way as to have the
effect of being indecent, or derogatory to, or denigrating, women, or is likely to deprave,
corrupt or injure the public morality or morals;
*****
4. No person shall produce or cause to be produced, sell, let to hire, distribute, circulate
or send by post any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph,
representation or figure which contains indecent representation of women in any form:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to—
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph,
representation or figure—
(i) the publication of which is proved  to be justified as being for the public
good on the ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing,
painting, photograph, representation or figure is in the interest of science,
literature, art, or learning or other objects of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious purposes;
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise represented
on or in—
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient Monument
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958; or
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the conveyance  of  idols, or kept or
used for any religious purpose;
(c) any film in respect of which the provisions of Part II of the Cinematograph
Act, 1952 will be applicable.
5. (1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, any Gazetted Officer authorised by
the State Government may, within the local limits of the area for which he is so authorised,—
*****
(b) seize any advertisement or any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing,
drawing, painting, photograph, representation or figure which he has reason to believe
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act;
*****
Definitions.
Prohibition
of publication
or sending by
post of
books,
pamphlets,
etc.,
containing
indecent
representation
of women.
24 of 1958.
37 of 1952.
Powers to
enter and
search.
5

6
Penalty. 6. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 or section 4 shall be
punishable on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and in the
event of a second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a term of not less than six
months but which may extend to five years and also with a fine not less than ten thousand
rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.
*****

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986.
————
[Shrimati  Krishna Tirath, Minister of State (Independent Charge) in the Ministry of
Women and Child Development]
GMGIPMRND—4038RS(S3)—11-12-2012.