10

AS INTRODUCED IN THE Ragya SABHA

Bill No. LXX of 2000

THE PAYMENT OF UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE BILL, 2000
A
BILL

to provide for the payment of unemployment allowance to the unemployed persons and
for matters connected therewith.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Payment of Unemployment Allowance Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for
different States and Union Territories.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “allowance” means the monthly payment to be made to an unemployed
person under This Act;

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.


Payment of
allowance to
unemployed
persons

Expenditure on
unemployment
allowance to be
shared by Cen-
tral and State
Govts.

Power to make
rules.

(0) “unemployed person” means any adult person who has no ostensible means
of livelihood and whose name is registered in an employment exchange;

(c) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. (1) Every unemployed person shall be entitled to the payment of a monthly
allowance at a rate and subject to such conditions as may he prescribed after consulting
the Governments of the States and Union Territories by the Central Government.

(2) While fixing the rates of allowance under sub-section (/) educational qualification,
skill, experience and other relevant conditions of the unemployed person shall be taken
into consideration.

4. The Central Government shall bear eighty percent of the total expenditure
incurred on the payment of allowance under this Act and the rest of the expenditure
shall be met by the respective State Governments and Union Territory Administrations,

5. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely,—

(a) the maximum and minimum amount of allowance payable under section
3 depending on the qualification and other relevant conditions of the applicant.

(09) manner of making application for payment of allowance;

(c) requirements for an applicant for being eligible for receiving allowance
such as educational qualifications, skill, experience, etc.

(d) such other matters which may be necessary to prescribe for carrying out
the provisions of this Act.

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,

before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rules or both Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.

20

25

30


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The problem of unemployment has assumed alarming situation in our Country
particularly in rural areas of economically backward regions. This has caused and is causing
aggravated frustration amongst younger generation. Their energy is not being utilised for
building the Nation. They, drivon to extreme desperation and deprivation, take to the path
of violence and crime. Empty sermons of morality, ethics, nationalism, religious discourses
and pious assurances of social, political and religious leaders are unable to check the trend
of youth taking to violence and criminality. It is imperative for the political leadership of
the country to take urgent corrective measures ० generate employment opportunities for
the youth but in the nature of things it is a long process before projects and schemes throw
up adequate employment opportunities to the young men and women. Alternative to this
is that the country should bear the burden of paying soine unemployment allowance to the
unemployed persons till they get employment enabling them to earn their daily biead. The
Bill seeks to achieve this objective.

DIPANKAR MUKHERJEE


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall bear eighty percent
expenditure incurred on payment of unemployment allowance. The Bill if enacted will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India on account of unemployment
allowance to be paid to the unemployed persons. It is however difficult to estimate
accurately, at this stage, the likely expenditure involved. On rough estimate, the recurring
expenditure will be to the tune of rupees two thousand crore. No non-recurring expenditure
is likely to be incurred.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules to carry out
the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of
legislature power is of normal character.


RAJYA SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for the payment of unemployment allowance to the unemployed
persons and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Dipankar Mukherjee, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4854RS—22. 11.2000.