1
THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Motor V ehicles (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Motor V ehicles Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
section 147,—
(1) in sub-section (1), in clause (b), for sub-clause (ii) and Explanation thereto,
the following shall be substituted, namely:—
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022
Bill No. LXX of  2022
Amendment
of section
147.
5
59 of 1988.

2
"(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger of a motor
vehicle including, but not limited to, gratuitous passengers and pillion riders,
except gratuitous passengers of a goods vehicle, caused by or arising out of the
use of the motor vehicle."
(2) in sub-section ( 3), after the words "any other prescribed matters," the
words ", save as otherwise provided by or under this Act," shall be inserted.
3. In section 150 of the principal Act,—
(1) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(ii) a condition excluding driving, with the connivance of or knowledge
of the owner, by a named person or by any person who is not duly licensed or by
any person who has been disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving licence
during the period of disqualification; or"
(2) after sub-section (4), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that on occurrence of any of the eventualities set forth in clause
(a) of sub-section (2), the insurer shall pay the awarded compensation in the first
instance to third parties including gratuitous passengers and pillion riders, and
may thereafter recover the same from the insured persons."
(3) in sub-section (5), after the words "otherwise than in the manner provided
for in sub-section (2)", the words "subject to the proviso to sub-section (4)," shall be
inserted.
4. In section 157 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(2) The transferee may apply in the prescribed form to the insurer for making
necessary changes in regard to the fact of transfer in the certificate of insurance and
the policy described in the certificate in his favour, and the insurer shall make the
necessary changes in the certificate and the policy of insurance in regard to the
transfer of insurance:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-clause, or failure in compliance
thereof, shall render the provisions of sub-section (1) invalid."
5. In sub-section (3) of section 166 of the principal Act,—
(1) in sub-section (3), for the words "six months", the words "three years" shall
be substituted.
(2) after sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that an application for compensation may be entertained after
the prescribed period, if the claimant satisfies the Claims Tribunal that he had
sufficient cause for not making an application within such period."
Amendment
of section
150.
Amendment
of section
157.
Amendment
of section
166.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 [Act No. 59 of 1988] contained certain timeframes under
sub-section (3) of section 166 for filing application for compensation in respect of accidents
before the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunals. However, those periods of limitation were
subsequently removed by omitting sub-section ( 3) of section 166, vide section 53 of the
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1994. This expunging of timeframe might have been made
by taking into consideration of the hardships faced by the victims of the accidents in
complying the said time limit. Thenceforth, the victims of accidents have been at liberty to
file application for compensation before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunals without
reckoning the period between the date of accident and filing of application.
However, the Government promulgated the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 on
09.08.2019, whereby a new sub-section (3) was inserted to section 166, by virtue of section
53 of the Amendment Act, viz.:—
"(3) No application for compensation shall be entertained unless it is made
within six months of the occurrence of the accident."
The Government notified the implementation of the above provision with effect from
01.04.2022. It is to be noted that the above amendment, in reality, shall be advantageous to
insurance companies as innumerable number of applications for compensation can be denied
merely on the grounds of the delay in filing applications. If a victim of an accident is bedridden
for more than six months, he may not be able to file an application for compensation within
the presently stipulated time period of six months. Though, the victim can, in such a
circumstance, authorize an agent for filing application by invoking clause (d) of sub-section (1)
of section 166 of the principal Act, the same would not always be feasible on practical
considerations since the person so injured has to 'duly authorize' the agent.
Similarly, a claimant needs several information like the registration details of the vehicle
involved in the accident, insurance details, driving licence details, etc. for filing an application
which may not always be effortless to collect. Prior to the latest amendments, the victims of
accidents generally inclined to rely on the charge sheet filed by the police authorities before
the courts, to get hold of the above mentioned details. It is true that a new section 159 has
been inserted in the principal Act by virtue of the Amendment Act No. 32 of 2019 thereby
making the police officers duty-bound, during the investigation, to prepare an accident
information report to facilitate the settlement of claim in such form and manner, within three
months and containing such particulars and submit the same to the Claims Tribunal and
such other agency as may be prescribed. Further, another newly inserted section 160  vide
the Amendment Act No. 32 of 2019 makes it imperative that the registering authorities and
officer-in-charge of police stations shall furnish to the claimants, on payment of the prescribed
fee, any information at the disposal of the said authority or the said police officer relating to
the identification marks and other particulars of the vehicle and the name and address of the
person who was using the vehicle at the time of the accident or was injured by it and the
property, if any, damaged. However, on a practical consideration, the investigation of police
authorities generally tends to exceed the prescribed time limits if we examine the history of
motor accident investigations. Several factors may lead to the delay in completion of
investigations. Besides the usual factors, the investigation may get delayed in cases of
requirement of availing the Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL) Reports in cases where there
arises a dispute as to who was driving the vehicle at the time of accident, ascertaining the
identity of vehicle involved in an accident in cases where the driver ran off with the vehicle,
etc. These extraneous reasons are beyond the control of investigation agencies, thereby
3

4
also rendering the provision contained in sub-section (4) of section 166 of the principal Act
toothless in many cases in so far as the time-frame is concerned. These aspects were not
seen duly envisaged while introducing the new timeframe.
It is equally pertinent to note that the limitation period prescribed in the Limitation
Act, 1963 for filing even money suits, in most of the circumstances, is three years. All the
above aspects make it exigent that the victims of accidents are to be provided with reasonable
time period for filing application for compensation before Motor Accidents Claims Tribunals.
There should also be a provision for condoning the delay for the cases filed after the
prescribed period, it there are sufficient causes for the delay occasioned.
Likewise, in a catena of judgments the Supreme Court held on the basis of the existing
provisions of the Motor V ehicles Act, 1988, that 'Liability Only Policy' (Act Only Policy) by
itself, being a statutory policy, won't cover the risk of death of or bodily injury to gratuitous
passengers including pillion riders. Though the Supreme Court, in a few of such cases,
directed the insurer to pay the amount of compensation to the claimants in the first instance
and thereafter to recover it from the insured, the same is seen to be by invoking the inherent
powers  of Supreme Court under article 142 of the Constitution of India. The term 'third party'
shall include all persons other than the insured, who is the first party, and the insurer, who is
the second party. All other persons, including gratuitous passengers and pillion riders, who
are neither the insured nor the insurer, shall be treated as 'third party' for the purpose of
insurance coverage in a Liability Only Policy. As such, it is imperative to amend the existing
Act, to cover gratuitous passengers including pillion riders also within the ambit of Liability
Only Policy so as to protect their interests in the case of an accident. It is equally significant
to omit the condition in sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 147 of the
Act restricting the coverage of insurance to only those accidents occurred in a public place.
Sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 150 of the existing Act empowers
the Insurer to raise the following ground as a defence for claiming impunity from payment of
compensation in case of an accident, viz:
"(ii) a condition excluding driving by a named person or by any person who is
not duly licenced or by any person who has been disqualified for holding or obtaining
a driving licence during the period of disqualification or driving under the influence
of alcohol or drugs as laid down in section 185;"
It is pertinent to note that one of the grounds, i.e. driving under the influence of
alcohol or drugs as laid down in section 185, was not there in the original Act and that the
same was subsequently incorporated vide the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019. The
real intention of Legislature while passing the original Act was to protect the interests of
third parties in an accident. Their insurance coverage shall not be absolved by the reason of
consumption of alcohol or drugs by the driver of the offending vehicle, against which the
latter can be prosecuted as per the penal provisions. It shall not preclude third parties from
claiming insurance coverage. As such, it is the need of the hour to omit the said defence from
the existing Act. Similarly, a condition shall also be inserted in sub-clause (ii) to protect the
interests of the owner who doesn't have any knowledge or connivance in permitting a
person to drive in violation of the stipulated conditions.
Furthermore, other defences provided in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 150
shall be restricted in such a way that the insurer shall, in such a circumstance, pay the
awarded compensation in the first instance to third parties including gratuitous passengers
and pillion riders and may thereafter recover the same from the insured. The Act shall perform
as a welfare legislation for the benefit of third parties by ensuring that they receive the fruits
of the awards obtained by them straightaway with an element of certainty and not to make
them wait for a prolonged recovery proceeding as against the owner of the vehicle.
Similarly, sub-section (2) of section 157 of the principal Act is apparently trying to limit
the protection granted under sub-section (1) thereof of deemed transfer of insurance in case
of transfer of vehicle. Further, sub-section (2) does not contain any provision explaining the

5
consequence of not taking any such procedural steps stipulated therein by the transferee.
Absence of such a provision emphasises the fact that transfer of insurance policy is controlled
by sub-section (1) only, and it takes place the moment there is transfer of ownership of a
vehicle together with its insurance policy. Hence sub-section (2) of section 157 of the Principal
Act needs to be modified suitably.
The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 is a benevolent social legislation in so far as the protection
of interests of victims of motor accidents is concerned. It is a pressing priority that the
principal Act, therefore, be amended to ensure the said purpose.
The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
DR.  JOHN  BRITTAS.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988
(ACT NO. 59 OF 1988)
* * * * * *
147. (1) In order to comply with the requirements of this Chapter, a policy of insurance
must be a policy which—
(a) is issued by a person who is an authorised insurer; and
(b) insures the person or classes of persons specified in the policy to the extent
specified in sub-section (2)—
(i) against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of the
death of or bodily injury to any person including owner of the goods or his
authorised representative carried in the motor vehicle or damage to any property
of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the motor vehicle in a public
place;
(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger of a transport
vehicle, except gratuitous passengers of a goods vehicle, caused by or arising
out of the use of the motor vehicle in a public place.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the
death of or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property of a third party
shall be deemed to have been caused by or to have arisen out of, the use of a
vehicle in a public place notwithstanding that the person who is dead or injured
or the property which is damaged was not in a public place at the time of the
accident, if the act or omission which led to the accident occurred in a public
place.
* * * * * *
(3) A policy shall be of no effect for the purposes of this Chapter unless and until there
is issued by the insurer in favour of the person by whom the policy is effected, a certificate
of insurance in the prescribed form and containing the prescribed particulars of any condition
subject to which the policy is issued and of any other prescribed matters; and different
forms, particulars and matters may be prescribed in different cases.
* * * * * *
150. (1)* * * * * *
(2) No sum shall be payable by a insurer under sub-section ( 1) in respect of any
judgment or award unless, before the commencement of the proceedings in which the
judgment or award is given the insurer had notice through the court or, as the case may be,
the Claims Tribunal of the bringing of the proceedings, or in respect of such judgment  or
award  so long as its execution is stayed pending an appeal; and an insurer to whom notice
of the bringing of any such proceedings is so given shall be entitled to be made a party
thereto, and to defend the action on any of the following grounds, namely:—
(a) that there has been a breach of a specified condition of the policy, being one
of the following conditions, namely:—
(i) a condition excluding the use of the vehicle—
6
Requirement
of policies and
limits of
liability.
Duty of
insurers to
satisfy
judgments and
awards against
persons
insured in
respect of
third party
risks.

7
(A) for hire or reward, where the vehicle is on the date of the contract of insurance
a vehicle not covered by a permit to ply for hire or reward; or
(B) for organised racing and speed testing; or
(C) for a purpose not allowed by the permit under which the vehicle is used,
where the vehicle is a transport vehicle; or
(D) without side-car being attached where the vehicle is a two-wheeled vehicle;
or
(ii) a condition excluding driving by a named person or by any person
who is not duly licenced or by any person who has been disqualified for holding
or obtaining a driving licence during the period of disqualification or driving
under the influence of alcohol or drugs as laid down in section 185; or
(iii) a condition excluding liability for injury caused or contributed to by
conditions of war, civil war, riot or civil commotion; or
(b) that the policy is void on the ground that it was obtained by nondisclosure
of any material fact or by representation of any fact which was false in some material
particular; or
(c) that there is non-receipt of premium as required under section 64VB of the
Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938).
(3) * * * * * *
(4) Where a certificate of insurance has been issued under sub-section (3) of section
147 to the person by whom a policy has been effected, so much of the policy as purports to
restrict the insurance of the persons insured thereby, by reference to any condition other
than those in sub-section (2) shall, as respects such liabilities as are required to be covered
by a policy under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 147, be of no effect.
(5) No insurer to whom the notice referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) has
been given shall be entitled to avoid his liability to any person entitled to the benefit of any
such judgment or award as is referred to in sub-section (1) or in such judgment as is referred
to in sub-section (3) otherwise than in the manner provided for in sub-section (2) or in the
corresponding law of the reciprocating country, as the case may be.
* * * * * *
157. (1) Where a person, in whose favour the certificate of insurance has been issued
in accordance which the provisions of this Chapter, transfers to another person the ownership
of the motor vehicle in respect of which such insurance was taken together with the policy of
insurance relating thereto, the certificate of insurance and the policy described in the certificate
shall be deemed to have been transferred in favour of the person to whom the motor vehicle
is transferred with effect from the date of its transfer.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that such deemed
transfer shall include transfer of rights and liabilities of the said certificate of insurance and
policy of insurance.
(2) The transferee shall apply within fourteen days from the date of transfer in the
prescribed form to the insurer for making necessary changes in regard to the fact of transfer
in the certificate of insurance and the policy described in the certificate in his favour, and the
insurer shall make the necessary changes in the certificate and the policy of insurance in
regard to the transfer of insurance.
* * * * * *
Transfer of
certificate of
insurance.

8
166. (1) An application for compensation arising out of an accident of the nature
specified in sub-section (1) of section 165 may be made—
(a) by the person who has sustained the injury; or
(b) by the owner of the property; or
(c) where death has resulted from the accident, by all or any of the legal
representatives of the deceased; or
(d) by any agent duly authorised by the person injured or all or any of the legal
representatives of the deceased, as the case may be:
Provided that where all the legal representatives of the deceased have not joined
in any such application for compensation, the application shall be made on behalf of or
for the benefit of all the legal representatives of the deceased and the legal
representatives who have not so joined, shall be impleaded as respondents to the
application:
Provided further that where a person accepts compensation under section 164 in
accordance with the procedure provided under section 149, his claims petition before
the Claims Tribunal shall lapse.
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made, at the option of the claimant,
either to the Claims Tribunal having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident occurred
or to the Claims Tribunal within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the claimant resides or
carries on business or within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant resides, and
shall be in such form and contain such particulars as may be prescribed:
(3) No application for compensation shall be entertained unless it is made within six
months of the occurrence of the accident.
* * * * * *
Application
for
compensation.

MGIPMRND—1799RS(S3)—12-12-2022.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
————
(Dr.  John  Brittas, M.P .)