THE SOYA  BEAN  GROWERS’  (REMUNERATIVE  PRICE  AND
WELFARE) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the remunerative price for the produce of the soya bean growers’,
insurance of soya bean crop free of cost and for their overall welfare and for
 matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enancted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Soya Bean Growers (Remunerative Price and Welfare)
Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "fund" means the Soya Bean Growers Welfare Fund established under
section 5; and
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 27TH APRIL, 2012
Bill No. LXX of  2010
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) "soya bean grower" means any persons who cultivates soya bean.
3. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to procure the entire soya bean
crop produced in the country through an agency to be set up for the purpose.
(2) The Central Government shall fix the price of soya bean every year after taking
into consideration,—
(i) the increase in the price of soya bean seeds, pesticides, fertilizers and other
inputs;
(ii) total investment of the soya bean growers; and
(iii) such other factors as may be prescribed.
4. The entire soya bean produced by the soya bean growers shall be compulsorily
insured free of cost of the Central Government against natural calamities, fall in the yield
of soya bean, fall in the price of soya bean and such other eventualities as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Soya Bean
Growers’ Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Government shall contribute to the fund in
such ratio as may be prescribed.
6. The Fund shall be utilised,—
(a) to provide financial assistance to soya bean growers for purchasing soya
bean seeds, pesticides and fertilizers, and in cases of low yields of soya bean or loss of
their crops due to rains, storms, floods, hailstorms and drought;
(b) to pay compensation to the next of kin of soya bean growers in the event of
their death;
(c) to pay life insurance premium on behalf of the soya bean growers;
(d) to provide free health facilities to soya bean growers and their families;
(e) to provide assistance to the soya bean growers in the event of disability; and
(f) for such other purposes as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Procurement
of soya bean
and fixation
of its
remunerative
price.
Compulsory
insurance of
soya bean.
Soya Bean
Growers’
Welfare Fund.
Utilisation of
Fund.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Soya bean is one of the main commercial crops of the country. Export of this crop is not
only benefiting the industry sector of the country but the Government is also earning foreign
currency. But, soya bean growers of the country are facing problem as they are not getting
remunerative price of their produce. Soya bean growing is proving non-profitable for the
farmers due to increase in the prices of soya bean seeds, fertilizers, pesticides and other
inputs. Due to high investment in cultivation of soya bean farmers have to go for loans and
on being unable to repay loans, they are forced to commit suicide. Being a cash crop,
insurance facility is also not available to the farmers.
The condition of soya bean growers of the leading soya bean producing State of the
country i.e. the State of Madhya Pradesh, is becoming pitiable. Farmers of the State are
getting into debt trap and are on the verge of committing suicide as they are not getting
remunerative price even after high investment in the soya bean crop. The condition of the
soya bean growers of other States is more or less the same.
Therefore, the responsibilities of the Government is not only to fix the remunerative
price of soya bean to protect the interest of the soya bean growers but also to provide for
free insurance and setting up of Soya Bean Grower Welfare Fund. There is an urgent need of
enacting a law in this regard.
Hence, this Bill.
PRABHAT JHA
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for procurement of soya bean from soya bean growers by
an agency to be set up by the Central Government and fixation of remunerative price for soya
bean by the Central Government. Clause 4 provides for compulsory free of cost insurance by
the Central Government of soya bean crop against natural calamities. Clause 5 provides for
setting up of a Soya Bean Growers’ Welfare Fund to which the Central Government and the
State Governments shall contribute in such ratio, as may be prescribed. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a recurring expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore may be involved per annum. A
non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore may also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of the Bill. It will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of legislative
power is of normal character.
5

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the remunerative price for the produce of the soya bean growers’, insurance
of soya bean crop free of cost and for their overall welfare and for
 matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Prabhat Jha, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—436RS(S3)—27-04-2012.