‘ a As Passep ny THE RAJYA SABHA

ne ON THE Ist Auaust, 2006
vw
nN न Bill No. LXXIII-C of 2003
THE CANTONMENTS BILL, 2006

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CHAPTERI
PRELIMINARY

Causes

can 7

RRR

1. Short title, extent and Commencement.
- By

2 Definitions, }
& CHAPTER I

DEFINITION AND DELIMITATION OF CANTONMENTS
Definition of cantonments,

Alteration of limits of cantonments.
. The effect of including area in cantonment. -

Disposal of cantonment fund and cantonment development fund when area ceases
to be a cantonment.

7. Disposal of cantonment fund and cantonment development fund when area ceases
to be included in a cantonment. है

8 Application of funds and property transferred under sections 6 and 7.
9. Limitations of operation of Act.
CHAPTER III
CANTONMENT BOARDS
Boards

avy

10. Cantonment Board.

11. Incorporation of Cantonment Board.

12. Constitution of Cantonment Boards.

13. Power to vary constitution of Boards in special circumstances.
14. Term of office of members.

15. Filling of vacancies.

16. Vacancies in special cases.

17. Oath of affirmation.

18. Resignation.

19. President and Vice President.

20. Term of office of Vice President.

21. Duties of President.

. Duties of Vice President.

. Allowances to Vice President and Members.
Appointment of Chief Executive Officer.

. Duties of Chief Executive Officer.

Special power of Chief Executive Officer..


CLauses

. Electoral rolls,

(i) act _

—_

Elections

. Qualification for being a member of the Board,

27.

28. Qualification of electors,
29.

30.

. Interpretation.
31, Power to make rules regulating

32. Members not to vote on matter
33. Liability of members.

३4, Removal of members.

35. Consequences of removal.

elections.
Members
in which he is interesteg,

३6. Member of the Board to be‘deemed a public servant.

37. Disqualification of person as an
38. Cantonment employee to be dee:

Employees

employee of Board.
med a public servant.

is Procedure

39. Meetings.

40. Business to be transacted.
41. Quorum.

42. Presiding Officer.

43. Minutes. -<ू

44. Meetings to be public.
45. Method of deciding questions.
46. CivilArea.

47. Committees for civil areas.

48. Power to make regulations.

49. Joint action with other local autho:
50. Report on administration. है

खा

rity.

Control
- Power of Central Government to require production of documents.

51,
52. Inspection.
53. Power tofcall for documents,

54. Power to require execution of work, etc.

55. Power to provide for enforcement of direction under section 54.
56. Power to override decision of Board.

57. Power of Central Government to review,

58. Power of General Officer Command:
under section 56 or otherwise.

ing-in-Chief, the Command, on reference

9, Power of Central Government on a reference made under section 56.

60. Supersession of Board,


222 B

=
BPanpZzesseae

8 82839 जन

,

FESRREB

CLAUSES
61.
Power of Central Government to issue directions to the Board.

ii)

Validity of proceedings
Validity of proceedings, etc.
CHAPTERIV
DUTIES AND DISCRETIONARY FUNCTIONS OF BOARDS
Duties of Board.
Power to manage property,
Discretionary functions of Board.

Power of expenditure for educational, health and other purposes outside the
cantonment.

CHAPTER V
TAXES AND Fees
Imposition of Taxation
General power of taxation. है
Charging of fees.
Norms of Property Tax.
Framing of preliminary proposals.
Objections and disposal thereof.
Imposition of tax.

Definition of “annual rateable value”.

. Incidence of taxation.

Assessment list

Assessment list.
Revision of assessment list.
Authentication of assessment list.
Evidential value of assessment list.
Amendment of assessment list.
Preparation of new assessment list.
Notice of transfers.
Notice of erection of buildings.

Remission and refund
Demolition, etc., of buildings.
Remission of tax.
Power to require entry in assessment list of details of buildings.

. Notice to be given of the circumstances in which remission or refund is claimed.
|. What buildings, etc., are to be deemed vacant.

Notice to be given of every occupation of vacant building or house.


(iv)

One “Charge on immovable property

SRRER BEB

Ss

101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.

107.

108.
109.

110.
ll.
112.
113.
114.
115.
116.
117.
118.

119.
120.
121.

Tax on buildings and land to be a charge thereon.
Octroi, terminal tax and toll

Inspection of imported goods, octroi, terminal tax and toll, etc.

Power to seize, etc.

Lease of octroi, terminal tax or toll.
Appeals

Appeals against assessment.

. Costs of appeal.

Recovery of costs from Board.
Conditions of right to appeal.

. Finality of appellate orders.

Payment and recovery of taxes
Time and manner of payment of taxes.

). Public notice for taxes due.
). Notice of demand.

Recovery of tax.
Interest payable on taxes due.
Distress.
Disposal of distrained property.
Attachment and sale of immovable property.
Recovery from a person about to leave cantonment and refund of surplus sale
proceeds, if any.
Power to institute suit for recovery.
Special provisions relating to taxation, ete.
Board to be a municipality for taxation purposes.
Payment to be made to a Board as service charges by the Central Government or
State Government. aa
Power to make special provision for conservancy in certain cases.
Exemption in case of buildings.
General power of exemption. ~
Exemption of poor persons.
Composition.
Irrecoverable debts. न
Obligation to disclose liability.
Immaterial error not to affect liability.
Distraint not to be invalid by reason of immaterial defect.
CHAPTER VI
(CANTONMENT FUND AND PROPERTY
Cantonment Fund and Cantonment Development Fund
Cantonment fund.
Custody of Cantonment Fund and Cantonment Development Fund.
Power of Board to borrow money.


(v)

Clauses
Property
122. Property.
123. Application of cantonment fund, cantonment development fund and property.

. Acquisition of immovable property.
. Power to make rules regarding cantonment fund, cantonment development fund

and property.
CHAPTER VI
Contracts
. Contracts by whom to be executed.
. Sanction.
. Execution of contract.

. Contracts improperly executed not to be binding on a Board.

CHAPTER VIII
SANITATION AND THE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF DISEASE
Sanitary authorities

). Responsibility for sanitation.
- General duties of Health Officer.

Conservancy and Sanitation
Public latrines, urinals and conservancy establishments,

. Duty of occupier to collect and deposit rubbish, etc.
}.. Power of Board to undertake private conservancy arrangement..
. Deposits and disposal of rubbish, etc.

Cesspools, receptacles, for filth, etc.

. Filling up of tank, etc, 5
. Provision of latrines, etc.

. Sanitation in factories, etc.

. Private latrines.

- Special provisions for collection of rubbish and solid waste management.

Removal of congested buildings.

. Overcrowding of dwelling houses,
4 Power to require repair or alteration of building.
. Power to require land or building to be cleansed.

Prohibition in respect of air pollutant.

|. Power to order disuse of house.

Removal of noxious vegetation.

. Agriculture and irrigation.

Burial and burning grounds

पर Power to call for information regarding burial and burning grounds.
. Permission for use of new burial or burning ground.

. Power to require closing of burial or burning ground.

श्र Exemption from operation of sections 150 to 152.

|. Removal of corpses.


(vi)

CLAUSES

155.
156.
157.
158.
159.
160.

161.

162.
163.
164.
165.
166.
167.

168.
169.
170.
171.
172.
173.
174.
175.
176,
177.

179.
180,
181.
182.
183.

Prevention of infectious, contagious or communicable diseases
Obligation concerning infectious, contagious or communicable diseases.
Blood Bank.

Special measures in case of outbreak of infectious or epidemic diseases,
Power to require names of. dairyman’s customers.

Power to require names of a washerman’s customers.

Power to require names of patients or customers of.a medical practitioner or
paramedical workers.

Report after inspection of dairy or washerman or medical practitioner's place of
business.

Action on report submitted by Health Officer.

Examination of milk, washed clothes or needles, syrringes, etc.
Contamination of public conveyance.

Disinfection of public conveyance.

Penalty for failure to report. .

Driver of conveyance not bound to carry person suffering from infectious or
contagious disease.

Disinfection of buildings or articles therein.
Destruction of infectious hut or shed
Temporary shelter for inmates of disinfected or destroyed building or shed.
Disinféction of building before letting the same.
Disposal of infected article without disinfection.
Means of disinfection.
Making or selling of food, etc., or washing clothes by infected person,
Power to restrict or prohibit sale of food or drink.
Control over wells, tanks, etc.
Disposal of infectious corpse.
Hospitals and dispensaries
Maintenance or aiding of hospitals or dispensaries,
Medical supplies, appliances, etc,
Free patients.
Paying patients,
Power to order person to attend hospital or dispensary.
Power to exclude from cantonment persons refusing to attend hospital or
dispensary.
Control of traffic for hygienic purposes
Routes for pilgrims and others.
Special conditions regarding essential services
Conditions of service of Safaikaramcharis and others.


(vii)
CLauses

CHAPTER IX
Water-SurpLy, DRAINAGE AND SEWAGE COLLECTION

Water Supply
186. Maintenance of water-supply,

187, Terms of Water-Supply.

. Board to carry out survey and formulate proposals.
. Control over sources of public water-supply.

Power to require maintenance or closing of, private source of public drinking
water-supply,

191. Supply of water.
192. Power to require water-supply to be taken.
193. Supply of water under agreement.

194. Board not liable for failure of supply.

195. Conditions of universal application.

196. Supply to persons outside cantonment.
197. Penalty.

Water, drainage and other connections
. Power of Board to lay wires, connections, etc.

|. Wires, etc., laid above surface of ground.
. Connection with main not to be made without permission. a
- Power to prescribe ferrules and to establish meters, etc.
Power of inspection.
Power to fix rates and charges.
Application of this Chapter to Government water Supplies
Government water-supply.
Water supply for domestic consumption.
Recovery of charges.

838

8

Supply of water from Government water-supply to the Board.
Functions of the Board in relation to distribution of bulk supply.
Special provisions concerning drainage and sewage.

. Construction of and Control of drains and sewage collection and disposal works.
. Certain matters not to be passed into cantonment drains.

212. Application by owners and occupiers to drain into cantonment drains,
213. Drainage of undrained premises.

214, New premises not to be erected without drains.

215. Power to drain group or block of premises by combined operations.
216. Power to close or limit the use of private drains in certain cases.

217. Use of drain by a person other than the owner.

218. Sewage and rain water drains to be distinct,
219.

डे है दे हे हे हे BR

Be
श्र

Power to require owner to carry out certain works for satisfactory drainage.
. Appointment of places for the emptying of drains and collection of sewage.


(viii)

CLAUSES

221
222.

BEBERNBB

8

3.

BR

5.

डे. डे हे थे हे

ES

EER

245.

8998 989७9 838 सै हे

. Order of stoppage of buildi

|. Unauthorised buildings over drains, etc,
. Drainage and sewer connections,

Miscellaneous

. Connection with water works and drains not to be made without Permission,

Buildings, railways and private streets not to be erected or constructed over
drains or water works without permission,

. Rights of user of property for aqueducts, lines, etc,
. Power of owner of premises to place pipes and drains through land belonging to

other persons.

. Power to require railway level, etc. to be raised or lowered,
. Power to execute work after giving notice to the person liable.
. Power to affix shafts, etc., for ventilation of drain or cesspool.

Power to examine and test drains, etc., believed to be defective.

. Bulk delivery of sewage by the Board.
. Employment of Government agencies for repair, etc.
Work to be done by licensed plumber,

Prohibition of certain acts.
CHAPTER X
TOWN PLANNING AND CONTROL OVER BUILDINGS, ETC.
Preparation of land use plan.

. Sanction for building.

Notice of new buildings.

Conditions of valid notice

Powers of Board under certain sections exercisable by Chief Executive Officer.
Power of Board to sanction or refuse,

ing or works in certain cases and disposal of things

en :

Power to sanction general scheme for Prevention of overcrowding, etc.

removed.

. Compensation.
. Completion notice.

Lapse of sanction.
Restrictions on use of buildings,
Period for completion of building.

. Completion Certificate.

. Illegal erection and re-erection,

. Power to stop erection or re-erection or to demolish.

. Power to seal unauthorised Constructions.

). Courts not to entertain Proceedings in certain Cases. —_
- Power to make bye-laws,

Prohibition of structures or fixtures which Cause obstruction in streets.

. Power to attach brackets for lamps and other accessories.

Maintenance of Roads,

i. |


(&)

Clauses

Streets
|. Temporary occupation of street, fand, etc,
. Closing and opening of streets.
. Names of streets and numbers of buildings.
. Group Housing Schemes :
Boundary walls, hedges and fences.
Felling, lopping and trimming of trees.
. Digging of public land.
. Improper use of land,

हैं 8 हैं> 8 8 6 8

CHAPTER XI

MARKETS, SLAUGHTER-Houses, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS
. Public markets and slaughter-houses.
. Use of public market.
. Power to transfer by public auction, etc.
. Stallages, rents, etc., to be published.
. Private markets and slaughter-houses.
270. Conditions of grant of licence for private market or slaughter-house.
271. Penalty for keeping market or slaughter-house open without licence, etc.
272. Penalty for using unlicensed market or slaughter-house.

है है 2 19 68

273. Prohibition and restriction of use of slaughter-house.
274. Power to inspect slaughter-houses.
275. Power to regulate certain activities.

Trades and occupations
276. Provision of washing places.
277. Licences required for carrying on of certain occupations.
. Power to stop use of premises used in contravention of licenses.
. Conditions which may be attached to licences.

33

General provisions
280. Power to yary licence.

281. Carrying on trade, etc., without licence or in contravention of section 280,
282. Feeding animals on dirt, etc.

Entry, inspection and seizure
283. Powers of entry and seizure.


tC)

Cas Import of cattle and flesh.

284. Import of cattle and flesh.
CHAPTER XII
Spirrruous 11000 AND INToxIcaTING 00005
Unauthorised sale of spirituous liquor or intoxicating drug.
Unauthorised possession of spirituous liquor.

Arrest of persons and seizure and confiscation of things for offences against the
two last foregoing sections.

Saving of articles sold or supplied for medicinal purposes.

B SRE

CHAPTER XIII
PUBLIC SAFETY AND SUPPRESSION OF NUISANCES
General Nuisances
. Penalty for causing nuisances

8

Dogs
. Registration and control of dogs

Traffic

g

291. Traffic Rule of the Toad,

Prevention of fire, etc.
Use of inflammable materials for building purposes,
Stacking or collecting inflammable materials,
. Care of naked lights.
Regulation of cinematographic and dramatic performance,
Discharging fire-works, fire-arms, etc, न
Power to require buildings, wells, etc., to be rendered safe.
Enclosure of wasteland used for improper Purposes,


«)

CLAUSES
CHAPTER XV

POWERS, PROCEDURES, PENALTIES AND APPEALS
Entry and inspection
305. Power of entry
306, Power of inspection by Member of a Board
307. Power of inspection, etc.
308. Power to enter land adjoining land where work is in progress.
309. Breaking into premises
310. Entry to be made in the day time.
311. Owners consent ordinarily to be obtained.
312. Regard to be had to social and religious usages.
313, Penalty for obstruction. हि
Powers and duties of Police Officers
314. Arrest without warrant.
315. Duties of Police Officers.
Notices
316. Notices to fix reasonable time.
317. Authentication and validity of notices issued by Board.
318. Service of notice, etc.
319. Method of giving notice.
320. Powers of Board in case of non-compliance with notice, etc. ,
321. Occupier not to obstruct owner when complying with notice.
Recovery of Money
322. Liability of occupier to pay in default of owner.
323. Relief to Agents and Trustees. 7
324. Method of recovery.
Committees of Arbitration
325. Application for a Committee of Arbitration.
326. Procedure for convening Committee of Arbitration.
327. Constitution of the Committee of Arbitration.

328. No person tobe nominated who has direct interest or whose services are not
immediately available.

329. Meetings and powers of Committee of Arbitration.
330. Decisions of Committee of Arbitration.
Prosecutions +

331. Prosecutions.
332. Composition of offence.

General Penality Provisions
333. General penality.
334. Offences by companies.
335. Cancellation or suspension of licenses, etc.
336. Recovery of amount payable in respect of damage to cantonment property.


(xii)

Quauses
Limitation

337. Limitation for prosecution.
Suits
338. Protection of Action of the Board etc.
339. Notice to be given of suits,
Appeals and Revision
340. Appeals from executive orders.
341. Petition of Appeal.
342. Suspension of Action Pending Appeal.
343. Revision.
344. Finality of the Appellate Orders,
345. Right of appellant to be heard,
CHAPTER XVI
RULES AND BYE-LAWS
346. Power to make rules,
347. Supplemental Provisions respecting rules.
348. Power to make bye-laws,
349. Penalty for breach of bye-laws.
350. Supplemental Provisions regarding bye-laws and regulations,
351. Rules and bye-laws to be available for inspection and purchase,
CHAPTER XVI

SuPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS
352, Extension of certain Provisions of the Act and Tules to place beyond canton-
ments,

353. “Power to delegate functions to the President, etc.
354, Registration.

356. Admissibility of documents or entry as evidence,
357. Evidence by officer or employee of the Board,
358. Application of, ‘Act 4 of 1899,
359. Power to remove difficulties,
360. Repeal and savings,

SCHEDULE |.

SCHEDULE I,

SCHEDULE III.

SCHEDULE IV,

SCHEDULE V.


As passe wy 76 Rasa Sanna
om Let Avoust, 2006

Bill No. LXXIII-C of 2003

THE CANTONMENTS BILL, 2006
A
BILL

to consolidate and amend the law relating to the administration of cantonmegts with a

view to impart greater democratisation, improvement of their financial base to make
provisions for developmental activities and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
5 1. (7) This Act may be called the Cantonments Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions

of this Act and any reference in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
\d_ construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.

Short title,
exteat and


Definitions.

2

2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—

(a) “Assistant Health Officer” means the medical officer appointed by the Genera}
Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, to be the Assistant Health Officer for a
cantonment;

(6) “Board” means a Cantonment Board constituted under this Act; 5

(c) “boundary wall” means a wall which abuts on a street and which does not
exceed two and a half metres in height;

(4) “building” means a house, outhouse, stable, latrine, shed, hut or other roofed
structure whether of masonry, brick, wood, mud, metal or other material, and any part
thereof, and includes a well and a wall other than a boundary wall but does not include |
a tent or other portable and temporary shelter;

(e) “casual election” means an election held to fill a casual vacancy;

(0 “casual vacancy” means a vacancy occurring otherwise than by efflux of time
in the office of an elected.member of a Board and includes a vacancy in such office,
arising under sub-section (2) of section 16;

(g) “Chief Executive Officer” means thetperspn appointed under this Act to be
the Chief Executive Officer of a cantonment;

(A) “civil area” means an area declared to be a civil area by the Central Government
under sub-section (/) of section 46;

(0) “civil area committee” means a committee appointed under section 47; 20

(j) “Command” means one of the Commands into which India is for military
purposes for the time being divided, and includes any area which the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a Command for all
or any of the purposes of this Act;

(0 “dairy” includes any farm, cattle-shed, milk-store, milk-shop or other place 25°
from which milk is supplied or in which milk is kept for purposes of sale or is manufactured
forthe sale into butter, ghee, cheese or curds, and, in relation to a dairyman who does
not occupy any premises for the sale of milk, includes any place in which he keeps the
vessels used by him for the storage or sale of milk;

(J “dairyman” includes the keeper of a cow, buffalo, goat, ass or other animal, 30
the milk of which is offered or is intended to be offered for sale for human consumption,
and any supplier of milk and any occupier of a dairy;

(m) “dangerous disease” means cholera, leprosy, enteric fever, smallpox,
tuberculosis, diphtheria, plague, influenza, venereal disease, hepatitis, Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndrome and any other epidemic, endemic, infectious or 35°
communicable disease which the Board may by public notice, declare to be, an
infectious, contagious or communicable disease for the purposes of this Act;

(a) “Defence Estates Circle” means one of the circles into which India is, for
the pyrposes of defence estates management, for the time being divided, and includes
any area which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, ५०
declare to be a Defence Estates Circle for all or any of the purposes of this Act;

”" (0) “Defence tel means the officer appointed by the Central
vernment to perform uties of the Defence Estates Officer for the purpose of
this Act and the rules made thereunder;

(2) “Director General” means an officer of the Indian Defence Estates Service 4S”
(IDES) appointed by the Central Government to Perform the duties of the Director

General, Defence Estates for the purpose of this Act Senior Additional
Director General and Additional Director General; — “

IS


15

् of 1948.

20

30

35°

५०

61 of 1985.

4s

3

(g) “Director” means the officer appointed by the Central Government to perform
the duties of the Director, Defence Estates, the Command, for the purposes of this Act
and the rules made thereunder;

(r) “entitled consumer” means a person in a cantonment who is paid from the
Defence Service Estimates and is authorised by general or special order of the Central
Government to receive a supply of water for domestic purposes from the Military
Engineer Services or the Public Works Department on such terms and conditions as
may be specified in the order;

(s) “Executive Engineer” means the officer of the Military Engineer Services of
that grade, having charge of the military works in a cantonment or where more than one
such officer has charge of the military works in a cantonment such one of those
officers as the Officer Commanding the station may designate in this behalf, and

includes the officer of whatever grade in immediate executive engineering charge of a
cantonment;

(0) “factory” means a factory as defined in clause (m) of section 2 of the
Factories Act, 1948;

(u) “Forces” means the regular Army, Navy and Air Force or any part of any one
or more of them;

(v) “Generat Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command” (GOC-inC, Command)
means the Officer Commanding any of the Commands;

(w) “General Officer Commanding the Area” means the Officer Commanding any
one of the areas into which India is for military purposes for the time being divided, or
any sub-area which does not form part of any such area, or any area which the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be an area for all or
any of the purposes of this Act;

x) “Group Housing” means a group of houses for dwelling purposes and may
comprise all ar any of the following : namely, (a) a dwelling unit, (6) open spaces
intended for recreation and ventilation, (c) roads, paths, sewers, drains, water supply
and ancillary installations, street lighting and other amenities, (d) convenient shopping
place, schools, community hall or other amenities for common use;

() “Government” in relation to this Act means the Central Government;

(z) “Health Officer” means the senior executive medical officer in military employ
on duty in a cantonment; -

(za) “hospital” includes family welfare centre, child welfare centre, maternity
centre and health centre;

(zb) “hut” means any building, no material portion of which above the plinth
level is constructed of masonry or of squared timber framing or of iron framing;

(zc) “inhabitant”, in relation to a cantonment, or local area means any person
ordinarily residing or carrying on business or owning or occupying immovable property
therein, or declared as such by the Chief Executive Officer and in case of a dispute, as
decided by the District Magistrate;

(zd) “intoxicating drug” includes a narcotic drug and psychotropic substance as
defined in the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1983 as modified
from time to time;

(ze) “market” includes any place where persons assemble for the sale of, or for
the purpose of exposing for sales, meat, fish, fruits, vegetables, animals intended for
human food or any other articles of human food whatsoever, with or without the
consetit of the owner of such place notwithstanding that there may be no common


' >

ellers and whether or not any contro} |
for the concourse of buyers and sel ! lf
Pease ee the busine of, or the persons frequenting, the market by the owner sf
पक # किक or by any other person, but shall not include a single shop oF group of shops
not being more than six in number and shops within unit lines,

(A “military” includes Air Force, Navy and other defence related establishments; 5

(zg) “military officer” means a person who,Seing an officer within the Meaning
of the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force Act, 1 950, & Commissioned, 44 “)
gazetted or in pay as an officer doing army, naval or air force duty with the army, Navy 62 of isn

or air force, or is an officer doing such duty in any arm, branch or part of any of those ' 45 of 18
0

forces;

zh) “nuisance” includes any act, omission, place, animal or thing which Causes
or is likely to cause injuty, danger, annoyance or offence to the sense of sight, smell or
hearing or disturbance to rest or sleep, or which is or may be dangerous to life or

injurious to health or property;
(zi) “occupier” includes an owner in accupation of, or otherwise using his own

land or building;

(z/) “Officer Commanding the station or Station Commander” means the military
officer for the time being in comnaand of the forces in a cantonment and if such officer
is likely to be absent for moreahan thirty days, the General Officer Commanding-in-
Chief, the Command may nominate, by an order, another military officer as “Officer Qo
Commanding the station or Station Commander”;

(zk) “ordinary election” means an election held to fill a vacancy in the office of
an elected member of a Board arising by efflux of time;

(z/) “owner” includes any person who is receiving or is entitled to receive the
rent of any building or land whether on his own account or on behalf of himself and 25°
others or an agent or trustee, or who would so receive the rent or be entitled to receive
it if the building or land were let to a tenant;

(zm) “party wall” means a wall forming part of a building and used or constructed
to be used for the support or separation of adjoining buildings belonging to different
owners, or constructed or adapted to be occupied by different persons; 30

(zn) “Principal Director” means the Officer appointed by the Central Government
to perform the duties of the Principal Director, Defence Estates, the Command for the
purpose of this Act and the rules made thereunder;

(Zo) “private market” means a market which is not maintained by a Board and
which is licensed by a Board under the provisions of this Act; 35

(22) “private slaughter-house” means a slaughter-house which is not maintained
by a Board and which is licensed by a Board under the provisions of this Act;

15

(24) “public market” means a market maintained by a Board;

(zr) “public place” means any place which is open to the use and enjoyment of
the public, whether it is actually used or enjoyed by the public or not; ५०

(zs) “public slaughter-house” means a slaughter-house maintained by a Board;

(zt) “resident”, in relation to a Cantonment, means a person who maintains
therein a house or a portion of a house which is at all times available for occupation by
himself or his family even though he may himself reside elsewhere, provided that he
— कर all intention of again occupying such house either by himself or ५६

is i


—

46 of 1950
62 of 1957
45 of 1950

15

20

2s

30

35

5

(zu) “regulation” means a regulation made by a Cantonment Board under this
Act by notification in the Official Gazette;

(cv) “rule” means a rule made by the Central Government under this Act by
notification in the Official Gazette;

(zw) “shed” means a slight or temporary structure for shade or shelter;

(zx) “slaughter-house” means any place ordinarily used for the slaughter of
animals for the purpose of selling the flesh thereof for human consumption;

zy) “soldier” means any person who is a soldier or sailor or an airman subject to
the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force Act, 1950, as the case may be,
and who is not a military officer;

(zz) “spirituous liquor” means any fermented liquor, any. wine, or any alcoholic
liquid obtained by distillation or the sap of any kind of palm tree, and includes any
other liquid containing alcohol which the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, declare to be a spirituous liquor for the purposes of this Act;

(zza) “street” includes any way, road, lane, square, court, alley or passage in a
cantonment, whether a thoroughfare or not and whether built upon or not, over which
the public have a right of way and also the road-way or foot-way over any bridge or
cause way;

(zzb) “sub-area” means one of the sub-areas into which India is for military
purposes for the time being divided and includes, for all or any of the purposes of this
Act, any territory which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette declare to be a sub-area for such purposes;

(zzc) “trade or commercial premises” means any premises used of intended to be
used for carrying on any trade, commerce or industry;

(zzd) “vehicle” means a wheeled conveyance of any description which is capable
of being used on a street, and includes a motor-car, motor lorry, motor omnibus, cart,
locomotive, tram-car, hand-eart, truck, motor-cycle, bicycle, tricycle and rickshaw;

(zze) “water-works” includes all fakes, tanks, streams, cisterns, springs, pumps,
wells, reservoirs, aqueducts, water-trucks, sluices mains, pipes, culverts, hydrants,
stand-pipes, and conduits and all machinery, lands, buildings, bridges and things
used for, or intended for the purpose of supplying water to a cantonment; and

(zzf) “year” means the year commencing on the first day of April.

Cuaprer II
DEFINITION AND DELIMITATION OF CANTONMENT

3. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare any

place or places along with boundaries in which any part of the Forces is quartered or which,
being in the vicinity of any such place or places, is-or are required for the service of such

५०

forces to be a cantonment for the purposes of this Act and of all other enactments for the time

being in force, and may, by a like notification, declare that any cantonment shall cease to be
3 cantonment.

(2) The Central Government may, by a like notification, define the limits of any

cantonment for the aforesaid purposes.

(3) When any place is declared a cantonment under sub-section (J), the Central

Government shall constitute a Board within a period of one year in accordance with the

US provisions of this Act:

Provided that the Central Government may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing,
extend the said period of one year for a further period of fix months at a time:

Provided further that the Central Government may, until a Board is constituted, by
order make necessary provisions for the efficient administration of the cantonment.

Definition of
cantonments.


Alteration
of limits of
cantonments.

The effect of
including area
in cantonment. +

Disposal of
cantonment
fund and
camtonment
development
fund when
area ceases to
bea
cantonment.

Disposal of
cantonment
fund and
cantonment
development
fund when
area ceases to
be imcluded in
@ cantonment

Application
of funds and
property
trensferred
under sections
6 and 7

6

(4) The Central Government may, by notification inthe Official Gazette, direct that fn
any place declared a cantonment under sub-section (/) the provisions of any enactment
relating to local self-government other than this Act shall have effect only to such extent or
subject to such modifications, or that any auth6rity Constituted under any such
shall exercise authority only to such extent, as may be specified in the notification, 5

4. (7) The Central Government may after consulting the State Government and the. -
Board concerned, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare its intention to include
within the cantonment any local area situated in the vicinity thereof orto exclude from the

cantonment any lacal area comprised therein.

(2) Any inhabitant of a cantonment or local area in respect of which notification has lo
been published under sub-section (/) may, within eight weeks from the date of notification,
submit in writing to the Central Goverment through the General Officer Commanding-in-
Chief, the Command, an objection to the notification, and the Central Government shall take

such @bjection into consideration.

(3) Onthe expiry of eight weeks from the date of the notification, the Central Government IS
may after considering the objections, if any, which 98५९ been submitted under sub-section
(2), by notification in the Official Gazette, include the local area in respect of which the
notification was published under sub-section (/), or any part thereof, in the cantonment or,
as the case may be, exclude such area or any part thereof from the cantonment.

5. When, by a notification under section 4, any local area is included ina cantonment, 20
such area shall thereupon become subject to this Act and to all other enactments for the time
being in force throughout the cantonment and to all notifications, rules, regulations, bye-
laws, orders and directions issued or made thereunder. *

6. (4) When, by a notification under section 3, any cantonment ceases to be a
cantonment and the local area comprised therein is immediately placed under the control of 25"
a local authority, she balance of the cantonment fund or the cantonment development fund
and other property vesting in the Board shall vest in such local authority, and the liabilities
of the Board shall be transferred to such local authority.

(2) When, in like manner, any cantonment ceases to be a cantonment and the local area
comprised therein is not immediately placed under the control of a local authority, the balance 30
of the cantonment fund or the cantonment development fund and other property vesting in.
the Board shall vest in the Central Government, and the liabilities of the Board shall be

transferred to that Government.

7. (1) When, by a notification under section 4, any local area forming part of a
cantonment ceases to be under the control of a particular Boasd and is immediately placed 35
under the control of some other local authority, such portion of the cantonment fund or the
cantonment development fund and other property vesting in the Board and such portion of
the liabilities of the Board, as the Central Government may, by jgeneral or special order, direct,
shall be transferred to that other local authority. xP

(2) When, in like manner, any local area forming pait of a cantonment ceases to be Yo
under the control of a particular Board and is not immediately placed under the control of
some other local authority; such portion of the cantonment fund or the cantonment
development fund and other property vesting in the Board shall vest in the Central
Government, and such portion of the liabilities of the Board shall be transferred to that
Government, as the Central Government may, by general or special order, direct.

8. Any cantonment fund or a cantonment development fund or a portion thereof or
other property of a Board vesting in the Central Government under the provisions of section
6 or section 7 shall be applied in the first place to satisfy any liabilities of the Board transferred
under such provisions to that Government, and in the second place for the benefit of the ¢
inhabitants of the local area which has ceased to be a cantonment or, as the case may be, part 59
of a cantonment,


7

9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Officia] Gazette, exclude from the Limitation of
operation of any part of this Act the whole or any part of a cantonment, or direct that any — of
provision of this Act shall, in the case of any cantonment —

(a) situated within the limits of a metropolitan area; or
5 (6) in which the Board is superseded under section 60,
apply with such modification as may be so specified.

CHAPTER III
CANTONMENT BoarDS
Boards
1० 10. (7) For every cantonment there shall be a Cantonment Board. —
(2) Every Board shall be deemed to be a municipality under clause (९) of article 243Pof

the Constitution for the purpose of—
(a) receiving grants and allocations; or
(0) implementing the Central Government schemes of social welfare, public health,
1S hygiene, safety, water supply, sanitation, urban renewal and education.

11. Every Board shall, by the name of the place by reference to which the cantonment _ Incorporation

is known, be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power — é

to acquire and hold property both movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the है

said name, sue and be sued.

22० 12. (1) Cahtonments shall be divided into four categories, namely:— Constitution of
| (i) Category 1 Cantonments, in which the population exceeds fifty thousand; —
(ii) Category II Cantonments, in which the population exceeds ten thousand,

but does not exceed fifty thousand:
} (iii) Category III Cantonments, in which the population exceeds two thousand
| as five hundred, but does not exceed ten thousand; and

| (iv) Category IV Cantonments, in which the population does not exceed two
thousand five hundred.

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (/), the population shall be calculated in accordance
‘ with the latest official census, or, if the Central Government, by general or special order, so
30 directs, in accordance with a special census taken for the purpose.

(3) In Category 1 Cantonments, the Board shall consist of the following members,
namely:—

(०) the Officer Commanding the station as ex officio or, if the Central Government
So directs in respect ofany cantonment, such other military officer as may be nominated
35 in his place by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command;

(6) the District Magistrate or an Executive Magistrate not below the rank of
| Additional District Magistrate nominated by him;

(c) the Chief Executive Officer;
(d) the Health Officer ex officio;
Uo (e) the Executive Engineer ex officio;

(/) three military officers nominated by name by the Officer Commanding the
station by order in writing;

(g) eight members elected under this Act.


(4) In Category ॥ Cantonments, the Board shall consist of the following Members,
namely ८
हे (a) the Officer Commanding the station as ex officio or, ifthe Central Gove;
so directs in respect of any cantonment, such other military officer as may be Nominateg
in his place by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command;
(0) the District Magistrate or an Executive Magistrate not below the rank of
Additional District Magistrate nominated by him;

(c) the Chief Executive Officer;
(4) the Health Officer ex officio;
(e) the Executive Engineer ex officio; Jo

(0 two military officers nominated by name by the Officer Commanding the
station by order in writing;

(g) seven members elected under this Act.

(5) In Category III Cantonments, the Board shall consist of the following members, j
namely:—
(a) the Officer Commanding the station as ex officio or, if the Central Government
So directs in respect of any cantonment, such other military officer, as may be nominated
in his place by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command;
(6) the District Magistrate or an Executive Magistrate nominated by him;
(c) the Chief Executive Officer; 20
(4) the Health Officer ex officio;
(e) the Executive Engineer ex officio;
(Aone military officer nominated by name by the Officer Commanding the station
by order in writing; ५
(g) six members elected under this Act, a5
(6) In Category IV Cantonments, the Board shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
(०) the Officer Commanding the station ex officio or, if the Central Government
So directs in respect ofany cantonment, such other military officer as may be nominated
in his place by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command; 30
(6) the Chief Executive Officer;
(c) two members elected under this Act.

(7) The Officer Commanding the station may, if he thinks fit, with the sanction of the
General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, nominate in place of any military officer
whom he is empowered to nominate under clause (/) of sub-section (3), clause (/) of sub- 35
section (4) or clause (f) of sub-section (5), any person, whether in the service of the Government
or not, who is ordinarily resident in the cantonment or in the vicinity thereof.

(8) Every election or nomination of a member of a Board and every vacancy in the
elected membership thereof shall be notified by the Centra) Government in the Official Gazette;

(9) The Member of Parliament and Member of Legislative Assembly representing ५०

constituencies which comprises wholly or partly the cantonment area, shall be special invitees
for the meetings of the Board but without a right to vote.

Power to vary 13.(/) Notwithstanding anything contained in section | 2, ifthe Central Government is

cucumstances

satisfied, —
(a) that by reason of military Operations, it is Necessary, or 4s


\S

20

35°

Yo

9

(b) that, for the administration of the cantonment, it is desirable, to vary the
constitution of the Board in any cantonment under this section, the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make a declaration to that effect.

(2) Upon the making of a declaration under sub-section (/), the Board in the cantonment
shall consist of the following members, namely: —

(a) the Officer Commanding the station,
(0) the Chief Executive Officer, and

(c) one member, not being a person in the service of the Government, nominated
by the Central Government in consultation with the General Officer Commanding-in-
Chief, the Command.

(3) The nomination of a member of a Board constituted under this seetion, and the
vacancy in the membership thereof shall be notified by the Central Government in the Official
Gazette.

(4) The term of office of a Board constituted by a declaration under sub-section (/)
shall not ordinarily extend beyond one year:

Provided that the Central Government may from time to time, by a like declaration,
extend the term of office of such a Board by any period not exceeding one year at a time:

Provided also that the Central Government shall forthwith direct that the term of office
of such a Board shall cease if, in the opinion of the Central Government, the reasons stated
in the declaration whereby such Board was constituted or its term of office was extended,
have ceased to exist.

(5) When the term of office of a Board constituted under this section has expired or
ceased, the Board shall be replaced by the former Board which, but for the declaration under
sub-section (/) or sub-section (4), would have continued to hold office, or , if the term of
office of such former Board has expired, by a Board constituted under section 12.

14. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of a member of a
Board shall be five years and shall commence—

(a) in case of an elected member, from the date of notification of his election
under sub-section (8) of section 12, or from the date on which the vacancy has occurred
to which he is elected, whichever is later; and

(8) in case of a nominated member, from the date of nomination under clauses (0)
and (f) of sub-section (3), clauses (6) and (१ of sub-section (4) and clauses (b) and
(0 of sub-section (5) of section 12, or the date of vacancy under clause (6) of sub-
section (/) of section 18, whichever is later, and the member so nominated shall be able
to take part in the proceedings of the Board:

Provided that the Central Government may, when satisfied that it is necessary in order
to avoid administrative difficulty, extend the term of office of all the elected members of a
Board by such period not exceeding one year, as it thinks fit:

Provided further that a member whose term of office has been so extended, shall cease
to hold office on the date of the notification of the election of his successor under sub-
section (8) of section 12.

(2) The term of office of an ex officio member of a Board shall continue so long as he
holds the office by virtue of which he is such a member.

(3) The term of office of a member elected to fill a casual vacancy shall commence from
the date of the notification of his election, and shall continue so long only as the member in
whose place he is elected would have been entitled to hold office if the vacancy had not
occurred.

Term of office
of members.


Fitting of

‘Vacancies in

special cases.

Oath or

10

(4) An outgoing member shall, unless the Central Government otherwise di
continue in office until the election of his successor is notified under sub-section (8) of
section 12 or the nomination of his successor, as the case may be.

(5) Any outgoing member may, if qualified, be re-elected or re-nominated.

15. (1) Vacancies arising by efflux of time in the office of an elected member of a Board 5
shall be filled by an ordinary election to be held on such date as the Central Government May,
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct.

(2) Acasual vacancy shall be filled by a casual election the date of which shall be fixed
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, and shall be, as soon as
may be, after the occurrence of the vacancy: Jo
Provided that no casual election shall be held to fill a vacancy occurring within six

months of any date on which the vacancy will occur by efflux of time, but such vacancy shall
be filled at the next ordinary election.

16. (7) If for any cause at an election no member is elected, or if the elected member is
unwilling to serve on the Board, fresh election shall be held to fill up such vacancy. is

(2) If a person is elected to more than one seat in a Board, then, unless he resigns all
but one of the seats within fourteen days from the date on which he is declared elected, or
where the dates on which he is declared elected are different in respect of different Seats,
from the last of such dates, all the seats shall become vacant.

(3) Vacancies arising in any of the following cases shall be filled by nomination by the 20

Central Government after consultation with the General Officer Commanding-ineChief, the
Command, namely:—

(a) where at a casual election no member is elected;

(6) where at an election held when a Board is constituted for the first time no

Fo coreg oan insufficient number of membersis elected or an elected member is unwiling 45
to serve on the Board.

(4) For the purposes of sub-section
of sub-section (3) of this section shall where there h:
into wards, be deemed to have been elected by such w
the time of making the nomination or at any time thereafter declare,

(5) The term of office ofa member nominated under this

section shall expire at the time
at which it would have expired if he had been elected at the

casual election.

17. Every person who is by virtue of his Office, or who is nominated or elected to be, a
member of the Board shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe at a meeting of the
Board an oath or affirmation of his allegiance to the Constitution of India in the following 35
form, namely:—

become
“I, A.B., having been elected 5
बिका a member of this Board, do

५०
Swear in the name of God

that I will faith and al Constitution

a affirm that I will bear true faith and llegiance to the

Of India as by law established and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which
Tam about to enter.”,


1०

15

20

30

Yo

18. (1) (a) Any elected member of a Board who wishes to resign his office may give his
resignation in writing to the President of the Board who shall forward it for acceptance and
notification 10 the Central Government under intimation to the General Officer Commanding-
in-Chief, the Command,

(6) Any nominated member of a Board who wishes to resign his office may forward his
resignation in writing through the President of the Board to the General Officer Commanding-
in-Chief, the Command for orders.

(2) Ifthe Central Government or the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command,
as the case may be, accepts the resignation, such acceptance shall be communicated to the
Board, and thereupon the seat of the member resigning shall become vacant.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the resignation of any
person elected to more than one seat im a Board from all but one of the seats in pursuance of
sub-section (2) of section 16 shall take effect when such resignation is received by the
President of the Board.

19. (1) The Officer commanding the station if aimember of the Board shall be the
President of the Board:

Provided that when a military officer holding the office of the President ceases to be
the Officer commanding the station merely by reason of a temporary absence from the
station for a period not exceeding thirty consecutive days, he shall not vacate the office of
President.

(2) Where the Officer commanding the station is not a member of the Board, the
military officer ‘nominated in his place under clause (a) of sub-section (3), sub-section (4),
sub-Section (5) or sub-section (6) of section 12 shall be the President of the Board.

3) In every Board except in case of a Board falling under Category IV Cantonment
there shall be a Vice-President elected by the elected members only from amongst them in
accordance with such procedure as the Central Government may by rule prescribe.

(4) In case of a Board falling under Category IV Cantonment, the Vice President shall
be elected by draw of lot under the supervision of the President of the Board in such manner
as he may decide.

20. (1) The term of office of a Vice-President shall be five years or his residual term of
office as a member, whichever is less.

‘
(2) A Vice-President may resign his office by notice in writing to the President and, on
the resiggation being accepted by the Board, the office shall become vacant.

(3) A Vice-Presiddht may be removed from his office, at a special meeting convened for
the purpose on a requisition for the same by not less than one-halfof the elected members of
the Board holding office, by a resolution passed by a majority of not tess than two-thirds of
the total number of elected members then holding office and attending and no member, other
than an elected member, shall have the right to vote on the resolution:

Provided that in case of Category IV cantonments, the Vice-President may be removed
if a resolution to this effect is passed by the Board and the other elected member shall
become the Vice-President.

21. (/) It shall be the duty of the President of every Board— "

(a) unless prevented by reasonable cause, to convene and preside at all meetings
of the Board and to regulate the conduct of business thereat;

Resignation.

President and
Vice-President.

Term of
office of Vice-
President.

Duties of
President.


Duties of Vice-
President.

Allowances to
Vice-President
and members.
Appoiatment
of Chief
Executive
Officer.

Duties of Chief

12 |

(b) to control, direct and supervise the financial and executive administration =
the Board;

(c) to perform all the duties and exercise all the powers specifically imposed ™
conferred on the President by or under this Act; and

(d) subject to any restrictions, limitations and conditions imposed by this Act to §
exercise executive power for the purpose of carrying out the provisions Of this Act and 1g
be directly responsible for the fulfilment of the purposes of this Act;

(e) in case of gross misconduct during the course of meeting, to Suspend a
member other than a Chief Executive Officer from attending the unconcluded part of
the meeting of the Board. lo

(2) The President may, by order in writing, empower the Vice-President to exercise al}
or any of the powers and duties referred to in clause (6) of sub-section (/) other than any
power, duty or function which he is by resolution of the Board expressly forbidden to
delegate.

(3) The exercise or discharge of any powers, duties or functions delegated by the [६
President under this section shall be subject to such restrictions, limitations and conditions,
if any, as may be laid down by the President and to the control of, and to revision by, the
President.

(4) Every order made under sub-section (2) shall forthwith be communicated to the
Board and to the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command. ao

22. (1) Itshail be the duty of the Vice-President of every Board,—

(a) in the absence of the President and unless prevented by reasonable cause, to
preside at meetings of the Board and when so presiding to exercise the authority of the
President under sub-section (/) of section 21;

(b) during the incapacity or temporary absence of the President or pending his 25°
appointment or succession to perform any other duty and exercise any other power of
the President; and .

(c) to exercise any power and perform any duty of the President which may be
delegated to him under sub-section (2) of section 21.

23. The Vice President and each elected member of the Board shall be entitled to 3°
receive such allowances, as the Central Government may, by rule, preseribe.

24. (1) For every cantonment there shall be a Chief Executive Officer appointed by the
Central Government or by such person as the Central Government may authorise in this
behalf:

Provided that, in the event of temporary absence of the Chief Executive Officer, not 35°
exceeding ninety days, the Principal Director shall designate a. officer under his jurisdiction
to perform the duties of the Chief Executive Officer during such period.

(2) Not less than one-half of the salary of the Chief Executive Officer shall be paid by
the Central Government and the balance from the cantonment fund.

(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall be the Member-Secretary of the Board and of 40
every Committee of the Board.

25. (7) Subject to the provisions of clause (c) and clause (व) of sub-section (/) of
section 21, the Chief Executive Officer shall—

(a) exercise all the powers and perform all the duties conferred or imposed upon ae
him by or under this Act or any other law for the time being in force;


15

(h) fails to pay any arrears of any kind due by him otherwise than as an agent,
receiver, trustee or an executor, to the Board within thirty days after the notice in this
behalf has been served upon him; or

(i) is disqualified under any other provision of this Act:

S Provided that a person shall not be deemed to have any interest in such a
contract or work as is referred to in clause (4) by reason only of his having a share or
interest in—

(a) any lease or sale or purchase of immovable property or any agreement
for the same; or
lo (0) any agreement for the loan of money or any security for the payment of
money only; or
(c) any newspaper in which any advertisement relating to the affairs of the
Board is inserted; or
(d) the sale to the Board of any articles in which he regularly trades or the
16 purchase from the Board of any articles, to a value in either case not exceeding
twenty-five thousand rupees in the aggregate in any year during the period of
the contract or work.
30. (7) For the purposes of sections 27, 28 and 29, ‘person’ means an individual
human being. =
ao (2) The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices within the meaning of clause
(g) of sub-section (3) of section 29, namely: —
(J) “bribery” that is to say—
(A) any gift, offer or promise by a candidate or his agent or by any other
person with the consent of a candidate or his agent of any gratification to any
25 person whomsoever, with the object, directly or indirectly of inducing—
(a) a person to stand or not to stand as, or to withdraw or not to
withdraw from being, a candidate at an election; or
(6) an elector to vote or refrain from voting at an election, or as a
reward to—
'» (0) a person for having so stood or not stood, or for having
3 withdrawn or not having withdrawn his candidature; or
(ii) an elector for having voted or refrained from voting;

(B) the receipt of, or agreement to receive, any gratification, whether as a
motive or areward—

(a) by a person for standing or not standing as, or for withdrawing

35° or not withdrawing, from being a candidate; or
(6) by any person whomsoever for himself or any other person for
voting or refraining from voting, or inducing or attempting to induce any
हु elector to vote or refrain from voting, or any candidate to withdraw or not

uo to withdraw his candidature.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the term “gratification” is not
restricted to pecuniary gratifications or gratifications estimable in money and it includes
all forms of entertainment and all.forms of employment for reward but it does not
include the payment of any expenses bona fide incurred at, or for the purpose of, any

us” election.
(2) Undue influence, that is to say, any direct or indirect interference or attempt to
interfere on the part of the candidate or his agent, or of any other person with the consent of
the candidate or his agent with the free exercise of any electoral right:


Provided that— - .
(a) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this clause ints

person as is referred to therein who—

candidate or any elector, or any person jn

is interested, with injury of any kind including :

ication or expulsion from any caste or comminity, . 5

(0 threatens any

candidate or an elector
ostracism and ex-communi

(ii) induces or attempts to induce 8 candidate or an elector 10 belive hy
he, or any person in whom he is interested, will become or will be ei
object of divine displeasure or spiritual censure, shal be deemed to का
with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate or elector inthe h
meaning of this clause;

(6) 8 declaration of public policy, or a promise of public action, or the mere
exercise of a legal right without intent to interfere with an electoral right shall not be
deemed to interfere within the meaning of this clause.

(3) The appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of IS
a candidate or his agent to vote or refrain from voting for any person on the ground of his
religion, race, caste, community or language or the use of, or appeal to religious symbols or.
the use of, or appeal to, national symbols, such as national flag or the national cade
furtherance of the prospécts of the election of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the
election of any candidate. 20

(4) The promotion of, or attempt to promote, feelings of enmity or hatred between
different classes of the citizens of India on grounds of religion; race, caste, community or
language, by a candidate or his agent or any other person with the consent of a candidate or
his agent for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of that candidate or for
prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate. as

(5) The publication by a candidate or his agent or by any other person, with the
consent of a candidate or his agent, of any statement of fact which is false, and which he
either believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the personal character
or conduct of any candidate, or in relation to the candidature, or withdrawal of any candidate,
being a statement reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of that candidate’s election. 30

(6) The hiring or procuring, whether on payment or otherwise, of any vehicle or vessel
by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of a candidate or his
agent or the use of such vehicle or vessel for the free conveyance of any elector other than
the candidate himself, the members of his family or his agent to or from any polling station or
place fixed for the poll: be

Provided that the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by any elector or by several electors at
their joint costs for the purpose of conveying him or them to and from any sueh polling
station or place fixed for the poll shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this
clause if the vehicle or vessel so hired is a vehicle or vessel not propelled by mechanical ५०
Power:

; Provided further that the use of any public transport vehicle or vessel or any tramcar
or railway carriage by any elector at his own cost for the purpose of going to or coming from

‘any such polling station or place fixed for the poll shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice
under this clause.

Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “vehicle” means any vehicle used or ad
capable of being used for the purpose of road transport, whether propelled by meahanical
Power or otherwise and whether used for drawing other vehicles or otherwise.


\o

15

20

as

५०

13

(0) subject to any restrictions, limitations and conditions imposed by this Act, to
exercise executive power to ensure that the administration of the Board is carried out in
accordance with provisions of this Act;

(6) prescribe the duties of, and exercise supervision and control over the acts
and proceedings of all, officers and employees of the Board;

(d) be responsible for the custody of all records of the Board;

(०) arrange for the performance of such duties relative to the proceedings of the
Board or of any Committee of the Board or of any Committee of Arbitration constituted
under this Act, as those bodies may respectively impose on him; and

() comply with every requisition of the Board on any matter pertaining to the
administration of the cantonment.

26. (1) The Chief Executive Officer may direct the execution of any work or the doing
of any act, in public interest and in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder, and incur such expenditure as may be necessary in executing such work or
doing such act, as the case may be, subject to the financial limits which the Board may by
resolution determine subject to general guidelines issued by the Director General, Defence
Estates with the approval of the Central Government.

(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, in case of emergency, direct the execution of any
work or the doing of any act which would ordinarily require the sanction of the Board and
immediate execution or doing of which is in his opinion, necessary for the service or safety
of the public, and may direct that the expense of executing such work or doing such act shall
be paid from the cantonment fund:

Provided that—

(2) he shall not act under this section without the previous sanction of the
President or, in bis absence, of the Vice-President;

(0) he shall not act under this section in contravention of any order of the Board
prohibiting the execution of any particular work or the doing of any particular act; and

(ले he shall report forthwith the action taken under this section and the reasons
therefor to the Board.

Elections

27. (1) The Board or, where a Board is got constituted in any place declared by
notification under sub-section (/) of section 3 to Be acantonment, the Officer Commanding
‘the station, shall prepare and publish an electoral roll showing the names of persons qualified
to vote at elections tothe Board and,suth roll shall be prepared, revised and finally published

in such manner and on such date ii each year as the Central Govemment may by rule
Prescribe,

(2) Every person whose nage appears in the final slectoral roll shall, so long as the roll
remains in force, be entitled to vote ata election tothe Board, and no other person shall be
so entitled.

(3) When a cantonment has been divided ito wards, the Gectoral roll shalt be divided
into separate lists for each ward.

(4) If @ new electoral roll is not published in any year op the date prescribed, the
Central Government may 1४७० that the old efectaral roll shall continue in operation until the
new roll is published,

Hi!



14

who, on such date as may be fixed by the Central 00 :
Qualification 28. (7) ae the Official Gazette hereinafter in this section referred to as के
— eee ffage and who has resided in th
walifying date”, is not less than eighteen years of age and v ify in the can
for aperiod of not less thrssix months immediately preceding the qualifying date shall, ifnoy
otherwise disqualified, be entitled to be enrolled as an elector. 5

Explanation.—When any place is declared a cantonment for the first time, or when
any local area is first included in a cantonment, residence in the Place Or area comprising the
cantonment on the aforesaid date shall be deemed to be residence in the cantonment for the
purposes of this sub-section.

(2) A person notwithstanding that he is otherwise qualified, shall not be entitled tobe Jo
enrolled as an elector if he on the qualifying date—

(7) is nota citizen of India, or
(ii) has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind, or
(iii) is an undischarged insolvent, or

(iv) has been sentenced by a Criminal Court to imprisonment for aterm exceeding 1¢
two years for an offence which is declated by the Central Government to be such as to
unfit him to become an elector or has been sentenced by a Criminal Court for any

offence under Chapter IXA of the Indian Penal Code: Sofia
Provided that any disqualification incurred by a person under clause (v) shall terminate
on the lapse of three years from the expiry of the sentence or order: ao

(3) If any person having been enrolled as an elector in any electoral roH subsequently
becomes subject to any of the disqualifications referred to in sub-section (2), his name Shall
be removed from the electoral roll unless, in the case referred to in clause (iv), the
disqualification is removed by the Central Government. .

— 29. (1) Saye as hereinafter provided, ery person, not being a person holding any 25°
for aa Office of profit under the Governfnent, whose name is entered on tke electoral roll of a
oi cantonment shall be quatified for election as a member of the Board in that cantonment.

(2) No person shalt be qualified for nomination as a member of'a Board ifhe is subject
to any of the disqualifications specified in sub-section (2) of section 28.

(3) No person shall be qualified for being chosen whether by election or nomination 30
as, and for being a member of a Board, if he—

(a) has been digmtissed from the service of the Government and is debarred from
re-employment therein, or is a dismissed employee of a Board;
(6) is debarred from Practising his profession or calli order of any competent
authority; ns wm 3s
है (९) holds any Place of profit in the gift or at the disposal of the Board, or is a
Police officer, or is the servant or employer of a member of the Board; or

(4) is interested in a subsisting contract made with, or in work being done for, the
Board except as a sharcholder other than 3 director in an incorporated company; or

(०) isen officer or employee, permanent or temporary, of a Board or of any other ५०
local authority; or, ‘

— is a member of any other local authority; or

(g) has, by the authority referred to in clause (/) of section 31, been found to
have been guilty of any of the corrupt practices specified in sub-section (2) of section

30 unless 8 period of five years has elapsed since the date of the decision of the US
authority; or ९


19

Employees

37. (1) No person who has directly or indirectly by himself or his partner any share or
interest in 8 contract with, by or on behalf of a Board, or in any employment under, by oron
behalf of a Board, otherwise than as an employee of the Board, shall become or remain an
employee of such Board.

5 (2) An employee of a Board who knowingly acquires or continues to have directly or
indirectly by himself or his partner any share or interest in a contract with, by oron behalf of
the Board or, in any employment under, by or on behalf of, the Board, otherwise than as an
employee of the Board, shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 168 of

45061860. the Indian Penal Code.

lo (3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any share or interest in any contract with, by
or on behalf of, or employment under, by or on behalf of a Board if the same is a share ina
company contracting with, or employed by, or oa behalf of, the Board or is a share or interest
acquired or retained with the permissiorvof the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the
Command in any lease bf sale to, or purchase by the Board of land or building or in any
1$ agreement for the same.

(4) Every person applying for employment as an employee of a Board shall, if he is
related by blood or marriage to any member of the Board or to any person not being a lower
grade employee, in receipt of remuneration from the Board, notify the fact and the nature of
such relationship to the appointing authority before the appointment is made, and if he has

20 failed to do so, his appointment shall be invalid but without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done by him.

38. Every officer or employee, permanent or temporary of a Board shall be deemed to
45 of 1860. be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code and clause (c)
49 of 1988. of section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.

as Procedure

39. (1) Every Board shall meet at least once in a month to transact its business on
such day as may be fixed by the President and in his absence by the Vice-President, and its

notice shail be given in such manner as may be provided in the regulations made by the
. Board under this Chapter.

30 (2) The President may, whenever he thinks fit, and shall, upon a requisition in writing
by not less than one-fourth of the members of the Board, convene a special meeting.

_ (3) Any meeting may be adjourned until the next or any subsequent day, and an
adjourned meeting may be further adjourned in like manner but not more than twice except in
case of a public emergency.

35 40. Subject to any regulation made by the Board under this Chapter, any busii
be transacted at any meeting: se

Provided that no business relating to the imposition, abolition or modification of
tax shall be transacted at a meeting unless notice of the same and of the datp fixed therefer
५ has been sent to each member not less than seven days before that date.
0 41. (1) The quorum necessary for the transaction of busi meeting
usiness at a f the
Board shall be one-half of the number of members of the Board holding the office: 7

Provided that ifthe number of members of the Board holding office at a particular ti
is an odd number, the quorum besined by ४0 sins
reer cs shall be one-half of the number obtained by adding one to the
us” (2) Ifa quorum is not
Present, the President or in his absence, the Vice-President or i
the absence of both, the Member-Secretary shall adjourn the meeting and the aaa

which would have bebn brought beft
peal mame dn pst fore the original meeting if there had been a quorum

ight before, and may be transacted journed meeting,
Whether there i8 8 quorum present or not. — —

Disqualification
of person as an
employee of

employee to be
deemed a
public servant.

Meetings.

Business to be


Presiding

Minutes,

Meetings to be
public.

Method of

deciding
questions.

Civil area.

Committees for
civil areas.

20

42. In the absence of—

(a) both the President and the Vice-President from any meeting of a Board
which thee is more than one elected member,

(6) the President ftom a meeting of a Board constituted under sub-section (6 ५
section 12 or sub-section (2) of section 13, ‘

the members present Shall elect one from among their own members to preside.

43. (1) The minutes of the proceedings of each meeting shall be recorded in a book
and shall be signed by the person presiding over the meeting and the Chief Executive Officer,
before the close of the meeting and shall, at such times and in such place as may be fixed by
the Board, be open to inspection free of charge by any inhabitant of the cantonment and its 10
authenticated copies may be made available to him on request, at a nominal cost to be
decided by the Board.

(2) Copies of the minutes shalt, as soon as possible after each meeting, be forwarded
for information to every member of the Board, the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the
Command, the District Magistrate and the Defence Estate Officer and in cantonments where |S
Navy or Air Force stations are located copies of the minutes shall be forwarded for information
to the Command Headquarters of the Navy or, as the case may be, the Air Force.

44. Every meeting of a Board shall be open to the public unless in any case the person
presiding over the meeting, for reasons to be recorded in the minutes, otherwise directs.

45. (/) All questions coming before a meeting shall be decided by the majority of the 2?
votes of the members present and voting.

(2) फ the case of an equality of votes, the person presiding over the meeting, shall
have a second or casting vote.

(3) The dissent of any member from any d&cision of the Board shall, if the member so ¢
requests, be entered in the minutes, tagether with.a short statement of the ground for such 2.
sent.

__ 46. (1) The Centeal Government may, by notification in Official Gazette, declare the
Civil area, in a cantonment, whith is inhabited largely by civil population to be the civil ares
for the purposes of this Act.

(2) The Central Government may in consultation with the Board undertake, as and 3°
when required and shall undertake after every census, a review of the boundaries of | the civil
area in each cantonment,

47. (1) Every Board constituted under section 12 in a cantonment shall appoint 8
comumittee consisting of the elected members of the Board, the Health Officer and the Executive, ~
Engineer for the administration of the-civil area in the cantonment as notified under section
46 of this Act and may delegate its powers and duties to such committee in the manaef
Provided in clause (६) of sub-section (/) of section 48.

(2) The Vice-President of the Board shall be the Chairman of the committee appouseed

under sub-section (2). sovtioa
ue
137 2), The Powers, duties and functions of the Board under sub-section () ५ 4७
» Section 143, section 147, section 149 and section 262 shall be exercised of

Fespett of a civil area by the civil area committee: cornanlttee

Provided that if the bleakh Officer dissents from aerived 0 HS Daath

any decrsion on

we ccoction (/) of section 137, section 143, section 147 ५०4 ation [५ ले

Grounds, the matter may be referred to the Board by the Presideat #


\

30

Yo

17

(7) The obtaining or procuring or abetting or attempting to obtain or procure by a
candidate or his agent or, by any other person with the consent of a candidate or his agent,
any assistance other than the giving of vote for the furtherance of the prospects of that
candidate’s election, from any person in the service of the Government or the Board:

Provided that where any person, in the service of the Government or the Board in the
discharge or purported discharge of his official duty, makes any arrangements or provides
any facilities or does any other act or thing, for, to, or in relation to, any candidate or his agent
or any other person acting with the consent of the candidate or lnis agent whether by reason
of the office held by the candidate or for any other reason, such arrangements, facilities or
act or thing shall not be deemed to be assistance for the furtherance of the prospects of that
candidate's election.

Explanation.—In this sectioa, the expression “agent” includes any person who. is
held to have acted as an agent in connection with the election with the consent of the
candidate.

31. The Central Government may, either generally or specially foranycantonment or
group of cantonments, after previous publication, make rules consistent with this Act to
regulate all or any of the following matters for the purpose of the holding of elections under
this Act, namely:—

(a) the division of a cantonment into wards;

(8) the determination of the number of members to be elected by each ward;

(c) the preparation, revision and final publication of electoral rolls;

(d) the reservation of wards for election of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and women;

(०) the registratio! n of electors, the nomination of candidates, the time and manner
of holding elections and the method by which votes shall be recorded;

(0 the authority which may be an officer of the State Government by which and
the manner in which disputes relating to electoral rolls or arising out of elections shall

be decided, and the powers and duties of such authority and the circumstances in
which such authority may declare a casual vacancy to have been created or any
candidate to have been elected;

(g) the fee to be paid for admission and consideration of any application relating
to election or election disputes;

(A) any other matter relating to elections or election disputes in respect of which
the Central Government is empowered to make rules under this Chapter or in respect of
which this Act makes no provision or makes insufficient provision and provision is, in
the opinion of the Central Government, necessary.

Members

32. (/) No member of a Board shall vote at a meeting of the Board or of any Committee
of the Board on any question relating to his own conduct or vote or take part in any discussion
on any matter, other than a matter affecting generally the inhabitants of the cantonment,
which affects his own pecuniary interest or the valuation of any property in respect of which
he is diteetly or indirectly interested, or of any property of or for which he is a manager or
agent.

(2) Where any member of the Board present at the meeting of the Board or any
committee of the Board believes that the person presiding over such meeting has pecuniary
or other interest in any matter under discussion and moves a motion to that effect, the person
so presiding— .

(a) shall not be entitled to vote on such motion, and

Power to make
rules
regulating
elections.

Member not to
vote on matter
in which he is
interested.


(0) shall, if such motion is carried, absent himself from the meeting during =

discussion.

" ber ofa Board shall be liable for the loss, waste or misapplication of,
33, Every member 0} ing to, vested in, or entrusted to the management of a

i i direct consequence of his neglect or mi
080 if'such loss, waste or misapplication isa d neg!
peer such member; and a suit for compensation for the same may be instituted agains, him

either by the Board or by the Central Government.
34, (1) The Central Government may remove from a Board any member thereof, who

f
beer money or other property belongi

Removal of
(a) becomes or is found to have been at the time of his election or nomination
subject to any of the disqualifications specified in sub-section (2) of section 28 of 1»
in section 29; or

(0) has absented himself for more than three consecutive meetings or three
months (whichever is later) of the Board and is unable to explain such absence to the
satisfaction of the Board.

Explanation.—In computing the aforesaid period of three consecutive months, {5
no account shall be taken of any period of absence with the leave of the Board; or

(c) has knowingly contravened the provisions of section 32; or

(व) being a legal practitioner, acts or appears on behalf of any other person
against the Board in any- legal proceeding or against the Government in any such
proceeding relating to any matter in which the Board is or has been concerned or acts 20
or appears on behalf of any person in any criminal proceeding instituted by or on
behalf of the Board against such person; or

(e) has himself done or aided or abetted encroachments and illegal constructions
on defence land in contravention of the provisions of this Act and the rules and bye-
laws made thereunder,

(2) The Central Government may remove from a Board any member who, in the opinion
of the Central Government, has so abused in any manner his position as a member of the
Board as to render his continuance as a member detrimental to the public interests.

(3) The General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command may, on receipt of a report
from the Officer Commanding the station remove from a Board any military officer nominated 30
as a member of the Board who is, in the opinion of the Officer Commanding the station,
unable to discharge his duties as a member of the Board and has failed to resign his office.

as

(4) No member shall be removed from a Board under sub-section (/) or sub-section (2)
of this section unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against
his removal. ce

Consequences 35.67) member removed under clause (6) of sub-section (/) or under sub-section (3)
of removal. of section 34 shall, if otherwise qualified, be eligible for re-election or re-nomination. .

(2) Amember removed under clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (/) of section 34
shall not be eligible for re-election or nomination for the period during which, but for such
removal, he would have continued in office. ५०

(3) Amember removed under sub-section (2) of section 34 shall not be eligible for re-
election or nomination until the expiry of three years from the date of his removal.

Member of the 36. Every member of the Board shall be deemed to be a publi¢ servant within the
Board tobe meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code and clause (c) of section 2 of the Prevention _ 45 of 186

poe servant, of Corruption Act, 1988, UG 49 of 1988


ai

(/) A Board may make regulations consistent with this Act and with the rules made Power to make
thereunder to provide for all or any of the following matters, namelys—

(a) the time and place of its meetings;
(0) the manner in which notice of the meeting shall be given;
(९) the conduct of proceedings at meetings and the adjournments of meetings;

(d) the custody of the common seal of the Board and the purposes for which it
shall be used; and

(e) the appointment of committees for any purpose and the determination of all
matters relating to the constitution and procedure of such committees, and the
lo delegation to such committees, subject to any conditions which the Board thinks fit to

impose, of any of the powers or duties of the Board under this Act other than a power
to make regulations or bye-laws,

(2) No regulation made under clause (e) of sub-section (/) shall take effect until it has
been approved by the Central Government.

8 (3) No regulation made under this section shall take effect until it has been published

in such manner as the Central Government may direct,
49. (1) A Board may - Joint action
(@) join with any other local authority— authority.
(0 in appointing a joint committee for any purpose in which they are
4० jointly interested and in appointing a chairman of such committee;
(if) in delegation to such committee power to frame terms binding on the
Board and such other local authority as to the construction and future
maintenance of any joint work or to exercise any power which might be exercised
by the Board or by such other local authority; and
(iii) in making regulations for regulating the proceedings of any such
committee relating to the purposes for which it has been appointed; or
(0) with the previous sanction of the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the
Command, and the State Government concemed, enter into an agreement with any
other local authority regarding the levy of any tax or toll whereby the said tax or toll
30 respectively leviable by the Board and by such other local authority may be levied
together instead of separately within the limits of the area hereafter in this section
referred to as the aggregate area subject to the control of the Board and such other
local authority.

(2) If any difference of opinion arises between any Board and other local authority
3 acting together under this section, the decision thereon of the Central Government or of an
officer appointed by the Central Government in this behalf shall be final.

(3) When any agreement such as is referred to in-clause (b) of sub-section (/) has
been entered into, then -

(a) where the agreement relates to octroi or terminal tax or toll, the party to the
Yo agreement (the Board, or as the case may be, such other local authority) which is
specified in this behalf in the agreement,—

(0 shall have the same powers to establish octroi limits and octroi stations
and places for the collection of octroi, terminal tax and toll within the aggregate
area as it has within the area ordinarily subject to its control;

us (ii) shall have the same powers of collecting such octroi, terminal tax
or toll in the aggregate area and the provisions of any enactment in force


Report on

22

relating to the levy of such octroi, terminal tax or toll by it Shall apply ;
same manner as if the aggregate area were comprised within the areq ote. the
subject to its control; Marily

(6) the total of the collection of such octroi, tax or toll made in the ager
and the costs thereby incurred shall be divided between the cantonment fund ar?
fund subject to the control of such other local authority, in such proportion Ps the &
have been determined by the agreement. 7m May

50. (/) Every Board shall, as soon as may be after the close of the financial Year ang

administration. ot later than the date fixed in this behalf by the Central Government, submit to the Cent

Power of
Central
Government to
require
production of
documents.

Inspection.

Power to call

for documents.

Government through the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, a je
the administration of the cantonment during the preceding financial year, in such form and Is
containing such details as the Central Government may direct.

(2) The comments, if any, of the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the
on such report shall be communicated by him to the Board which shall be allowed a
time to furnish a reply thereto, and the comments together with the reply, if any, shall be Is
forwarded to the Central Government along with the report.

Control ’

51. The Central Government or such officer or authority as may be authorised by the
Central Government in this behalf may at any time require a Board—

(a) to produce any record, correspondence, plan or other document in its 70
possession or under its control;

(6) to furnish any return, plan, estimate, statement, account or statistics relating
to its proceedings, duties or works;

(c) to furnish or obtain and furnish any report.

52. The Central Government or the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command 25
or the Director General or the Principal Director, may depute any person in the service of the
Government to inspect or examine any department of the office of, or any service or work
undertaken by, or thing belonging to, a Board, and to report thereon, and the Board and its
officers and employees shall be bound to afford the person so deputed access at all reasonable
times to the premises and property of the Board and to all records, accounts and other 30
documents the inspection of which he may consider necessary to enable him to discharge
his duties.

53. The General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command or the Principal Director,
may, by order in writing, — »

(a) call for any book or document in the possession or under the control of the 35
Board;
(6) require the Board to furnish such statements, accounts, reports and copies

of documents relating to its proceedings, duties or works as he thinks fit.

54. If, on receipt of any information or report obtained under section 51 or section 52
or section 53, the Central Government or the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the 4०
Command or the Director General or the Principal Director is of opinion—

(a) that any duty imposed on a Board by or under this Act has not been performed
or has been performed in an imperfect, inefficient or unsuitable manner; or ot
(6) that adequate financial provision has not been made for the performance Of (५०

any such duty,
| i it or he thinks fit, to make arrangements
it or he may direct the Board, within such Lala fel duty, oras the case may be, to make

to its or his satisfaction for the proper perform: uy:
financial provision to its or his satisfaction for the performance of the duty


23

Provided that unless in the opinion of the Central Government or the General Officer
Commanding-in-Chief, the Command or the Director General or the Principal Director, as the
case may be, the immediate execution of such order is necessary, it or he shall, before making
any direction under this section, give the Board an opportunity of showing cause why such

हु. direction should not be made.

55. If, within the period fixed by a direction made.under section 54, any action the
taking of which has been directed under that section has not been duly taken, the Central
aang event or the General Officer Commanding-in-Chie, the Command or the Director General
or the Principal Director, as the case may be, may make arrangements for the taking of such

Jo action, and may direct that all expenses connected therewith shall be defrayed out of the
cantonment fund.

56. (1) If the President dissents from any decision of the Board which he considers
prejudicial to the health, welfare, discipline or security of the Forces in the cantonment, he
may, for reasons to be recorded in the minutes, by order in writing, direct the suspension of

{§ action thereon for any period not exceeding one month and, if he does so, shall forthwith
refer the matter to the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command.

(2) Ifthe District Magistrate considers any decision of a Board to be prejudicial to the
public health, safety or convenience, he may, after giving notice in writing of his intention to
the Board, refer the matter to the Central Government, and pending the disposal of the

Zo reference to the Central Government no action shall be taken on the decision.

(3) If any Magistrate who is a member of a Board, being present at a meeting, dissents
from any decision which he considers prejudicial to the public health, safety or convenience,
he may, for reasons to be recorded in the minutes and after giving notice in writing of his
intention to the President, report the matter to the District Magistrate; and the President

as shall, on receipt of such notice, direct the suspension of action on the decision for a period
sufficient to allow of a communication being made to the District Magistrate and of his taking
proceedings as provided in sub-section (2).

(4) Ifthe Chief Executive Officer considers any decision of the Board taken ata meeting,
to be in contravention of the provisions of this Act, rulés, regulations or bye-laws made
30 thereunder and the general guidelines issued by the Central Government from time to time in
this regard, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and after informing the President in
this behalf, forthwith refer the matter to the Principal Director who shall if considered
appropriate direct the suspension of action on the said decision for a period not exceeding

one month.

35° (5) The Principal Director shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing on the reference

made under sub-section (4), refer the matter to the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the

Command along with recommendation on whether or not the said decision of the Board
should be revoked and inform the matter to Director General Defence Estates.

57. The Central Government may, at any time, review any decision or order of the
Yo Board or the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, and pass such orders
thereon as it may deem fit:

Provided that where it is proposed to modify a decision or order of the Board reasonable ,

opportunity shall be given to the Board to show cause why the decision or order in question
should not be modified.

us” 58. (7) The General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, may at any
time —
. (व) direct that any matter or any specific proposal other than one which has been
referred to the Central Government under sub-section (2) of section 56 be considered
or reconsidered by the Board; or

Power to
provide for
enforcement of
direction under
section 54

Power to
override
decision of

Power of

Government to

Power of
General Officer
Commanding-
in-Chief, the
Command, on
reference
under section
56 oF
otherwise.


|

24

nnsion, for such period as may be stated in the order, Of action
on = 100 of बल, other than a decision which has bo लाल हे him
b-section (/) of section 56, and thereafter cancel the eae at . भा
Board a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why bos na शव tt
made, direct that the decision shall not be carried into ८ t or carted 5
into effect with such modifications as he may specify.

isi ferred to him under sub-sections (/) ang
2) When any decision of a Board has been rel o
(#)of: in 56, the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, may, by order ia
iting —

(a) cancel the order given by the President directing the suspension Of action; of lo
(0) extend the duration of the order for such period as he thinks fit; or

0) after giving the Board a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why such
multe shoul not be made, direct that the decision shall not be carried into effect of
that it shall be carried into effect by the Board with such modifications as he may
specify,

है isi 031 Government
Power of 59. (1) When any decision of a Board has been referred to the Cent é
Central under sub-section (2) of section 56, the Central Government may, after consulting the General
tretrence "Officer Commanding in-Chief, the Command, by order in writing —
pasha (@) direct that no action be taken on the decision; or

(0) direct that the decision be carried into effect either without modification or 20
with such modifications as it may specify.

Is

Supersession 60. (/) If, inthe opinion of the Central Governme!

in the Official 25-
be incompetent or in default or to have exceeded or abused its

(2) When a Board is Superseded by an order under sub-section (/)—

(a) all members of the Board shall, on such date as may be specified in the order,
vacate their offices as such members but without Prejudice to their eligibility for election
or nomination under clause (०)

3०

(0) during the Supersession of the Board, all powers and duties conferred and
imposed upon the Board by or under this Act shall be exercised
Officer Commanding the Station, or by

Validity of 61. (7) No act or proceeding of a Board ot of any committee
neat, by reason only of the existence of a vacancy in the Board or co;

(2) No disqualification or defect
acting as the President or amember
Or proceeding of the Board or
the act being done or the py

ofa Board shall be invalid
mmittee,

in the election, nomination or intment of Person
ofa Board or of any such commits, ities,
Conhmitee ifthe majority ofthe persons present at the tine nt
roceeding being taken were duly qualified members thereof,


1S

2०

as

30

35

Yo

25

(3) Any document or minutel which purport to be the record of the proceedings of a
Board or any committee of a Board shall, if made and signed substantially in the manner
prescribed for the making and signing of the record of such proceedings, be presumed to be a
correct record of the proceedings of a duly convened meeting, held by a duly constituted Board
‘or committee, as the case may be, whereof all the members were duly qualified,

CHAPTER IV
DUTIES AND DISCRETIONARY FUNCTIONS OF BOARDS

62. It shall be the duty of every Board, so far as the funds at its disposal permit, to make
reasonable provision within the cantonment for—

(0) lighting streets and other public places;
(ii watering streets and other public places;

(iii) cleansing streets, public places and drains, abating nuisances and removing
noxious vegetation;

(iv) regulating offensive, dangerous or obnoxious trades, callings and practices;

(vy) removing, on the ground of public safety, health or convenience,
undesirable obstructions and projections in streets and other public placts;

(vi) securing or removing dangerous buildings and places;

(vii) acquiring, maintaining, changing and regulating places for the disposal of
the dead; F

(viii) constructing, altering and maintaining streets, culverts, bridges, causeways,
markets, slaughter-houses, latrines, privies, urinals, drains, drainage works and
sewerage works and regulating their use;

(ix) planting and maintaining trees on roadsides and other public places;

(x) providing or arranging for a sufficient supply of potable water, where such
supply does not exist, guarding from pollution water used for human consumption,
and preventing polluted water from being so used;

(xi) registering births and deaths;

(xii) preventing and checking spread of dangerous diseases; establishing and
maintaining a system of public vaccination and inoculation for the said objective;

(xiii) establishing and maintaining or supporting public hospitals, maternity and
child welfare centres and dispensaries, and providing public medical relief;

(xiv) establishing and maintaining or assisting primary schools;

(xv) rendering assistance in extinguishing fires, and protecting light and property
when fire occurs;

(xvi) maintaining and developing the value of property vested in, or entrusted
to, the management of the Board;

(xvii) establishing and maintaining civil defence services;
(xviii) preparing and implementing town planning schemes;

(xix) preparing and implementing plans for economic development and social
justice;

(xx) naming and numbering of streets and premises;
(xxi) according or refusing permission to erect or re-erect building;
(xxif) organising, promoting or supporting cultural and sports activities;

Duties of


Power to
manage
property

Discretionary
functions of
Board.

26

(xxiii) celebrating Independence Day and Republic Day and incurring expenditure
thereon,

(xxiv) fulfilling any other obligation imposed upon it by or under this Act or any
other law for the time being in force.

63. A Board may, subject to any conditions imposed by the Central Government, 5

i by the Central Government on such terms
anage any property entrusted to its management i
pi the Hai of rents and profits accruing from such property as may be determined by
rule made under section 346.

64. (/) A Board may, within the cantonment, make provision for—

(i) laying out in areas, whether previously built upon or not, new streets, and [0
acquiring land for that purpose and for the construction of buildings, and compounds
of buildings, to abut on such streets;

ii) ir ishi intainit i ‘ks, gardens, offices,
(ii) constructing, establishing or maintaining public pari
dairies, bathing or washing places, drinking fountains, tanks, wells and other works of IS
public utility;
(iii) reclaiming unhealthy localities;

(vi) furthering educational objects by measures other than the establishment
and maintenance of primary schools;

(v) setting up or supporting higher schools, colleges and vocational, professional
and special education;

(vi) constructing, and maintaining works and structures, including rainwater
harvesting, for providing supply of water for public and private purposes;

(vii) constituting, maintaining and managing supply and distribution of electricity,
including by exploiting non-conventional energy sources, to public and private
premises; é

(viii) taking a census and granting rewards for information which may tend to
secure the correct registration of vital Statistics;

(é) making a survey;

(x) giving relief on the occurrence of local epidemics, floods, famines or other
natural calamities by the establishment or maintenance of relief work or otherwise; 30

(मी securing or assisting to secure suitable Places for the carryi
offensive dangerous or obnoxious trade, calling or Occupation;

(xii) establishing and maintaining a farm or other Place for the disposal of
sewage!

ing on of any

(xiii) constructing, subsidising or guaranteeing tram other means
locomotion, and electric lighting or electric power a = =

(xiv) establishing and maintaining cattle Pounds;

(xv) arranging for civic reception with ior i
bette Prior approval of the Officer Commanding

(vd providing housing accommodation for any class of inhabitants; Yo

(xvii) conservation and maintenance of ancient and histori lumen
archaeological sites and remains or Place of public inbdndate a the cache “

(xviii) developing land resources under the management of the Board;


15

2०

30

35

५०

us

27

(xix) preparing and implementing group housing schemes;
(xx) establishing and undertaking remunerative projects;
(xx/) developing small-scale and cottage industries;

(xxii) developing expertise in different areas of urban governance and local self-

government to and able to provide consultancy to other Municipal and Development
Authorities;

(xxii/) adopting any measure, other than a measure specified in section 62 or in
the foregoing provisions of this section likely to promote the safety, health or
convenience of the inhabitants of the cantonment;

(xxiv) establishing and maintaining or supporting libraries, museums, art galleries,
botanical or zoological collections;

(xxv) establishing and maintaining or supporting stadia, gymnasia, akharas and
places for sports and games;

(xxvi) establishing theatres and cinemas;

(xxvii) organising and managing fairs and exhibitions;

(xxviii) constructing and maintaining:-—

(a) _rest-houses;

(b) poor-houses;

(०) infirmaries;

(@) children’s home;

(e) houses for deafand dumb and for disabled and handicapped children;
(f) shelters for destitute and disabled persons;

(g) asylums for persons of unsound mind;

(A) old age homes;

(0 working women's hostels;

(xxix) establishing and managing chemical or bacteriological laboratories for the
examination or analysis of water, food and drugs for the detection of diseases or
research connected with the public health or medical relief;

(xxx) providing relief to destitute and disabled persons;

(xxx/) establishing and maintaining veterinary hospitals;

(xxxii) constructing and maintaining warehouses and godowns;

(xxxiii) constructing and managing garages, sheds and stands for vehicles and

(xxxiv) constructing and managing community halls and convention halls;

(०८०) holding seminars, workshops, public debates, and similar activities
particularly on issues and rules and regulations of civic importance;

Explanation—For the purposes of clause (xvii)—

(a) “conservation” means the supervision, management and maintenance of a

“place to retain its historical, architectural, aesthetic or cultural significance or of

environment and includes the protection, improvement, preservation, restoration,
reconstruction and adoption or a combination of more than one of these activities, and
the use of such place in a way that ensures the social as well as economic benefits;

(6) “ancient and historical monuments, archaeological sites and remains or place
of public importance” include buildings, artefacts, structures, areas, or precincts of
historical or aesthetical or educational or scientific or cultural or environmental
significance, and those natural features of environment signifcance or scenic beauty,
as may be declared by the Board.


Power of
expenditure
of
educational,
health and
other
purposes
outside the
cantonment.

General power
of taxation.

28

thin or outside the ante “om ate the
पक oe. पर आलम Fg asd bean appropriate charge on be
cantonment fund or the cantonment development fund.
65.(/)A Board may make provision subject to availability of funds for— 5
(i) educational objects in a cantonment;
(ii) the objectives of public health and medical care; sialon
(iii) works relating to water-supply, drainage and lighting;
(iv) the preservation, improvement and wee ‘environment,
outside the cantonment, if it is satisfied that the interests of the residents of the cantonment |p
will be served thereby.

(2) A Board may, either wi

CHAPTER V
TAXES AND FEES
Imposition of taxation
66. (7) The Board shall, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, 15
impose the following taxes for the purposes of this Act :—

(@) property tax; and
(6) tax on trades, professions callings and employments,

(2) In addition to the taxes specified in sub-section (/) the Board may, for the
Purposes of this Act, impose any tax which under any enactment for the time being in force 20
may be imposed in any municipality in the State in which the cantonment is situated:

Provided that the Board shall revise every five years, the rates of taxes imposed under
sub-sections (/) and (2) :

Provided further that the Board shall not abolish any tax imposed under this section or
vary it to the Board’s financial disadvantage without the Prior sanction of the Central 257
Government and the tax mentioned in sub-section (2) shall not exceed the ceiling prescribed
in this behalf by clause (2) of article 276 of the Constitution.

(3) The taxes specified in sub-sections (7) and (2) shall be imposed, assessed and

collected in accordance with the provisions of this Act, rules and the bye-laws made
thereunder.

30

(#) Any tax imposed under this section shall take effect from the date of - its
notification in the Official Gazette or where any later date is specified in this behalf in the
67. The Board shall, for the Purposes of this Act, charge the following fees, 5
namely:— , 3
(०) licence fee on vehicles and animals;
(6) licence fee on advertisements other than advertisements in newspapers;
(० fee relating to maintenance of property records;
(@) Processing fee on buildings payable along with application for sanction of
the building plan; Yo
(e) licence fee on entry of vehicles;
(0 betterment fee on the increase in land value caused by the execution of any
development work; and
() Such other-fee which the Board may by regulation specify:
Provided that the foe charged under clause (g) of this section shall not be less than the us
Cost incurred by the Board fr or in connection with the specific service to which the fee
relates,


29

68. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the property tax shall be levied on lands
and buildings in the cantonment and shall consist of not less than ten and not more than
thirty per cent of the annual rateable value of tands and buildings:

Provided that the Board may, when fixing the rate at which the property tax shall be —

5 levied during any year, determine that the rate leviable in respect of lands and buildings or
portions of lands and buildings in which any particular class of trade or business is carried
on shall be higher than the rate determined in respect of other lands and buildings or portions
of other lands and buildings by an amount not exceeding one half of the rate so fixed:

Provided further that the tax may be levied on graduated scale, if the Board so
10 determines.

Explanation.—Where any portion of a land or building is able to a higher rate of the

tax such portion shall be deemed to be a separate property for the purpose of municipal
taxation alone.

69, When a resolution has been passed by the Board proposing to impose a tax under
1S section 66, the Board shall in the manner prescribed in section 319 publish a notice
specifying— :
(a) the tax which it is proposed to impose;

(6) the persons or classes of persons to be made liable and the description of the

property or other taxable thing or circumstance in respect of which they are to be made
4० liable; and

(०) the rate at which the tax is tobe levied.

70.{1) Any inhabitant of the caatonment may, within thirty days from the publication
of the notice under section 69, submit to the Board an objection in writing to all or any of the
proposals contained therein and the Board shall take such objection into consideration and

25° pass orders thereon by special resolution.

(2) Unless the Board decides to abandon its proposals contained in the notice
published under section 69, it shall submit to the Central Government through the General
Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, all such proposals along with the objections, if
any, received in connection therewith together with its opinion thereon and any modifications

3,0 proposed in accordance with such opinion and the notice published under the said section.

71. The Central Government may authorise the Board to impose the tax either in the
original form or, if any objection has been submitted, in that form or any such modified form
as it thinks fit.

72. (1) Where the Central Government is of opiniomthat for securing adequate financial

3¢ provision for the efficient discharge of the duties and functions of a Board it is necessary so
to do, it may issue directions to the Board requiring it to impose within the eantonment area
any tax which it is empowered under this Act to impose and which is not already imposed
within the said area or to enhance any existing tax in such a manner or to such an extent as the
Central Government considers fit and the Board shall, in accordance with the direction,
Yo forthwith impose or enhance such tax in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that—

(a) no such directions shall be issued without giving the Board and the

inhabitants of the cantonment area, an opportunity of showing cause why such
directions should not be issued;

us (6) the Central Government shall take into consideration any objection which

the Board or any inhabitant of the cantonment area may make against the imposition os
enhancement of such tax;

Norms of
Property tax.

Objections and
disposal
thereof.


Definition
of “annual
rateable
value”,

Incidence of

ON

30

odify or abolish such tax
11 not be lawful for the Board to mi when
लक । en without the sanction of the Central Government,

॥ or modify any dir

he Central Governmest may, at any time, cance! eet
७७४ 8 wader sub-section (/) with effect from such date as may be specifieg inthe
direction and on and from the date so specified the imposition or enhancement Of such कं
tax, shall cease or be modified accordingly.

73. For the purposes of this Chapter, “annual rateable value” means—

hospitals, factories ang
‘a) in the case of hotels, colleges, schools, ' any
other (01408: which the Chief Executive Officer decides to assess under thi,
clause, one-twentieth of the sum obtained by adding the estimated Present cos \
of erecting the building to the estimated value of the land appertaining thereto,
and

(0) in the case of building or land not assessed under clause (a), the Bross
annual rent for which such building exclusive of furniture or machinery therein or
such land is actually let or, where the building or land is not let or in the opinion Is
of the Chief Executive Officer is let for a sum less than its fair letting value, might
reasonably be expected to let from year to year :

Provided that, where the annual rateable value of any building is, by reason of
exceptional circumstances, in the opinion of the President Cantonment Board, excessive
if calculated in the aforesaid manner, the President Cantonment Board may fix the annual 2०
rateable value at any less amount which appears to him to be just.

74. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in the notification imposing the tax,
every tax assessed on the annual rateable value of buildings or lands or of both shall be
leviable primarily upon the actual occupier of the property upon which the said tax is
assessed, if he is the owner of the buildings or land or holds them ona building or other 25-
lease granted by or on behalf of the Government or the Board or on a building lease
from any person.

(2) In any other case, the tax shall be primarily leviable as follows, namely :--
(a) if the property is let, upon the lessor;
(6) if the property is sub-let, upon the superior lessor; 30

(c) if the property is unlet, upon the person in whom the right to let the same
vests.

(3) The liability of the several owners of, any building which is, or Purports to be,
severally owned in parts or flats or rooms or Separate tenements for the payment of
such tax or any instalment thereof, payable during the period of such ownership shall be 35
joint and several.

(4) On failure to recover any sum due on account of such tax from the person
primarily liable, these may be recovered from the occupier of any part of the buildings
or lands in respect of which the tax is due such portion of the sum due as bears to the
whole amount due the same ratio which the rent annually payable by such occupier ५०
bears to the aggregate amount of rent so payable in respect of the whole of the said
buildings or lands, or to the aggregate amount of the letting value thereof, if, any, stated
in the authenticated assessment list.

(5) An occupier who makes any Payment for which he is not primarily liable under ¢
this section shall, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be entitled to be ५
reimbursed by the person primarily liable for the payment, and, if so entitled, may
deduct the amount so paid from the amount of any rent from time to time becoming due
from him to such person.


31

Assessment list

75. When a tax assessed on the annual rateable value of buildings or lands or both is
imposed, the Chief Executive Officer shall cause an assessment list of all buildings or lands
in the cantonment, or of both, as the case may be, to be prepared in such form and in such
manner as the Central Government may by rule prescribe.

‘2 76. (1) The Chief Executive Officer shall, at the same time, give public notice of a date,
not less than one month thereafter, when he shall proceed to consider the valuation and
assessments entered in the assessment list, and, in all cases in which any property is for the
first time assessed or the assessment is increased shall also give written notice thereof to the
owner and to any lessee or occupier of the property.

lo (2) Any objection to 8 valuation or assessment shall be made in writing to the Chief
Executive Officer before the date fixed in the notice, and shall state in what respect the
valuation or assessment is disputed, and all objections so made shall be recorded in a
register to be kept for the purpose by the Chief Executive Officer.

(3) The objections shall be inquired into and investigated, and the persons making
1S them shall be allowed an opportunity of being heard either in person or by authorised agent
by the Chief Executive Officer.

77. (1) When all objections made under section 76 have been disposed of, and the
revision of the valuation and assessment has been completed, the assessment list shall be
authenticated by the signatures of the Chief Executive Officer and the President Cantonment

20 Board, who shall, certify that except in the cases if any, in which amendments have been
made as shown therein no valid objection has been made to the annual rateable value or any
other matters entered in the said list:

Provided that whenever the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief the Command or the
Principal Director comes to the conclusion that the assessment lists or any entries therein
AS have not been correctly prepared and are prejudicial to the interests of the Board or of the
Central Government, they may suo moto re-open the said assessment and issue such directions
as deemed fit.

(2) The assessment list so authenticated shall be deposited in the office of the Board,

and shall there be open, free of charge, during office hours to all owners lessees and occupiers
30 of property comprised therein or the authorised agents of such persons, and a public notice
that it is so open shall forthwith be published.

78. Subject to such alterations as may thereafter be made in the assessment list under
the provisions of this Chapter and to the result of any appeal made thereunder, the entries in
the assessment list authenticated and deposited as provided in section 77 shall be accepted

3 as conclusive evidence—

(a) for the purposes of assessing any tax imposed under this Act, of the annual
rateable value or other valuation of all buildings and lands to which such entries
respectively refer; and

(6) for the purposes of any tax imposed on buildings or lands, of the amount of

Yo each such tax leviable thereon during the year to which such list relates.

79. (1) The Chief Executive Officer may after obtaining the approval of President

Cantonment Board amend the assessment list at any time—

(०) by inserting or omitting the name of any person whose name ought to have
been or ought to be inserted or omitted; or

us (6) by inserting or omitting any property which ought to have been or ought to
be inserted or omitted; or

Assessment
list.

Revision of
assessment
list.

Authentication
of assessment

Evidential
value of
assessment


Preparation of

Notice of
transfers.

Notice of
erection of

> |

32

hich has been err

ing the assessment on any property ५/

“nl aaa es fraud, accident or mistake whether on the Part of
administration or assessees; or

(4) by revaluing or re-assessing any property the value of which has been
increased; or 5

(०) in the case of a tax payable by an occupier, by changing the name Of the
occupier:

i h amendment become liable to
Provided that no person shall by reason of. any sucl pay
any tax or increase of tax in respect of any period prior to the commencement of the Year in
which the assessment is made. lo

(2) Before making any amendment under sub-section (/) the Chief Executive Officer
shall give to any person affected by the amendment, notice of not less than one month that
he proposes to make the amendment.

i i objection to the Chief
(3) Any person interested in any such amendment may tender an
Executive Officer in writing before the time fixed in the notice, and shall be allowed an Ise
Opportunity of being heard in Support of the same in person or by authorised agent.

80. The Chief Executive Officer shall Prepare a new assessment list at least once in
every three years, and for this Purpose the provisions of sections 75 1079 shall apply in like
manner as they apply for the purpose of the Preparation of an assessment list for the first 2
time.

81. (1) Whenever the title of any person primarily liable for the Payment ofa tax on the
annual rateable value of any building or land to or over such building or land is transferred,
the person whose title is transferred and the person to whom the same is transferred shall,
within three months after the execution of the instrument of transfer or after its registration,
if it is registered, or after the transfer is effected, if no instrument is executed, give notice of a5
such transfer to the Chief Executive Officer.

(2) Inthe event of the death of: any person primarily liable as aforesaid, the person on
whom the title of the deceased devolves shall give notice of such devolution to the Chief
Executive Officer within six months from the death of the deceased,

(3) The notice to be given under this Section shall be in such form as may be determined 30
by rules made under section 346, and the transferee or other Person on whom the title

devolves shall, if so required, be bound to produce before the Chief Executive Officer any
documents evidencing the transfer or devolution.

(4) Every person who makes a transfer as aforesaid without giving such notice to the
Chief Executive Officer shall Continue liable for the Payment of all taxes assessed on the 3$”

Property transferred until he gives notice or until the transfer has been recorded in the
‘Tegisters of the Board, but nothing in this section shall be held to affect the liability of the

transferee for the Payment of the said tax,

(5) The Chief Executive Officer shall record every transfer or devolution of title notified

to him under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) in the assessment list and other tax registers Yo
of the Board.

(6) Any failure to comply with the Provisions contained in sub-sections (J) to (3) shall
be punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.

82. (1) If any building is erected or re-erected within the meaning of section 235, the
Owner shall give notice thereof to the Chief Executive Officer within thirty days from the date US
Of its completion or occupation, whichever is earlier.


Iv

20

33

(2) Any person failing to give the notice required by sub-section (/) shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to five thousand or ten times the amount of the tax payable on the
said building, as erected or re-erected, as the case may be, in respect of a period of three
months, whichever is greater.

Remission and refund

83. If any building is wholly or partly demolished or destroyed or otherwise deprived
of value, the Board may, on the application in writing of the owner or occupier, remit or refund
such portion of any tax assessed on the annual rateable value thereof as it thinks fit but no

Femission or refund shall take effect in respect of any period commencing more than two
months Before the delivery of such application.

84. In a cantonment when any building or land has remained vacant and unproductive
of rent for sixty or more consecutive days the Chief Executive Officer shall remit or refund, as
the case may be, one-half of such portion of any tax assessed on the annual rateable value
thereof as may be proportionate to the number of. days during which the said building or land
has remained vacant and unproductive of rent: :

Provided that in any cantonment which the Central Government, by notification in the
Official Gazette, has declared to be a hill cantonment and in respect of which the Central

Government by the same or a like notification has declared a portion of the yearto be the
season for the cantonment—

(a) when any building or land is leased for occupation through the season only,
but the rent charged is the full annual rent, no remission or refund shall be admissible
under this section in respect of any time outside the season during which the building
or land remains vacant;

(6) when such building or land has remained vacant and unproductive of rent, in

AS” respect of any time, not being less than sixty consecutive days during which within

30

35

Yo

US

the season, the Chief Executive Officer shall remit or refund one-half of such portion of
any tax assessed on the annual rateable value thereof as bears to the whole of the tax
So assessed the same proportion as the number of days during which the building or
land has remained vacant and unproductive of rent bears to the total length of the
season,

85. (/) For the purpose of obtaining a partial remission or refund of tax, the owner of
a building composed of separate tenements may request the Chief Executive Officer at the
time of the assessment of the building, to enter in the assessment list, in addition to the
annual rateable value of the whole building, a note recording in detail the annual rateable
value of each separate tenement.

(2) When any tenement, the annual value of which has been thus separately recorded,
has remained vacant and unproductive of rent for sixty or more consecutive days one half of
such portion of any tax assessed on the annual rateable value of the whole building shall be
remitted or refunded as would have been remitted or refunded if the tenement had been
Separately assessed.

86. No remission or refund under section 84 or section 85 shall be made unless notice
in writing of the fact that the building, land or tenement has become vacant and unproductive
of rent, has been given to the Chief Executive Officer and no remission or refund shall take

effect in respect of any period commencing more than fifteen days before the delivery of
such notice.

87. (/) For the purposes of sections 84 and 85 no building, tenement or land shall be
deemed vacant if maintained as a resost or town or country house or be deemed unproductive

of rent if let to @ tenant who has a continuing right of occupation thereof, whether he is in
actual occupation or not.

Demolition,
etc., buildings.

Power to
require entry in
of details of
buildings.

Notice to be
given of the
in which
remission or
refund is

What
buildings, etc.,

are to be


Notice to be
given of every
occupation of
vacant building
or house.

Tax on
buildings and
land to be
4 charge

thereon.

Inspection of
imported
goods, octroi,
terminal tax
and toll, etc.

Power to
seize etc,

34

(2) The burden of proving all facts entitling any person to claim relief under section ३)

him.
or section 84 or section 85 shall be upon
88. (/) The owner of any building, tenement or land in a है emission op
fund toe has been given under section 84 or section 85 ren Notice Of the 1»
SSapelon of such building tenement or land within fifteen days of such re-occupation,

ion (/ 1 ishable
(238 तर mn aa ips finde he cht
with fine which shall not be less ree payab! i
period which it has been re-occupied and whiey,
tenement or land in respect of the period during cies sche
may extend.to two thousand five hundred rupees, or to ten times the amount of the said tay
whichever sum is greater. lo
Charge on immovable property
ilding or land shall, subjecy
89. A tax assessed on the annual rateable value of any buil
to the prior payment of the land-revenue, if any, due to the Government thereon, be a firs,
charge upon the building or land.
Octroi, terminal tax and toll IS
bringing ivi i 11815 within the limi
90. E Person bringing or receiving any goods, vehicles or ani re limits
of any cantonmentin which aco ण ermina tao lis viable shall when sorequrcae
an officer duly authorised by the Chief Executive Officer in this behalf, so far as may be
necessary for ascertaining the amount of tax chargeable—
(a) permit that officer to inspect, examine or weigh such goods, vehicles or Qo
animals; and
(6) communicate to that officer any information, and exhibit to him any bill,
invoice or document of a like nature, which such person may possess relating to such
goods, vehicles or animals.
91. (7) Any person who takes or attempts to take past any octroi station or any other 25
Place appointed within a cantonment for the collection of octroi, terminal tax or toll any
goods, vehicles or animals, on account of which octroi, terminal tax or toll is leviable and

5

Which may extend either to ten times the value of such octroi, terminal tax or toll, or to tws 3०
thousand five hundred rupees, whichever is greater, and,which shall not be less than twice
the value of such octroi, terminal tax or toll, as the case may be.

terminal tax or toll is chargeable or any part or number thereof which is of sufficient valne ५ 35

(3) The Chief Executive Officer, or an officer of the Board authorised by him, after the
lapse of five days from the seizure, and after the issue of a notice in writing to the person in
whose possession the goods, vehicles or animals were at the time of seizure, fixing the time
wo ac of sale, may cause the property so seized, or so much thereof as may be necessary, Yo

Provided that the Chief Executive Officer may, in any case, order that any article of a
Perishable nature which cannot be kept for five days without serious risk of damage, or
which cannot be kept safe at a cost which, together with the amount of octroi, terminal acer US’
toll, is likely to exceed its value, shall be sold after the lapse of such shorter times as he may,
having regard to the nature of the article, think proper.


oN OENE!fLERNT eae”

35

(# If, at any time before the sale has begun, the person whose property has been
seized tenders to the Chief Executive Officer the amount of all expenses incurred and of the
octroi, terminal tax or toll, the Chief Executive Officer shall release the property seized.

(5) The surplus, if any, of the sale-proceeds shall be credited to the cantonment fund,
and shall, on application made to the Chief Executive Officer within six months after the sale,
be paid to the person in whose possession the property was at the time of seizure, and, if no
such application is made, shall become the property of the Board.

92. It shall be lawful for the Chief Executive Officer, with the previous sanction of the
Board to lease the collection of any octroi, terminal tax or toll for any period not exceeding
‘one year; and the lessee and all persons employed by him in the management and collection

of the octroi, terminal tax or toll shall, in respect thereof,—
(a) be bound by any orders made by the Chief Executive Officer for their guidance;

(8) have such powers exercisable by officers or employees of the Board under
this Act as the Board may confer upon them; and

its (c) be entitled to the same remedies and be subject to the same responsibilities

25

30
5 of 1908.

७०

us

as if they were employed by the Board for the management and collection of the octroi,
terminal tax or toll, as the case may be:

Provided that no article distrained may be sold except under the orders of the Chief
Executive Officer.

Appeals

93. (1) An appeal against the assessment or levy of, or against the refusal to refund,
any tax under this Act shall lie to the District Court.

(2) If the District Court, on the hearing of an appeal under this section, entertains
reasonable doubt on any question as to the liability to, or the principle of assessment of, a
tax, the Court may, either on its ownmotion or on the application of the appellant, draw up
statement of the facts of the case and the point on which doubt is entertained, and refer the
statement with its opinion on the point for the decision of the High Court.

(3) On a reference being made under sub-section (2), the subsequent proceedings in
the case shall be, as nearly as may be, in conformity with the rules relating to references to
the High Court contained in order XLVI of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908.

Explanation.— For the purposes of this section and sections 94, 95, 96, 97 and 102,
“District Court”, in relation to a cantonment, means the Principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction having jurisdiction over the area in which that cantonment is situated, and
includes such other Civil Court having jurisdiction over that area as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, in consultation with the
High Court having jurisdiction over that area.

94. In every appeal the costs shall be in the discretion of the District Court hearing the
appeal.

95. (1) If the Board fails to pay any cost awarded to an appellant within ten days after
the date of the order for payment thereof, the District Court awarding the costs may order
the person having the custody of the balance of the cantonment fund to pay the amount.

(2) Where the appellant fails to pay any costs awarded to the Board within ten days
after the date of the order for payment thereof, the same shall be recoverable by the Board in
the same manner as moneys recoverable by the Board under section 324.

Lease of octroi,
terminal tax or

|!

Costs of

Recovery of
costs from


Conditions of

right to appeal.

Finality of
appellate

Time and

payment of
taxes,

Public notice
for taxes due.

Notice of

36

96. No appeal shall be heard or determined under this Chapter unless—

is, i a tax assessed on the annual Tateable y,

(a) the आए le, 6 8 =. within thirty days next after the date g .
of buildings ee rs the pisessment list under section 77 (exclusive Of the ॥
rete! br chee a copy of the relevant entries therein), OF, as the ८; +
“लए, कम! days of the date on which an amendment is finally made Under
be, mie aan the case of any other tax, within thirty days next after the date
iis recede of the notice of assessment or of alteration of assessment we if no
notice has been given, within thirty days next after the date of the presen of
the first bill in respect thereof: lo

i itted after the expiration of the Petiog

led that an peal may be admitted afte: atior Periog
omer by this section if the appellant satisfies the District Court before
whom the appeal is preferred that he had sufficient cause for not preferring it Within
that period;

दर ४ if any, in dispute in the '
0) the amount including the assessed tax or duty, if any, in ( appeal |S

shall hs —— by the appellant every year on or before the due date in the Office of
the Board till the appeal is decided by the District Court.

97. The order of a District Court confirming, setting aside or modifying an order in
respect of any valuation or assessment or liability to assessment or taxation shall be final:

Provided that it shall be lawful for the District Court, upon application Or on its own 26
Motion, to review any order passed by it in appeal if application in this behalf is made within
three months from the date of the original order.

Payment and recovery of taxes

98. Save as otherwise expressly provided under this Act, any tax imposed under the
Provisions of this Act shall be payable on such dates and in such manner, as the Chief 25
Executive Officer may, by public notice, direct.

99. (1) When any tax has become due the Chief Executive Officer shall cause a
Seperate bill and public notice to be issued as well as Published in a local news paper
specifying the tax and the Period for which it is due for Payment.

(2) The tax shall become due for payment from the date of issue of Public notice under 36
sub-section (/) above.
(3) Any non-receipt of a Bi

ill by a person shall not beacause for non-payment of the tax
notified under sub-section (7)

(2) For every notice of demand which the Chief Executive Officer causes to be served
On any person under this section, a fee of such amount,

vera in each case be fixed by the Chief Executive Officer

101. (/) Ifthe Person liable for
the service of the notice of de


20

a5

30

Yo

us

37

Provided that the Chief Executive Officer shall not recover any sum the liability for
which has been remitted on appeal under this Chapter:

Provided further that the sale of any immovable property attached under this sub-
section shall not be made save under the orders of the Board.

(2) Every warrant issued under this section shall be signed by the Chief Executive
Officer.

102. (/) Ifa person on whom a notice of demand has been served under section 100,
does not, within thirty days from the service of such notice, pay the sum demanded in the
notice, he shall be liable to pay by way of interest, in addition to the sum and other charges
due one per cent., of the sum due for each complete month from the date of expiry of the
period of thirty days as aforesaid.

(2) The amount of interest shall be recoverable in the same manner as moneys recoverable
by the Board under section 324.

Provided that—

(a) where no appeal has been preferred, the Chief Executive officer with the
previous sanction of the Board; and

(6) in any other case, the District Court hearing the appeal under section 93,
may remit the whole or any part of the interest payable in respect of any period.

103. (/) It shall be lawful for any official of the Board to whom a warrant issued under
section 101 is addressed to distrain, wherever it may be found in the cantonment, any
movable property of or standing timber, growing crops or grass belonging to the person
therein named as defaulter, subject to the following conditions, exceptions and exemption,
namely:—

(०) the following property shall not be distrained—

(0) the necessary wearing apparel and bedding of the defaulter or of his
wife or of his children;

(ii) tools of artisans;
(iii) books of account; or

(iv) when the defaulter is an agriculturist, his implements of husbandry,
seed-grain, and such cattle as may be necessary to enable the defaulter to earn
his livelihood; :

(6) The distress shall not be excessive, that is to say, the property distrained
shall be as nearly as possible equal in value to the amount recoverable under the
warrant, and if any property has been distrained which, in the opinion of the Chief
Executive Officer, should not have been distrained, it shall forthwith be returned.

(2) The person charged with the execution of a warrant of distress shall forthwith
make an inventory of the property which he seizes under such warrant, and shall, at
the same time, give a written notice in the form in Schedule III to the person in
possession thereof at the time of seizure that the said property will be sold as therein
mentioned.

104. (/) When the property seized is subject to speedy and natural decay, or
when the expense of keeping it in custody is, when added to the amount to be recovered,
likely to exceed its value, the Chief Executive Officer shall give notice to the person in
whose possession the property was at the time of seizure that it will be sold at once,
and shall sell it accordingly by public auction unless the amount mentioned in the
warrant is forthwith paid.

Interest

payable on
taxes duc.


|

18
ह fi
+ हे not in the meantime suspended by the Chief Executive Officer, o
(2) Ifthe warrant is sized shall, afer the expiry of the period named in the Notice
pest ey (2) of section 103, be sold by public auction by order Of the Chie
served unde I! 2
Executive Officer.

‘ha fee of such amount, not exceed
के istrai de under this Chapter a fee of . tes
two है लए eae ak case be fixed by the Chief Executive Officer Shall be
charged, and the said fee shall be included in the costs of recovery.

6

A@achment 105, (1) When a warrant is issued for the attachment and sale of immovable pr
and sale of

ibiting the defaulter from transferring ..
t hment shall be made by an order prohibiting th
immovable pec feces in any way, and all persons from taking any benefit from such transfer Ig
Property, or charge, and declaring that such property would be sold unless the amount of tax due w

all costs of recovery is paid in the office of the Board within fifteen days from the date of
attachment.

(2) An order under sub-section (/) shall
such property by pasting the same conspicuol
having circulation in the area in whi
mode as may be considered appropri:

be displayed at some place on or adjacent to
usly and by publishing the same inane IS
ich the property is situated or by any other means or
ate by the Chief Executive Officer,

(3) Any transfer of or charge on the Property attached or any
without the written permission of the Chief Executive Officer shall
claims of the Board enforceable under the attachment.

interest thereon Made
be void as against all

20

(4) Where the sum due to the Board with the cost incurred by the Board in the sale of

the property, including publication of Notice in newspaper and a sum equal to five per cent,

of the purchase money for payment to the Purchaser is paid by the defaulter, before the

confirmation of the sale under sub-section (5), the attachment, if any, of the immovable
Property shall be deemed to have been removed. :

(5) After the sale of the Property by auction

writing by the Chief Executive Officer who shall put the person declared to be the Purchaser
in possession of the same and shall grant him a certifi

cate to the effect that he has Purchased
the property to which the Certificate refers,

as aforesaid, it shall be confirmed in

(6) The Central Government may make rules for—

30
(a) regulating the manner of execution of warrants for the attachment and sale of
immovable Property;

(6) charging of fees for the attachm:
included in the cost of recovery 0

ent and sale of immovable Property, to be
f the tax due;

fea nasi 106. (1) If the Chief Executi
about to leave

cantonment immediate payment by
pend ० spout to become due, and cause a notice of demand हे,
proceeds, if Person.

any.


39

(2) If, on the service of such notice, such person does not forthwith pay the sum so
due or about to become due, the amount shall be leviable by distress and sale of movable
property or attachment and sale of immovable property in the manner herein before provided
in this Chapter, and the warrant of such distress and sale or attachment and sale may be

5 issued and executed without any delay. ह

(3) The surplus of the sale proceeds arising out of section 104, section 105 and this
section, if any, shall immediately after the sale of the property, be credited to the cantonment
fund, and the notice of such credit shall immediately be given to the person whose property
has been sold, or to his legal representative and, if such money is claimed, within a period of

0 one year from the date of notice, a refund thereof shalJ be made to the said person or his
representative. डर

(4) Any surplus of the sale proceeds not claimed within one year as-aforesaid shall be
the property of the Board.

107. Instead of proceeding against a defaulter by distress and sale of movable property

1S or attachment and sale of immovable property as herein before provided in this Chapter, or
after a defaulter has been so proceeded against unsuccessfully or with only partial success,

any sum due or the balance of any sum due, as the case may be, from such defaulter on
account of a tax may be recovered from him by a suit in any court of competent jurisdiction.

Special provisions relating to taxation, etc.

20 108. A Board shall be deemed to be a municipal committee for the purposes of taxation
11 of 1881 as per the Municipal Taxation Act, 1881.

‘

109. The Central or the State Government, as the case may be, shall pay to a Board

annually service charges for providing collective municipal services or development work in

a cantonment where the Central or the State Government properties are situated as worked

25 out by the Board based on thé guidelines issued in this behalf by the Central Government or
the State Government.

110. A Board may make special provisions for the cleansing of any factory, hotel, club
or group of buildings or lands used for any one purpose and under one management, and
may fix a special rate and the dates and other conditions for periodical payment thereof,

30 which shall be determined by a written agreement with the person liable for payment of the
conservancy or scavenging tax in respect of such factory, hotel, club or group of buildings
or lands: =

Provided that, in fixing the amount , proper regard shall be had to the probable cost to
the Board of the services to be rendered.

35 111. (/) When in pursuance of section 110, a Board has fixed a special rate for the
cleansing of any factory, hotel, club or group of buildings or lands, such premises shall be
exempted from the payment of conservancy or scavenging tax imposed in the cantonment.

(2) The following buildings and lands shall be exempt from any property tax other
than tax imposed to cover the cost of specific services rendered by tht Board, namely:—

Uo (०) places set apart for public worship and either actually so used or used for no

other purpose and rendering services free of cost without deriving any income

whatsoever;
(0) buildings used for educational purposes, public libraries, play grounds and
dharamshalas which are open to the public and.from which no income is derived;

us 1... (0) hospitals and dispensaries maintained wholly by charitable contributions;

Power to
institute suit
for recovery.

Board to be a
Municipality
for taxation

purposes.

Payment to
be made to a
Board as
service
charges by
Central
Gevernment
or State
Government.

Power to make
special
provision. for
conservancy
in certain
cases.

case of


General Power
of exemption.

Exemption of
poor persons.

disclose

not to affect

> |

40

(d) burning and burial grounds, not being the property of the Government
Board, which are controlled under the provisions of this Act; a

(e) buildings or lands vested ina Board; and
(0 any buildings or lands, or portion of such buildings or lands, Which are the

property of the Government, ;

112. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, either
wholly or in part from the payment of any tax imposed under this Act, any person, or class of
persons or any property or goods or class of property or goods. है

113. A Board may exempt, for a period not exceeding one year at a time from the
payment of any tax, or any portion of a tax imposed under this Act, any person who in ity |
opinion is by reason of poverty unable to pay the same. °

114. (1) The Board may, with the previous sanction of the General Commanding Officer.
in-Chief, the Command, allow any person to compound for any tax.

(2) Every sum due by reason of the composition of a tax under sub-section (/) shall be
recoverable as if it were a tax. - 1S

115. The Board may write off any sum due on account of any tax or rate or of the costs
of recovering*any tax or rate if such sum is, in its opinion, irrecoverable:

Provided that, where the sum written off in favour of any one person exceeds two
thousand and five hundred rupees, the sanction of the General Officer Commanding-in-

Chief, the Command shall be first obtained.

116. (7) The Chief Executive Officer, may, by written notice, call upon any inhabitant
of the cantonment to furnish such information as may be necessary for the purpose of
ascertaining—

(०) whether such inhabitant is liable to pay, or has correctly paid, any tax imposed
under this Act;
(8) at what amount he should be assessed; or
(c) the annual value of the building or land which he occupies and the name and
address of the owner or lessee thereof.

(2) If any person, when called upon under sub-section (J) to furnish information,
neglects to furnish it within the period specified in this behalf by the Chief Executive 30
Officer or furnishes information which is not true to the best of his knowledge or belief,
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and shall
also be liable to be assessed at such amount on account of tax as the Chief Executive
Officer may deemoproper, and the assessment so made shall, subject to the provisions
of this Act, be final. 3s

117. No assessment and no charge or demand on account of any tax or fee shall
be impeached or affected by reason only of any mistake in the name of any person liable
to pay such tax or fee, or inthe description of any property or thing, or any mistake in
the amount of the assessment, charge or dethand, if the directions contained in this Act
and the rules and bye-laws made thereunder have in substance and effect been complied Yo
with; but any pergén who sustains any special damage by reasqn of any such mistake
shall-be entitled to recover such compensation for the same, as the Board may decide.

118, No distress levied or attachment made under this Chapter shall be deemed
unlawful, nor shall any person. making thie same be deemed a trespasser, on account us
se tice of demand, warrant of distress or attachment

defect of form im the no
ax cp other proceeding relating thereto; nor shall any such eos —
trespasser ab initio on account of any pane ter comm ;
any person who sustains any special damage rosea eh eee fe earn
be entitled to recover such compensation for ॥

4०

श्र


41

CHAPTER VI
CANTONMENT FUND AND PROPERTY
Caritonment fund and cantonment development fund

119. (1) There shall be formed for every cantonment a cantonment Tund and there shall
£ 0७० placed to the credit thereof the following sums, namely:—

(a) the balance ifany, of the cantonment fund formed for the cantonment
2ori92 under the Cantonments Act, 1924;

(6) all sums received by or on behalf of the Board.

(2) There shall also be formed for every cantonment, a cantonment development fund
10 and there shall be placed to the credit, thereof the following sums, namely:— मन

(0) भा) sum received from the Central Government or the Government of. any
State by way of contributions, grants, subsidies or by any other way for the
implementation of any specific scheme or for the execution of. any specific project;

(४) any sum received from any individual or association of individuals by way of
IS gift or deposit; and

(iif) any sum raised or borrowed under section 121 for the execution of specific
development projects.

120. (/) The cantonment fund and the cantonment development fund shall be kept in

‘Separate accounts which shall be maintained in State Bank of India or any of its subsidiary

ao banks or any nationalised bank or any scheduled commercial bank having its branch either
in the cantonment or in the municipal area adjoining the cantonment.

Explanation.—in this section,—

(0) “nationalised bank” means corresponding new bank specified in the First
5 of 1970. Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
40 of 1980. 25 1970 or the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980;

(ii) “State Bank of India” m the State Bank of India constituted under the
23 of 1955. State Bank of India Act, 1955;

i (iii) “subsidiary bank” means a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of
38 of 1959. India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959.

30 (2) The Chief Executive Officer may with the previous sanction of the President
Cantonment Board may invest any portion of cantonment fund or cantonment development
fund in securities of Central Government or in such securities, including fixed deposits in banks
in the best interest of the Board and may dispose of such investments or vary them for others
ofa like nature.

35 (3) The income resulting from any fixed deposit or from any such securities as is
referred to in sub-section (2) or from the proceeds of the sale of any such security shall be
credited to the cantonment fund or, as the case may be, the cantonment development fund.

(4 Every action taken under sub-sections (2) and (3) may be subsequently brought to
the next meeting of the Board.

Uo 121. A Board may from time to time by a resolution passed in this behalf borrow money
from another Board, on mutually agreeable terms any sum of money which may be required
for the schemes or projects covered under this Act.

Cantonment
fund and
cantonment
development
fund.

Custody of
Cantonment
Fund and
Cantonment
Development
Fund.

Power of Board
to borrow
money.


42
Property
Si ion made by the Central Government al) pry,
122. Subject to any special reservat f _ Wey
10७७ of the nature hereinafter in this section specified which has been acquired oF provides pa

is
maintained by a Board shall vest in and belong to that Board, and shall be under its dinectien
management and control, that is to say,—

(a) all markets, slaughter-houses, manure and night-soil depots, and buildings
of every description;

distribution of water for Public
(6) all water-works for the supply, storage or |
Purposes and all bridges, buildings, engines, materials, and things connected therewith
Or appertaining thereto; lo

(०) all sewers, drains, culverts and water-courses, and all works, materials ang
things appertaining thereto;

i imal Ith and rubbish of,

(d)all dust, dirt, dung, ashes, refuse, animal matter, fi every

kind, and dead bodies of animals collected by the Board from the streets,

Privies, sewers, cesspools or elsewhere, or déposited in places appointed by the IS
Board for such purposes;

5

(०) all lamps and lamp-posts and apparatus connected therewith or appertaining
thereto;

(all lands or other Property transferred to the Board by the Central or a State
Government, or by gift, purchase or otherwise for local public purposes; and

(g) all Streets and the-pavements, Stones and other materials thereof, and also all
trees, erections, materials, implements, and things existing on or appertaining to streets,

Application -_ 123, The cantonment fund, cantonment development fund and all Property vested in
1४४7, कक ard shall be applied for the Purposes, whether express or implied, for which, by or under
neat भाप this Act or any other law for the time being in force, Powers are conferred or duties or 26
ment fund and Obligations are imposed upon the Board :

‘Property.

49

(0) on such terms and conditions as the: Central Government may impose: 30

Provided further that Priority shall be given in the order hereinafter Set forth to the
following liabilities and obligations of a Board, that is to Say,—

(a) १० the liabilities and obligations arising from a trust legally imposed or
accepted by the Board; ™

(c) to the payment of establishment charges;

(2) tothe payment of any sum the payment of which is expressly required the
Provisions of this Act or any rule or bye-law made thereunder, ५ ५०

Acquisition of 124. ‘Wien there is any hindrance to the permanent or temporary acquisition upoa
immovable Payment of any land required by a Board for the purposes of this Act, the Central Government
prone: may, on the recommendation of the Board, Procure the acquisition thereof under the provisions

of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and, on payment by the Board of the compensation 1 of 1


43

awarded under that Act and of the charges incurred by the Government in connection with
the proceedings, the land shall vest in the Board.

125. The Central Government may make rules consistent with this Act to provide for all
or any of the following matters, namely:

5 (a) the conditions on which property may be acquired by Boards or on which
Property vested in a Board may be transferred by sale, mortgage, lease, exchange ot
otherwise; and

(6) any other matter relating to the cantonment fund or cantonment development
fund or cantonment property, in respect of which no provision or insufficient provision

10 is made by or under this Act and provision is, in the opinion of the Central Government
necessary.
CHAPTER VIL
Contracts

126, Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, every Board shall be competent to enter
1§ into and perform any contract necessary for the purposes of this Act.

127, (1) Every contract —
(a) for which budget provision does not exist, or

(6) which involves a value or amount exceeding rupees fifty thousand shalt
require the sanction of the Board. .

20 (2) Every contract other than a contract such as is referred to in sub-section (/) shall
be sanctioned by the Chief Executive Officer‘on behalf of the Board.

128. Every contract made by or on behalf of a Board, the value or amount of which
exceeds fifty thousand rupees, shall be in writing, and every such contract shall, be signed
by two members, of whom the President or the Vice-President shall be one, and be
2S countersigned by the Chief Executive Officer and be sealed with the common seal of the
Board.

129. (/) If any contract is executed by or on behalf of a Board, otherwise than in
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, it shall not be binding on the Board.

(2) Where the Chief Executive Officer executes a contract on behalf of the Board
30 sanctioned under sub-section (2) of section 127, he shall submit a report, on the execution of
the contract, to the Board at its next meeting.

CHAPTER VIII
SANITATION AND THE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF DISEASE

Sanitary authorities
35 130. The following officers shall, for the purposes of sanitation, have control over, and
be responsible for maintaining in a sanitary condition, those parts of a cantonment, respectively,

which are specified in the case of each, that is to say :—
(a) the Officer Commanding the army in the cantonment—all buildings and

lands which are occupied or used for army purposes;

uo (b) the Officer Commanding the navy in the cantonment—all buildings and
lands which are occupied or used for naval purposes;

(०) the Officer Commanding the air force in the cantonment—all buildings and
lands which are occupied or used for air force purposes;

(d) the Officer Commanding the station in the cantonment—all buildings and
US lands, occupied or used for any defence purpose, other than those referred to in
clauses (a), (6) and (c);

Power to make
rules regarding
cantonment
fund,
cantonment
develpment
fund and
property.

Contracts by
whom to be

Sanction.

Execution of
contract.

Responsibility

for sanitation.


General duties
of Health

Public latrines,
urinals and
conservancy
establishments.

Duty of
occupier to
collect and

Tubbish, etc.

44

iwi t or railway administration occupyin

(e) oe pales eisai Idings and lands in his charge Peo
eo eaten or administration;

(the head of any establishment or —— * me Def
Research and Development Organisation in the ee हा dings ang
lands which are occupied or used for the purposes 0० search ang
Development Organisation in the cantonment,

(g) the head of a Public Sector Undertaking — the buildings anq lands
belonging to such undertaking in the cantonment;

i fficer — i d lands in the civil area of
#) the Chief Executive Officer — the buildings an : le
the aia and all other buildings and lands not covered in clauses (a) to(g)
above.

131. (1) The Health Officer shall be the Advisor to the Board in all matters
relating to sanitation and exercise a general sanitary supervision over the cantonment
and shall periodically submit a report along with his recommendations at least once in 5
every month to the Board.

(2) The Assistant Health Officer shall perform such duties in connection with
the sanitation of the cantonment as are, subject to the control of the Board, allotted to
him by the Health Officer.

Conservancy and sanitation : 20

132. All public latrines and urinals provided or maintained by a Board shall be so
constructed as to provide separate compartments for each sex the compartments so
constructed shall be made accessible to and barrier free for the persons with disabilities
and shall be provided with all necessary conservancy establishments, and shall regularly
be cleansed and kept in proper order. as

133. (1) It shall be the duty of an occupier of a building or land—

(a) to make adequate arrangements for the house scavenging of the building
or land;

condition and repair;

टी to — all filth, rubbish and other offensive matter collected in
receptacles and to be removed and deposited in the Public receptactes, depots or
Places provided or appointed under sub-section: (7) of section 135. i ¥

(2) For the purpose of this section and section 134,
the removal of filth, rubbish or other offensive matter from a
Cesspool or other common receptacle for such matter.

“house scavenging” means
Privy, latrine, urinal, drain,

(2) Where the Chief Executive Officer has undertaken the hey के refetred to in
ane went all matter removed in the performance of such duties shall be the property


lo

20

as

30

35

५०

us

45

135. (7) Every Board shall provide or appoint, in proper and convenient situations,
public receptacles, depots or places for the temporary deposit or disposal of household
rubbish, offensive matter, carcases of dead animals and sewage.

(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, by public notice, issue directions as to
the time at which, the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which, any matter
referred to in sub-section (/) may be removed along a street or may be deposited or
otherwise disposed of.

(3) All matter deposited in receptacles, depots or places provided or appointed
under this section shall be the property of the Board.

136. The Chief Executive Officer of any cantonment may, by notice in writing—

(a) require any person having the control whether as owner, lessee or occupier
of any land or building in the cantonment—

(i) to close any cesspool appertaining to the land or building which, in
the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, is a nuisance, or

(ii) to keep in a clean condition, in such manner as may be prescribed
by notice, any receptacle for filth or sewage accumulating on the land or in
a building, or 5

(iif) to prevent the water of any private latrine, urinal, sink or bathroom
or any other offensive matter, from soaking, draining or flowing, or being put,
from the land or building upon any street or other public place, or into any
water-course or into any drain not intended for the purpose, or

(iv) to collect and deposit for removal by the conservancy establishment
of the Board, within such time and in such receptacle or place, as may be
specified in the notice, any offensive matter or rubbish which such person has
allowed to accumulate or remain under, in or on such building or land; or

(8) require any person to desist from making or altering any drain leading into
a public drain; or

(c) require any person having the control of a drain in the cantonment to
cleanse, purify, repair or alter the same, or otherwise put it in good order, within such
time as may be specified in the notice.

137. (J) Where any well, tank, cistern, reservoir container, desert cooler or any
other , receptacle or place in the cantonment where water is stored or accumulated, whether
within any private enclosure or not, is in such a condition as to create a nuisance or, in
the opinion of the Health Officer, is or is likely to be a breeding place for mosquitoes,
the Board may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or occupier thereof within
such period as may be specified in the notice, to fill up or cover the well, cistern, reservoir
or receptacle, or to fill up the tank, or to drain off or remove the water, as the case may
be.

(2) The Board may from time to time take such measures as are necessary in its
opinion for prevention of breeding of mosquitoes, insects or any bacterial or viral carriers
of disease* in public places under the control or management of the Board.

(3) The Board may, if it thinks fit, meet the whole or any portion of the expenses
incurred in execution of work mentioned in sub-sections (7) and (2) of this section.

138. The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or
lessee of any building or land in the cantonment to provide, in such manner as may be
specified in the notice, any latrine, urinal, cesspool, dust-bin or other receptacle for filth,
sewage, or rubbish, or any additional latrine, urinal, cesspool ot other receptacle as aforesaid,
which should, in his opinion, be provided for the building or land.

Deposits and
disposal of
tubbish, etc.

Cesspools,
receptacles,
for filth, etc.

Filling up of
tank, etc.

Provision of
latrines, etc.


Sanitation io
fictories, etc

Private latrines,

Special
Provisions for
collection of
rubbish and
Solid waste
management.

Removal of
congested
buildings.

46 A

139, Every person employing, whether on behalf of the Government of Othe m
more than ten workmen or labourers, and every person managing or — Conta
market, school, theatre or other place of public (6078 हल्इर मजाक oo Poteet

fh he Chief Executive Officer, and shall provide su - हर :
pea parol amis as the Chief Executive Officer thinks fit, and shal ean ५
the latrines and urinals to be kept clean and in proper order:

Provided that nothing in this section shall apply in the case of a factory to which the
Factories Act, 1948 applies.

4
| isi loyment of Manval Scayen, er
140, Subject to the provisions of the Emp K a ‘i
Construction of Dry Latrine (Prohibition) Act, 1993, the Chief Executive Officer ५, ०१५
official of the Board authorised by him may, by notice in writing, — i

(a) require the owner or other person having the control of any private latrine,
or, urinal in the cantonment not to put the same to public use; or

i ivate latrines or urinals has
(0) where any plan for the construction of private ~
approved, and copies thereof may be obtained free of charge on application Ic

(0 require any person repairing or Constructing amy private latrine @
urinal not to allow the same to be used until it has been inspected by an official
of the Board authorised by the Chief Executive Officer, or under the direction of
the Health Officer and approved by him as conforming with such plen; op

(४) require any person having control of any private latrine or urinal to 20
re-build or alter the same in accordance with such plan; or

(c) require the owner or other person having the control of any such Private
latrine or urinal which, in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, Constitutes ३
nuisance, fo remove the latrine or urinal; or

(d) require any person having the control whether as owner, lessee or Occupier 25
of any land or building in the cantonment—

(i) to have any latrines Provided for the same shut out by a sufficient roof
and wall or fence from the view of persons Passing by or dwelling in the
neighborhood, or

(i/) to cleanse in such manner as the Chief Executive Officer may

Specify 30
in the notice any latrine or urinal belonging to the land or building;

(e) require any person being the owner and having the control of. any drain in
the cantonment to Provide, within ten days from the service of the notice, such
covering as may be specified in the notice.

141.(/) All solid waste material 8enerated in a cantonment shall be removed by the 35
Board and be brought to the Compost sites or sanitary land sites or trenehing sites earmarked
by it for the purpose.

(2) The Board shall also devise schemes for Collecting rubbish and garbage from
each house in the cantonment and may, if considers necessary, associate residents’ welfare
associations or such other non Sovernmental organisation for this Purpose.

(3) As far as possible the Board shall devise appropriate system to ensure that all
compostable or bio-degradable waste in the Cantonment is recycled and used for generating
manure, bio-gas or any other form of, energy.

142.(1) Where it appears toa Board that any block of buildings in the cantonment
is in an unhealthy condition by reason of the manner in which the buildings are crowded 4
together, or of the narrowness or closeness of the street, or of the want of proper drainage
or ventilation, or of the impracticability of Cleansing the buildings or other similar cause, it
may cause the block to be inspected by a committee consisting of —


lo

is

Ro

30

35

५०

47

(a) the Health Officer,

(4) the Civil Surgeon of the district or, if his services are not available, some
other medical officer in the service of the Government,

(०) the Executive Engineer or a person deputed by the Executive Engineer in
this behalf, and

(d) two non-official members of the Board.

(2) The committee shall make a Teport in writing to the Board regarding the sanitary
condition of the block, and, if it considers that the condition thereof is likely to cause risk of
disease to the inhabitants of the building or of the neighbourhood or otherwise to endanger
the public health, it shall Clearly indicate on a plan verified by the Executive Engineer or the
Person deputed by him to serve on the committee, the buildings which should in its opinjon
wholly or in part be removed in order to abate the unhealthy condition of the block.

(3) If, upon receipt of such report, the Board is of opinion that all or any buildings
indicated should be removed, it may, by notice in writing, require the owners thereof to
remove them:

Provided that the Board shall make compensation as it thinks fit to the owners for any
buildings so removed which have been erected under proper authority:

Provided further that the Board may if it considers it equitable in the circumstances so
to do pay to the owners such sum as it thinks fit as compensation for any buildings so
removed which have not been erected under proper authority.

(4) For the purposes of this section “buildings” includes enclosure, walls and fences
appertaining to buildings.

143. (1) Where it appears to a Board that any building or part of a building in the
cantonment which is used as a dwelling house is so overcrowded as to endanger the health
of the inmates thereof, it may, after such inquiry as it thinks fit, by notice in writing require
the-owner or occupier of the building or past thereof, as the case may be, within such time
Not being less than one month as may be specified in the notice, to abate the overcrowding
of the same by reducing the number of lodgers, tenants, or other inmates to such number 85
may be-specified in the notice.

(2) Any person who fails, without reasonable cause, to comply with @ requisition
made upon him under sub-section (1) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two
thousand five hundred rupees, and, in the ease of a continuing offence, to an additional

fine which may extend to two hundred fifty rupees for every day after the first during which
the failure has continued.

144, (1) Where any building in a cantonment is so ill-constructed or dilapidated as to
be, in the opinion of the Board, in an insanitary state, the Board may, by notice in writing,
require the owner, within such time as may be specified in the notice, to exeoute such repairs
or to make such alterations as it thinks necessary for the purpose of removing such defects,

(2) A copy of every notice issued under sub-section (1) shall be conspicuously
pasted on the building to which it relates.

(3) A notice issued under sub-section (/) shall be deemed to have been complied
with, if the owner of the building to which it relates has, instead of executing the repairs or
making the alterations directed by the notice, removed the building.

145. (/) If any buifding or land, whether tenantable or otherwise, is—

us (0) in an insanitary, filthy or unwholesome state; or

Overcrowding
of dwelling
houses,

Power to
require repair
oralteration of


> |

48

(ii) in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, a nuisance to ”
in the neighbourhood; or Persons resid

(ii) overgrown with prickly-pear or rank and noisome Vegetation the Chi
Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or Chieg
such building or land to clean, lime-wash internally or externally, clear, ने Pie ot
Put such building or land in a proper state within such period as may be pein 5
the notice. |

(2) Any person who failsto comply with the notice issued under sub-section (1) shay
be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand Tupees, and, in the case on
continuing offence, with an aduitional fine which May exfend to two hundred fifty mit ७

for each day after the first during which the offence continues.

ne

Prohibition in 146. No owner, occupier, lessee or any other occupant of the premises shall allow
ब्रा OF cause to be allowed any air pollutant above the standards, laid down under ८
(g) of sub-section (/ ) of section 17 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,
1981. Wu,
Power to order 147. If a Board is satisfied that any building or part of a building in the cantonment

— of which is intended for or used as a dwelling place is unfit for human habitation, it may
> Cause a notice to be pasted om some conspicuous part of the building Prohibiting the.
Owner or occupier thereof from using the building or room for human ‘habitation, or

allowing it to be so used, until it has been rendered fit for such use to the satisfaction of 20

the Board.
Removal of 148. The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee,
=e or occupier of any land in the cantonment to clear away and remove any thick or noxious
७७४ vegetation or undergrowth which appears to him to be injurious to health or offensive to
Persons residing in the neighbourhood. as
Agriculture 149. Where, in the opition of a Board, the cultivation in the cantonment of any

and irrigation. description of crop or the use thetein of any kind of manure or the irrigation of any land
therein in any specified manner is likely to be injurious to the health of persons dwelling in
the neighbourhood, the Board may, by public notice, prohibit such cultivation , use or
irrigation after such date as may be specified in the notice, or may, by a like notice, direct 30
that it shall be carried out subject to such conditions as the Board thinks fib:

Provided that if, when 4 Notice is issued under this section, any land te which it
relates has been lawfully prepared for cultivation or any crop is sown therein or is standing
thereon, the Board shall, if it directs that the notice is to take effect on a date earlier than that
by which the crop would ordinarily be sown or reaped, as the case may be, make 35
compensation to all persons interested in the land or crop for the loss, if any, incurred by
them respectively by reason of compliance with the notice.

Burial and burning grounds
150. The Chief Executivé Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or
peaesrheher A person in-charge of any burial or burning ground in the cantonment fo supply such 4°
a information as may be specified in the notice concerning the condition, management or
burial and position of such ground.

151. (7) No place in a cantonment which has not been used as a burial or burning

for this ission in
apes ground before the commencement of this Act shall be so used without the perm! uf

burial or ” writing of the Board.
oon perm: ited subject to any conditions which the Board thinks
ह (0 कल tip mpsmcee | pont arfhoyance to, or danger to the health of,

fit to impose for the purpose ०:
persons residing in the neighbourhood.


49

152. (7) Where a Board, aftermaking or causing to be made local inquiry, is of opinion Powerto
that any burial or burning ground in the cantonment has become offensive to, or dangerous ue
to the health of, persons living in the neighbourhood, it may,with the previous sanction of ऐप
the Central Government by notice in writing, require the owner or person in charge of such ground.

5 ground to close the same from such date as may be specified in the notice.

(2) Where the Central Government sanctions the issue of any notice under sub-
section (/) it shall declare the conditions on which the burial or burning ground may be re- ,
opened, and a copy of such declaration shall be annexed to the notice.

(3) Where the Central Government sanctions the issues of any such notice, it shall
{© require a new burial or buming ground to be provided at the expense of the cantonment
fund, or, if the community concerned is willing to provide a new burial or bugning ground,
the Central Government shall require a grant to be made from the cantonment fund towards
the cost of the same.
(4) No corpse shall be buried or burnt in any burial or burning ground in respect of
1§ which a notice issued under this section is for the time being in force.
153. The provisions of sections 150, 151 and 152 shall not apply in the case of any Exemption fm
burial ground which is for the time being managed by or on behalf of the Government. ‘operation of

sections 150 to
152.
“£54. The Board may, by public notice, prescribe routes in the cantonment by which Removal of
alone corpses may be removed to burial or burning grounds. Se:

20 Prevention of infectious, contagious or communicable diseases

155.(/)Any person being _ in charge of, or in attendance, whether as a medical Obligation
Practitioner or otherwise, upon any person in a cantonment whom he knows or has reason 28:81 क
to believe to be suffering from a contagious, communicable or infectious disease, or being cqnigious or
the owner, lessee or occupier of any building in a cantonment in which he knows that any communicable
25 person is so suffering, shall forthwith give information to the Board respecting the existence diseases.
of such disease.
(2) No person shall—
(०) knowing that he is suffering from a contagious, communicable or an
infectious disease, expose other persons to the risk of infection by his presence or
36 conduct in any public street or public place;
(6) having the care of a person whom he knows to be suffering from a contagious,
communicable or an infectious disease cause or permit that person to expose other
Persons to the risk of infection by his presence or conduct in any such street or place
as aforesaid;
35 () place or cause to be placed in a dustbin or other receptacle forhe deposit of
rubbish any matter which he knows or has reason to beli tothave been exposed to
infection from a contagious, communicable or an infectious disease and which has
not been disinfected properly; "
(4) throw or cause to be thrown into any latrine or urinal any matter which he
५० knows or has reason to believe to have been exposed to infection from a contagious,
communicable or an infectious disease and which has not been disinfected properly.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (/) or sub-section (2) shall apply in the case of
disease where the person suffering therefrom is under specific and adequate
medical treatment and is by reason of his habits and conditions of life and residence unlikely
US to spread the disease.
(4) Whoever—

(a) fails to give information or gives false information to the Board respecting
the existence of such disease as is referred to in sub-section (/), or


Blood bank

Special
meausres in
case of
outbreak of
infectious or
epidemic
diseases,

Power to
require names
of dairyman’s

customers,

Power to
require names
ofa

customers.

50 >

(+) contravenes the provisions of sub-section (2), shalMbe punishable with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees:

i i fe i ive information ifhe
Provided that no person shall be punishable for failure to give 11 i hag
reasonable cause to believe that the information had already been duly given.

156. Subject to the provisions of any Act made in this regard and the rules and 5
regulations made thereunder, whoever, being in charge of a blood bank or any other
establishment which collects or supplies blood, plasma, marrow or any other substance for
transfusion or treatment of patients or for any other medical use, fails 10 take
Precautions or exercise adequate supervision thereby leading to or resulting in the supply
of infected or contaminated blood, plasma, marrow or any other Substance, shall be {5
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to five years or with fine which May extend
to one lakh rupees or with both.

157. (/) In the event of a cantonment being visited or threatened by an Outbreak of
any infectious or contagious disease among the inhabitants thereof or of any epidemic
diseaSe among any animals therein, the Officer Commanding the Station, if he thinks thar Is
the provisions of this Act or of any law for the time being in force in the cantonment are
insufficient for the Purpose, may, with the previous sanetion of the Central
Government —

(०) take such special measures, and

(0) by public notice, make such temporary regulations to be observed by the 2०
public or by any class or section of the pablic, as he thinks necessary to prevent the
outbreak or the spread of the disease:

Provided that where in the opinion of the Officer Commanding the Station, immediate
measures are necessary, he may take action without such sanetion as aforesaid and, if he
does so, shall forthwith report such action to the Central Government. as

(2) Whoever commits a breach of any temporary regulation made under sub-section
(J) shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 188 of the Indian Penat
Code. Sof ta.

+ 158. Where it is certified to the Chief Executive Officer by a medical Practitioner that
the outbreak or spread of any infectious or contagious disease in thécantonment is, in the 36
opinion of such medical practitioner, attributable to the milk supplied by any dairyman, the
Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the dairyman, within such time as
may be specified in the notice, to furnish him with a full and complete list of the names and
addresses of all his customers within the cantonment, or to give him such information as
will enable kim to trace the Persons to whom the dairyman has sold milk, 35

washerman, the Chiéf Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the washerman,
within a time to be specified in the notice, to furnish the Health Officer with a full and Uc
complete list of the names and addresses of all owners within the cantonment of clothes

and other artitles which the washerman washes or has washed during the six weeks
immediately preceding the date of the notice.

Explandtion.—Por the Purposes of this section, the expression “washerman” shall ue
mean an individual, body corporate, association of Persons engaged in washing clothes in
an cantonment. ५


51

160. Where it is certified to the Chief Executive Officer by the Health Officer or a

doctor in the employment of the Board that there is apprehension of the outbreak or

spreading of any infectious or contagious or communicable disease in the cantonment

because of ase of contaminated needles, syringes or any other such equipment by 8
i ¢ medical practitioner or by any paramedical worker, the Chief Executive Officer may, by
notice in writing, require the medicat practitioner or the paramedical worker, within such
time as may be specified in the notice, to furnish him with a full and complete list of the
names arat addresses of all his customers or patients within the cantonment, or to give
him such information as will enable him to trace the persons whom the medical practitioner
or the paramedical worker has attended to or treated in the six weeks preceding the date
of issuing the notice.

161. Where, after inspection the Health Officer is of opinion that any infectious,
contagious or communicable disease is caused or is likely to arise in the cantonment from
the consumption of the milk supplied from a dairy or from the washing of clothes or other

15 articles in any place, or from any process employed by a washerman, or from use of
contaminated needles, syringes or other such equipment by 8 medical practitioner or any
paramedical staff, he shall report the matter to the Chief Executive Officer.

162. Upon receipt of a report submitted by the Health Officer under section #61, the
Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, —
Ro (a) probibit the supply of milk from the dairy until the notice has been withdrawn;
or

(b) prohibit the washerman from washing clothes or other articles in any such
place or by any such process as aforesaid until the notice has been withdrawn or
unless he uses such place in such manner, or washes by process, as the Chief Executive

as Officer may direct in the notice; or

(c) prohibit the medical practitioner or the paramedical worker from using any
such needles, syringes or other such equipment unless the notice is withdrawn or
rectification as may be required in the notice is carried out.

163. The Health Officer or a doctor in the employment of the Board may take
possession of any milk, clothes or other articles which are or have recently been in the
possession of any dairyman on whom a notice has been served under section 158, or of
any clothes or other articles which are or have recently been in the passession of any
washerman, on whom a notice has been served under section 159, or any needles, syringes
or such other equipment which are or have recently been in the possession of the medical

35 practitioner or paramedical worker to whom a notice under section 160 has been issued
and may subject the same or cause the same to be subjected to such chemical or other
process as he may think necessary; and the Board shall pay from the cantonment fund all
pe eg — process and shall also pay to the owner of the milk, clothes or other

jes such sum as compensation for any | i
६ pee ewan y loss occasioned by such process as may

164, Whoever in a cantonment—

” —_— a public conveyance while suffering from an infectious of contagious

(6) uses a public con for th i is suffering
us any such disease, or veyance ae from

(c) uses a public com for the carri
died from any such i” i ine hia leas

shall be bound to take i i isease
के proper precautions against the communication of the di
other persons using or who may thereafter use the conveyance and to sci anak meee

Power to
require names
of patients or
customers of a

practitioner or
paramedical
workers.

Report after
inspection of
dairy or
washerman or
medical
practitioner's
place of
business.

Action on

report
submitted by
Health Officer.

Kxamination of
milk, washed
clothes or
needles,
syringes, etc.

of public
conveyance.


. driver or person incharge of the conveyance, and further to report without del
waechh fi लेक Officer he of the conveyance and the name of the Person
notified.

Disinfection of 165. (/) Where any person suffering from, or the corpse of any Person who has die

public from, an infectious, communicable or contagious disease has been carried ॥ @ public 5

conveyance. conveyance which ordinarily plies in a cantonment, the driver thereof shall forthwith Tepon
the fact 10 the Chief Executive Officer who shall forthwith cause the conveyance (५ be
disinfected if that has not already been done.

(2) No such conveyance shall be brought again into use until the Chief Executive
Officer has granted a certificate stating that it can be used without Sausing risk of infection ie

Penalty for 166. Whoever fails to make to the Chief Executive Officer any report which he is
wasted required to make by section 164 or section 165 shall be punishable with fine which may
pen extend to one thousand Tupees,

Driver of 167. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no

Conveyance owner, driver or person incharge of a public conveyance shall be bound to convey of ७ Is
pee ease allow to be conveyed in such conveyance-in or in the vicinity of a cantonment any Person
r contagious disease or the corpse of any person who has

suffering from Suffering from an infectious o1 न
infectiousor died from such disease unless and until such person pays or tenders a sum fixed by the

diese "S ~— Chief Executive Officer from time to time, to cover any loss and expense which would
oe ordinarily be incurred in disinfecting the conveyance.

Disinfection 168. Where a Board is, upon the advice of the Health Officer, of opinion that the
< 16% cleansing and disinfection of any building or part of a building in the cantonment or of
"any articles in any such building or part which are likely to retain infection, or the renewal
. of the flooring of any such building or part of such building, would tend to prevent or
check the spread of any infectious or contagious disease, the Board may by notice in 255
writing, require the owner or occupier to cleanse and disinfect, the said building, part or
articles, as the case may be, or to renew the said flooring, within such time as may be
specified in the notice:

Provided that where, in the opinion of the Board the owner or occupier is from poverty
or any other cause unable effectually to carry out any such requisition, the Board may, at 30
the expense of the cantonment fund, cleanse and disinfect the building, part or articles, or
as the case may be, renew the flooring.

36

Destruetion of 169.(1) Where the destruction of any hut or shed in a cantonment is, in the opinion
ov hut of the Board, necessary to prevent the spread of any infectious or Contagious disease, the
— Board may, by notice in writing, require the owner to destroy the hut or shed and the 55

materials thereof within such time as may be specified in the notice,

destroy the same forthwith, or may himself cause it to be destroyed after giving not less Yo

(3) The Board shall pay compensation to the owner of any hut or shed destroyed
under this section.

‘Temporary 170. The Board shall provide free of charge temporary shelter or house accommodation
shelter for for the members of any family in which an infectious or Contagious disease has appeared US”
paras or _ Who have been compelled to leave their dwelling by reason of any proceedings taken under
destroyed section 168 or section 169, and who desire such shelter or accommodation as aforesaid to
building or be provided for them.


53

171. (1) Where in a cantonment any building or part of a building is intended to be let,
in which any person has, within six weeks immediately preceding, been suffering from an
infectious or contagious disease, the person letting the building or part shall before doing
so disinfect the same in such manner as the Chief Executive Officer may, by public or special

§ — notice, direct, together with all articles therein liable to retain infection.

(2) For the purposes of this section, the keeper of a hotel, lodging house or sarai
shall be deemed to let to any person who is admitted as a guest therein that part of the
building in which such person is permitted to reside.

172. No person shall, without previous disinfection of the same, give, lend, sell,

(0 transmit or otherwise dispose of to another person any article or thing which he knows or

has reason to believe has been exposed to contamination by any infectious or contagious
disease and is likely to be used in, or taken into, a cantonment.

173. (1) Every Board shall—

(a) provide proper places with necessary attendants and apparatus for the
रु disinfection of conveyances, clothing, bedding or other articles which have been
exposed to infection;

() cause conveyances, clothing or other articles brought for disinfection to be

disinfected either free of charge or on payment of such charges as the Chief Executive
Officer may fix.

20० (2) The Chief Executive Officer may notify places at which articles of clothing, bed-
ding, conveyances or other articles which have been exposed to infection shall be washed,
and, if it does so, no person shall wash any such thing at any place not so notified without
having previously disinfected such thing.

(3) The Chief Executive Officer may direct the destruction of any clothing, bedding or
A$ other article in the cantonment likely to retain infection, and may give such compensation
as he thinks fit for any article so destroyed.

. 174. Whoever, while suffering from, or in circumstances in which he is likely to
spread, any infectious or contagious disease,—

(a) makes, carries or offers for sale in a cantonment or takes any part in the
30 business of making, carrying or offering for sale therein any article of food or drink or
any medicine or drug for human consumption, or any article of clothing or bedding for

personal use or wear, or

(b) takes any part in the business of the washing or carrying of clothes,
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.

25 175. When a cantonment is visited or threatened by an outbreak of any infectious
or contagious disease, the Chief Executive Officer on behalf of the Board may, by public
notice, restrict in such manner or prohibit for such period, as may be specified in the
notice, the sale or preparation of any article of food or drink for human consumption

- +specified in the notice or the sale of any flesh of any description of animals so speci-
0 fied.

176. (1) If the Chief Executive Officer on the advice given by the Health Officer is
of opinion that the water in any well, tank or other place is likely, if used for drinking, to
endanger, or cause the spread of, any disease, it may,—

(a) by public notice, prohibit the removal or use of such water for drinking;

५५ (b) by notice in writing, require the owner or person having control of such
well, tank or place to take such steps as may be directed by the notice te prevent the
public from having access to or using such water; or

Disinfection
of building
before letting
the same.

Disposal of
infected article

disinfection.

Means of
disinfection.

Making or sell-
ing of food,
ctc., or washing
clothes by in-
fected person.

Power to

prohibit sale of
food or drink.

Control over
wells, tanks,


Disposal of in-

Maintenance or
aiding of hospi-
tals or dispensa-

Medical sup-
plies, appli-
ances, etc,

Free patients.

Paying patients,

Power to order
person to
attend hospital

or dispensary.

.

54

(c) take such other steps as it may consider expedient to prevent the Outbrea,
or spread of any such disease,

art of a cantonment being vi

ent of — acantonment or any pi

Pathe cates of any infectious or na ve feats Om

ithout 3

ithorised by him in this behalf may, w ,

disinfoct any well, tank or other place from which water is, हट हे “a be, taken foy the

purposes of drinking, and may further take such sce he : ensure the Poy

of the water or to prevent the use of the same for drinking purposes.

177, Where any person has died in a cantonment from any infectious of Contagion,

oO

"disease, the Chief Executive Officer, may, by notice in writing, — नि

(a) require any person having charge of the corpse to Convey the same tg मर
mortuary, thereafter to be disposed of in accordance with law; or

191 here death
rohibit the removal of the corpse from the place aw "
wenn the purpose of being buried or burned or of being conveyed to ; ‘
mortuary. हि
Hospitals and dispensaries
178. (1) A Board may—
(a) provide and maintain either within or without the cantonment as Many
hospitals and dispensaries as it thinks fit; or

(b) make, upon such terms as it thinks fit to impose, a grant-in-aid to any 2,
hospital or dispensary or veterinary hospital, whether within or without the canton-
ग्रह, not maintained by it. ५

(2) Every hospital or dispensary maintained or aided under sub-section (1) shall
have attached to it a ward or wards for the treatment of Persons suffering from infectious or
Contagious diseases.” .

- the conduct of | hospitals and dispensaries or in accordance with the said orders modified in

such mannér as the Central Government may think fit.

(2) The Board shall cause every such hospital or dispensary to be Provided with all

requisite drugs, instruments, apparatus, furniture and appliances and with sufficient cots, 35
bedding and clothing for in-patients,

180. At every hospital or dispensary maintained or aided under section 178, the sick
Poor of the cantonment, and other inhabitants of the cantonment suffering from infectious,
communicable or Contagious disease, and, with the sanction of the Board, any other sick
Persons, may receive medical or Surgical treatment free of Cost, and, if treated as in-patients, U2
shall be either dieted gratuitously or, if the medical officer in charge so directs, shall be
granted subsistence allowance on Such scale as the Board may fix.

181. Any sick person who is ineligible to receive medical Or surgical treatment free of
Cost in any hospital or dispensary under section 180 may be admitted for treatment therein
upon such terms as the Board thinks fit.

us

182. (1) If the Health Officer or the Medical Officer incharge of a hospital or dispen-
Sary maintained or aided under Section 178 has reason to believe that any person living in
the cantonment is suffering from an infectious, communicable or contagious disease, he


55

may, by notice in writing, call upon such person to attend for examination at any such
hospital or dispensary at such time as may be specified in the notice and not to quit it
without the permission of the medical officer-in-charge; and, on the arrival of such person
at the hospital or dispensary, the Medical Officer-in-charge thereof may examine him for the

§ Purpose of satisfying himself whether or not such person is suffering from an infectious,
communicable or contagious disease:

Provided that, if, having regard to the nature of the disease or the condition of the

Person suffering therefrom, or the general environment and circumstances of such person,

the Health Officer or Medical Officer, as the case may be, considers that the attendance of

{@ such person at a hospital or dispensary is likely to prove unnecessary or inexpedient, he
shall examine such person at such Person's own residence.

(2) If any person on examination under sub-section (1), is found to be suffering
from an infectious or contagious disease, the Health Officer or Medical Officer, as the
case may be, may cause him to be detained in hospital untit he is free from the infection or

1S contagion:
Provided that, if having regard
person suffering therefrom, or the general

2० tions in the matter as he thinks necessary,

to attend at the hospital or dispensary, specified in the notice, or that such person, having

2S attended the hospital or dispensary, has quitted it without the permission of such medical
officer, or that any person has failed to comply with any direction given to him under
section 182, the Officer Commanding the station may, by order in writing, direct such person
to be removed from the cantonment within twenty-four hours and not to re-enter it without

his permission in writing.
30 (2) No person who has under sub-section
Not to re-enter a cantonment shall enter any
sion of the Officer Commanding the station.

Control of traffic for hygienic Purposes
184. (1) A Board may Provide or prescribe suitable routes for the use of persons
36 passing through the cantonment—

(a) on their way to or from fairs or places of pilgrimage or other Places of public
Tesort; or

(8) during times when an infectious or contagious disease is prevalent, and
may; by public notice, require such persons as aforesaid to use such routes and no
Uo others,

(2) All routes provided or Prescribed under sub-section (1) shall be clearly and
Sufficiently indicated by the Board.

Special conditions regarding essential services

(1) been ordered to be removed from and
other cantonment without the written permis-

185. (1) No person employed in any service, or being employed in connection with
US the working of any system of, Public conservancy or sanitation or water supply or hospitals
or dispensaries or electric supply or public

r transport services or such other essential ser-
vices under a Board in any cantonment ar

; and the conditions of service specified herein shall, invariably be
employed to said services...

Power to ex-
clude from can-
tonment pi
sons refusing
to attend hospi-
tal or dispen-
sary.

Routes for

Conditions of
service of


; >

(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that ”
and from such date as may be specified in the notification, the provisions of this Section
shall apply in the case of any specified class of employees employed by a Board Whose
functions intimately concern the public health or safety.

CHAPTER IX 5
Warer-suppLy, DRAINAGE AND SEWAGE COLLECTION

Water-supply

Maintenance of 186. (1) In every cantonment where a sufficient supply of potable water for
water-supply. —_ use does not exist, the Board shall provide or arrange for the provision of such a Supply,

(2) The Board shall, as far as possible, make adequate provision that such le
shall be continuous throughout the year, and that the water shall be at all times fit for human
consumption.

(3) It shall be the duty of every Board to practise and propagate the scientific methods of
water harvesting including harvesting of rain water for use and make arrangement for recharging
the sources of ground water including underground aquifers and to preserve rivers, streams, |5~
springs and other natural sources of water within and in the vicinity of the cantonment.

Terms of 187. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and
water-supply. expression in relation to water supply shall have the respective meanings given below,
namely :—
4०

(1) “communication pipe” means :—

(a) where the premises supplied with water abut on the part of the street
in which the main is laid, and the service pipe enters those premises otherwise

than through the outer wall of a building abutting on the street and has a

stopcock placed in those premises and as near to the boundary of that street as

is reasonably practicable, so much of the service pipe as lies between the main 25

and that stopcock;

(8) in any other case, so much of the service pipe as lies between the
main and the boundary of the street in which the main is laid, and includes the
ferrule at the junction of the service pipe with the main, and also,—

(i) where the communication pipe ends at in a stopcock, that stop- 30

cock, and *

(ii) any stopcock fitted on the communication pipe between the

end thereof and the main.

(2) “main” means a pipe laid by the Boatd for the purpose of giving a general
supply of water as distinct from a supply to individual consumers and includes any 357
apparatus used in connection with such a pipe.

(3) “servicepipe” means so much of any pipe for supplying water from a main
to any premises as is subject to water pressure from that main, or would be so subject
but for the closing of some tap.

(4) “supply pipe” means so much of any service pipe as is not acommunication 42
pipe.

(5) “trunk main” means a main constructed for the purpose of conveying water
from a source of supply to a filter or reservoir or from one filter or reservoir to another
filter or reservoir, or for the purpose of conveying water in bulk from one part of the ¢
limits of supply to another part of those limits, or for the purpose of giving or taking +
a supply of water in bulk.

(6) “water fittings” includes pipes (other than mains), taps, cocks, valves,


57

ferrules, meters, cisterns, baths and other similar apparatus used in connection with
the supply and use of water

188, (1) The Board may, when so required, — Board to carry
out survey
fa) carry out a survey of the existing consumption of and demand for water

and formulate
दर supplies in cantonment and of the water resources in or Hkety to be made available in proposals
the cantonment;

(8) prepare an estimate of the future water supply requirements of the canton-
ment;

(c) carryout a survey of the existing quantity of sewage collection;

lo (a) formulate proposals as to —

(i) the existing or future water supply requirements of the cantonment;

(ii) the existing or future sewage collection requirement in cantonment
including proposals for the manner in which and the place or places at which
sewage should be carried, collected and treated. 4

(2) If the Board is of the opinion that the works and other properties for the time being
vested in the Board, are inadequate for the purpose of sufficient supply of water or for the
purpose of efficient collection of sewage under this Act it may take steps in accordance with
the provisions of this Act for the construction of additional works, whether within canton-

ment or outside the cantonment with the approval of the Principal Director and for the
20 acquisition of additional properties for such works.

Is

189. (1) The Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, by Control over
pulllic notice, declare any lake, stteam, spring, well, tank, reservoir or other source, whether Sources of
within or without the limits of the cantonment other than a source of water-supply under the paral
control and in use of the Military Engineer Services or the Public Works Department from है

2286 which water is or may be made available for the use of the public in the cantonment to be
source of public water-supply.

(2) Every such source shall be under the control of the Board and it shall be the duty
of the Board to preserve and maintain such source.

190. The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or any Power to
30 person having the control of any source of public water-supply which is used for drinking ——
purposes—

maintenance or
closing of
(a) to keep the same in good order and to clear it from tim8 to time of silt, refuse pire aa
and decaying vegetation; or पे

(8) to protect the same from contamination in such manner as the Chief supply.
3g Executive Officer may direct; or

(c) if the water therein is proved to the satisfaction of the Chief Executive
Officer to be unfit for drirlking purposes, to take such measures as may be specified in
the notite to prevent the public from having access to or using such water:

Provided that, in the case of a well, such person as aforesaid may, instead of com-

Uo plying with the notice, signify in writing his desire to be relieved of all responsibility for
the proper maintenance of the well and his readiness to place it under the control and
—, of the Board for the use of the public, and, if he does so, he shall not be

ound to carry out the requisition, and the Board shall undertake the control and super-
vision of the well.

५४ 191. (1) Subject to the guidelines made by the Board in this regard, the Chief Supply of
Executive Officer may permit the owner, lessee or occupier of any building or land to con- हे
2०७ the building or land with a source of, public water-supply by means of communication


Power to
require water-
Supply to be
taken.

Supply of
water under

Board not
liable for failure
of supply,

Conditions of
universal
application.

|

58

pipes of such size and description as may be specified for the purpose of obtaining Water fy
domestic use.

very building so connected with the water-supply ॥
ata 6 प्रवाह sot return for the water tax, if any, such quantity Of water
the Chief Executive Officer may determine. 5

(3) All water supplied in excess of the quantity to which such id limiteg
sub-section (2) and, in a cantonment in which a water tax is not mip Water
under this section, shall be paid for at such rate as the Board may fix ‘ceping in view PY
financial viability.

(4) The supply of water for domestic use shall not be deemed to include ay jp
supply for—

(०) animals or for washing vehicles where such animals or vehicle are kept for

sale or hire; .

$4) any trade, manufacture or business;

(c) fountains, swimming baths or any ornamental or mechanical Purpose;
(6) gardens or for purposes of irrigation;

(४) making or watering roads or paths; or

@ building purposes.

192. If it appears to the Chief Executive Officer that any building or land in the 2,
cantonment is without a proper supply of potable water, the Chief Executive Officer may, by
Notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or occupier of the building or land to obtain from
8 source of public water-supply such quantity of water, as is, adequate to the requirements

of the persons usually occupying or employed upon the building or land, and to Provide
communication pipes of the Prescribed size and description, and to take all necessary Steps 48

IS

193. (1) Subject to the guidelines made by the Board in this regard, the Chief Executive
Officer may, by agreement, supply, from any source of public water-supply, the owner,
lessee or occupier of any building or land in the cantonm

other than a domestic Purpose, on such terms and conditions, consistent with this Act and 30

(2) The Chief Executive Officer may withdraw suc!
thereof at any time if it should appear Necessary to do so
sufficient supply of water for domestic use by inhabitants

194, Notwithstanding any obligation imposed on Boards under this Act, a Board
shall Not be liable to any forfeiture, penalty or damages for failure to Supply water or for

i it, as the case may be arises from

in the case of an agreement for
xpress provision for forfeiture, U2
ent,

+h supply or curtail the quantity
for the purpose of maintaining
of the cantonment, 35

penalty or damages in the event of such failure or Curtailm

ed subject to the following conditions, us
namely:—

(०) the owner, lessee or occupier of any building or land in or on which water
Supplied by the Board is wasted by reason of the Pipes, drains or other works being
Out of repair shall, ifhe has knowledge thereof, give notice of the same to such officer
as the Chief Executive Officer may appoint in this behalf; ©


59

(b) the Chief Executive Officer or any other officer or employee of the Board 7

authorised by him in writing in this behalf may enter into or on any premises supplied
with water by the Board, for the purpose of examining all pipes, taps, works and

fittings connected with the supply of water and of ascertaining whether there is any
gs waste or misuse of such water;

(c) the Chief Executive Officer may, after giving notice in writing, cut off the
connection between aay source of public water-supply and any building or land to
which watér is supplied for any purpose therefrom, or turn off such supply if—

(i) the owner or occupier of the building or land neglects to pay the water
\o tax or water rate or other charges connected with the water supply within one
month from the date on which such tax or rate or charge falls due for payment;

(ii) the occupier refuses to admit the Chief Executive Officer or other
authdrised officer or employee of the Board into the building or land for the
Purpose of making any examination or inquiry authorised by clause (b) or pre-
is vents the making of such examination or inquiry;

(iii) the occupier wilfully or negligently misuses or causes waste of wa-
ter;

(iv) the occupier wilfully or negligently injures or damages his meter or
any pipe or tap conveying water from the water works;

2० (v) any pipes, taps, works or fittings connected with the supply of water
to the building or land are found, on examination by any other officer or em-
ployee of the Board authorised by the Chief Executive Officer in writing in this
behalf, to be out of repair to such an extent as to cause waste of water;

(@) the expense of cutting off the connection or of turning off the water in any
as

case referred to in clause (c) shall be Paid by the owner or occupier of the building or
land;

(६) no action taken under or in pursuance of clause (c) shall relieve any person
from any penalty or liability which he may otherwise have incurred,

196. A Board may allow any person not residing within the limits of the canton-

30 ment to take or be supplied with water for any Purpose from any source of public, water

‘supply on such terms as it may prescribe, and may at any time withdraw or curtail such
supply.

197. Whoever—

(a) uses for other than domestic Purposes any water supplied by a Board for
3° domestic use; or

(2) Where water is supplied by agreement with a Board for a specified purpose,
uses that water for any other purposes shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to two thousand five hundred Tupees, and in addition, the Board shall be
entitled to recover from him the cost of the water misused.

५०

Water, drainage and other connections

198. A Board may carry any cable, wire, pipe, drain, sewer or channel of any kind,—

(a) for the purpose of carrying out, establishing or maintaining any system of

water-supply, lighting, drainage, or Sewerage, through, across, under or over any

uy road or street, or any Place laid out or intended as a road or Street, or, after giving
ie reasonable notice in writing to the owner or occupier, into, through, across, under or

over any land or building, or up side of any building, situated within the cantonment;
or


Wires, etc., laid
above surface

of ground.

Connection
with main not to
be made with-
out permission.
Power to pre-
scribe ferrules
and to establish
meters, etc.

Power of
inspection

Power to fix
rates and
charges

Government
woter-supply.

है

i duction or dj
‘ing water or of the introd 11%,
0) for the purpose of supply’ कर ॥
seston batik for the removal or outflow of sewage, after giving FCASONAD Ie o

occupier, into, through, across, under or over & lan?

in writing to the owner or :

i A ildi ituated outside the cantonment ang
building, or up side of any building, sit holt Ma
i A ich may be necessary or expedient for epa
times do all acts and things which : हा, sewer of channel in an effets iting ५, .
maintaining any such cable, wire, pipe, drain, sewer ideal 5 bina Mate f,
the purpose for which the same may be used or is intende: sed ;

Provided that no nuisance shall be caused in excess of what is reasonably १९०७५)

for the proper execution of the work: :
Provided further that compensation shall be payable to जय a मर
damage sustained by him which is directly occasioned by the carrying ‘any such Operation
199, In the event of any cable, wire, pipe, drain, sewer or ss being ~ OF carrieg
above the surface of any land or through, over or up side of any bui ing, suc cable, Wire,
Pipe, drain sewer or channel shall be so laid or carried as to interfere as little as Possible wi,
the rights of the owner or occupier to the due enjoyment of such land or building, and | >
compensation shall be payable by the Board in respect of any substantial interference With

the right to any such enjoyment.

200. No person shall, for any purpose whatsoever, without the permission of the Boarg
at any time make or cause to be made any connection or communication with any cable, Wire,
Pipe, drain, sewer or channel constructed or maintained by, or vested in, a Board. 26

201. The Chief Executive Officer may prescribe the size of the ferrules to be used for
the supply of gas, if any, and may establish meters or other appliances for the Purpose of
measuring the quantity of any water or gas or testing the quality thereof supplied to any
premises by the Board,

202. The ferrules, communication pipes, connections, meters, stand pipes and all 287
fittings thereon or connected therewith leading from water mains or from pipes, drains,
sewers or channels into any house or land, to which water or gas is supplied by a Board, and
the pipes, fittings, and works inside any such house or within the limits of any such land,
shall in all cases be installed or executed subject to the inspection and to the satisfaction of
the Chief Executive Officer.

203. A Board may fix the charges to be made for the establishment by them or through
their agency or communications from, and connections with, mains, or Pipes for the supply
of water, or gas, or for meters or other appliances for measuring the quantity, or testing the
quantity thereof supplied, and may levy such charges accordingly.

Application of this Chapter to Government water-supplies 3s

204. (1) Where in any cantonment there is a water-supply (other than a public water-
supply under the control of the Board) under the control of the Military Engineer Services or the
Public Works Department, the Officer of the Military Engineer Services or of the Public Works
Department, as the case may be, in charge of such water-supply (hereafter in this Chapter
referred to as the Officer) may publish in the cantonment in such manner as he thinks fit anotice ५०
declaring any lake, stream, spring, well, tank, Feservoir or other source, whether within or without
the limits of the cantonment other than a Source $f pub! blic water-supply and the officer may, for
the purpose of keeping any such source in good order or of | protecting it from contamination or
from use, require the Board to exercise any power conferred upon it by section 190,

(2) In the case of any water-supply such as is referred to in sub-section (1), the ५४४
following provisions of this Chapter, namely, the Provisions of sections 191, 193, 194, 195,
197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202 and 203 shall, as far as may be, be applicable in respect of the
supply of water to the cantonment, and for the Purpose of such application references to
the Board shall be construed as references to the Officer, and references to the Chief Execu-
tive Officer or other officer or employee of the Board shall be construed as references to So
such person as may be authorised in this behalf by the Officer.

36


2०

25

30

35

Yo

us

So

61

(3) The provisions of section 193 shall be a
by agreement to the Board by the Officer for ७:
purpose in like manner as they are applicable to
pier of any building or land in the cantonment,

pplicable in respect of the supply of water
se for any purpose other than a domestic
such supply to the Owner, lessee or occu-

(4) In order to preserve the undergros

und water level, the Board may make regulations
for the digging or use of bore wells in the

cantonment,

205. (1) Where it appears to the Chief Executive Officer that any dwelling house in
the cantonment is without supply of water for domestic consumption and that such a
supply can be given from mains which is not more than one hundred feet distance from
any part of such dwelling house, the Chief Executive Officer may by notice require the
owner to obtain supply and to execute all such works as may be necessary for this
purpose.

ly of wholesome water as appears to the Chief Executive Officer to
be sufficient for domestic Consumption and use of the inmates of the house,

206. In any case in which the provisions of section 204 apply and in which the
Board is not receiving a bulk supply of water under section 207, the water-tax, if any,
imposed in the cantonment and all other rates arising out of the supply of water which

1) be imposed under the Provisions of this Chaj
recovered by the
Central Government may in
Officer.

5 ch proportion thereof as the
each case determine, shall be Paid by the Board to the

207. (1) Where in any cantonment there is a water-supply such as is referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 204, the Board may, and so long as the Board is unable to provide
3 water-supply of its own, it shall receive from the Military Engineer Services or the Public

Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Board shall not
charge for the supply to Persons in the cantonment of water received by the Board under
this section a rate calculated to Produce more than the sum of the Payments made to the
Military Engineer Services or Public Works Department for water received and the actual
Cost of the supply thereof by the Board to consumers,

(3) If any dispute arises between the Board and the Military Engineer Service or
Public Works Department regarding the rate and amount of water adequate to the require-
ments of persons in the cantonment other than entitled consumers, the disputes shall be
referred to the Central Government whose decision shall be final.

208. Where under the provisions of sub-section (J) of section 207 a bulk supply of
water is received by the Board, the Board shall be solely responsible for the supply of water
to all persons in the cantonment other than entitled consumers; and the provisions of this
Act shall apply as if such bulk supply were a source of public water-supply under the

Water supply
for domestic
consumption

Recovery of
charges,

Supply of
water from
Government
water-supply
to the Board,

Functions of
the Board in re-
lation to distri-
bution of bulk
supply.


Special
provisions
concerning
drainage and
sewage

Construction
of and control
of drains and
sewage collec-
tion and dis-
posal works.

Certain matters
not to be
Passed into
cantonments
drains.

Application by
owners and
occupiers to
drain into
cantonment
drains

62

i ications from and connections with such bul
control of the Board and as if the communications "
कक for the purpose of supplying water to such persons were a system of water-supply
established and maintained by the Board.

209. (1) All public drains, all drains in, alongside or under any public Street, ex,
those vn ‘a the Military Engineer Service or any Department of the Central Government 5
or a State Government or any autonomous body under the Central Government or 4 State
Government and all sewage collection works, whether constructed out of the cantonment
fund or otherwise and all works, material and things appertaining thereto, which are Situated
in the cantonment shall vest in the Board.

(2) All public and other drains, which are vested in the Board are hereafter in this Act lo
referred to as cantonment drains.

(3) For the purposes of enlarging, deepening or otherwise repairing or maintaining
any such drain or sewage collection work so much of the sub-soil appertaining thereto as
may be necessary for the said purpose shall be deemed also to vest in the Board.

(4) All drains and ventilation shafts, pipes and all appliances and fittings connected |S
with drainage works constructed, erected or set up out of the cantonment fund in or upon
Premises not belonging to the Board whether—

(a) before or after the commencement of this Act; and

(0) for the use of the owner or occupier of such premises or not, shall unless
the Board has otherwise determined, or does at any time otherwise determine, vest 2o
and be deemed always to have vested in the Board.

210. (1) All cantonment drains, all sewage collection and all works, materials and
things appertaining thereto shall be under the control of the Board.

(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall maintain and keep in repair all cantonment drains
and sewage collection and sewage disposal works when authorised by the Board. as

(3) The Board shall construct as many new drains and Sewage collection and sewage

disposal works as may from time to time be necessary for effectual drainage and sewage
collection.

211. No person shall throw, empty or turn into any cantonment drain or into any drain
communicating with a cantonment drain-

(a) any matter likely to injure the drain or to interfere with the free flow of its
contents, or to affect Prejudicially the treatment and disposal of its contents; or 35

(6) any chemical, refuse or waste Stream, or any liquid of a temperature higher
than forty-five degrees centigrade, being refuse or Stream which, or liquid which
when so heated is, either alone or in combination with the contents of the drain be
dangerous, or the cause of a nuisance, or Prejudicial to health; or

(c) any dangerous petroleum. ५०

Explanation.—In this section, the expression “dangerous petroleum” has the
meaning as in the Petroleum Act, 1934. 30 of 19

212. (1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by bye-laws made in this
behalf, the owner or occupier of any premises having a Private drain, or the Owner of any
Private drain within cantonment may apply to the Chief Executive Officer to have his drain ५५४
made to communicate with the cantonment drains and thereby to discharge foul water and
surface water from those premises or that Private drain:


1s

20

2s

30

3s

५०

us

63

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall entitle any person:—

(a) to discharge directly or indirectly into any cantonment drain;
(i) any trade effluent from an
bye-laws made in this behalf: or
(ii) any liquid or other matter the discharge of which into cantonment
drains is prohibited by or under this Act or any other law; or

(8) where separate cantonment drains are provided for foul water and for sur-
face water to discharge directly oF indirectly—

(0 foul water into a drain provided for the surface water; or

(ii) except with the Permission of the Chief Executive Officer, surface
water into a drain provided for foul water; or

(c) to have his drains made to communicate directly with a storm-water over-
flow drain.

'y trade premises except in accordance with

(2) Any person desirous of availing himself of the provisions of sub-section (7) shall
give to the Chief Executive Officer notice of his proposals, and at any time within one month
after receipt thereof, the Chief Executive Officer may by notice to him refuse to permit the
communication to be made, if it appears to him that the mode of construction or Condition of
the drain is such that the making of the communication would be Prejudicial to the drainage
system, and for the purpose of examining the mode of construction and condition of the
drain he may, if necessary, fequire it to be laid open for inspection.

(3) The Chief Executive Officer may, if he thinks fit, construct such parts of the work
necessary for having a private drain made to communicate with a cantonment drain, as is in
or under a public street and in such a case, the expenses incurred by the Chief Executive
Officer shall be paid by the owner or occupier of the premises, or as the case may be, the

owner of the private drain and shall be recoverable from the owner or occupier as an arrears
of tax under this Act.

213. (1) Where any premises are in the opinion,of the Chief Executive Officer, without
sufficient means of effectual drainage and a cantonment drain or some place approved by

the Chief Executive Officer for the discharge of filth and other Polluted and o! i

matter is situated at a distance of not exceeding thirty metres from any part of the said
premises, he may, by written notice, require the owner of the said Premises—

(a) to make a drain emptying into such cantonment drain or place;
(2) to provide and set up all such appliances and fittings as may appear to the

(c) to remove any existing drain or other appliance or thing used or intended to
be used for drainage which is injurious to health;

ewly or in substitution of any existing appliance or
thing or to provide both a close drain and such other appliance or thing in substitu-
tion of the existing open drain and other appliance or thing, which is or is likely to be
injurious to health;

हि (०) to Provide and set up all such appliances and fitting as may appear to the
Chief Executive Officer to be necessary for the purpose of gathering and receiving

m floors and galleries of buildings when they are washed, and
conveying the same through spouts, by down-

: J take pipes so as to Prevent such
waste water from discharging directly on streets or inside any lower portion of the
premises;

Drainage of
undrained pre-
mises,


. >

(0 to carry out any work to improve or re-model an existing drain which is
inadequate, insufficient or faulty.
it rovided for in sub-section (/) any premises are, in the
कहता 1 Chief हि dice without sufficient means of effectual drainage, he
may, by written notice, require the owner of the premises— 5
(a) to construct a drain up to a point to be prescribed in uct Notice but not at
a distance or more than thirty meters from any part of the premises; or
(b) to construct a closed cesspool or soakage pit and drain or drains emptying
into such cesspool or soakage pit.
(3) Any requisition for the construction of any drain under sub-section (2) may |6
contain any of the details specified in sub-section (/).

New premises 214. (1) It shall not be lawful to erect or to re-erect any premises in a cantonment or to
not to be A

without CCCUPY any such premises unless— हा
Grains. (a) a drain be constructed of such size, materials and description, at such level

and with such fall as shall appear to the Chief Executive Officer to be necessary for the [S~
effectual drainage of such premises;

___ (b) there have been provided and set up on such premises such appliances and
fittings as may appear to the Chief Executive Officer to be necessary for the purposes
of gathering or receiving the filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter from, and
conveying the same off, the said premises and of effectually flushing the drain of the 20
said premises and every fixture connected therewith.

(2) The drain so constructed shall empty into a cantonment drain situated at a dis-
tance of not exceeding thirty meters from the Premises; but if no cantonment drain is situ-
ated within that distance then such drain shall empty into a cesspool situated within that

distance to be specified by the Chief Executive Officer for the purpose. as
Power to drain 215. (1) If it appears to the Chief Executive Officer that any group or block of
prea bel ae premises may be drained more economical ly or advantageously in combination than sepa-
olshargy हे rately, and a cantonment drain of sufficient size already exists or is about to be con-

operations structed within thirty metres of any part of that group or block of premises, the Chief

Executive Officer may cause that group or block of Premises to be drained by a combined 30
operation.

them as an arrears of tax under this Act, a5

(3) Not less than fifteen days before any such work i: नि
Executive Officer shall give to each such owner— 15 commenced, the Chief

(a) written notice of the nature of the proposed work; and

(b) an estimate of the expenses to be incurred ji
proportion of such expenses payable by him. 7 respect thereof and of the Us

(4) The Chief Executive Officer may require the ow:

के ners of such gro.
premises to maintain the work executed under this section. Broups or block or

Power to 216. Where a drain connecting any premises witha cantonment drain j i
close or limit’ for the effectual drainage of such premises and is otherwise unobjectionabie ee
pion a in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, adapted to the 8eneral system Of drainage Ys

in contsia in the cantonment, he may, by written notice addressed to the owne;

direct 7 Of the premises,
cases a


IS

as

30

५०

५६

65

(a) that such drain be closed, discontinued or destroyed and that any work
necessary for that purpose be done; or

(b) that such drain shall, from such date as may be specified in the रे /अलत दस
behalf, be used for filth and polluted water only or for rain water and unpollut
soil water only:

Provided that-

i) no drain may be Closed, discontinued or destroyed by the Chief
Oe Officer tinge! clause (a) except on condition of his Providing aaa
drain equally effectual for the drainage of the premises and communicating wit
any cantonment drain which he thinks fit; and

(ii) the expenses of the construction of any drain so provided by the
Board and of any work done under clause (a) may be paid out of the canton-
ment fund.

(2) Where no cause is shown within the specified Period or the cause shown appears
to the Chief Executive Officer invalid or insufficient, the Chief Executive Officer may by
order in writing either authori
be a joint owner thereof.

(3) An order made under sub-section (2) may contain directions as to~

(a) the payment of rent or compensation by the owner of the premises;
(8) the construction of a drain for the premises for the purpose of connecting it
with the aforesaid drain;

(c) the entry upon the land in which the aforesaid drain is situate with assis-

tants and workmen at all reasonable hours;
(d) the respective 16590
ing, cleaning and emptyin;
218, Wherever

Chapter that Steps shall or may be taken for
the effectual drainage of any premises, it
Officer to require that

shall be competent to the Chief Executive
t there shall be one 0
distinct drain for 1;

rain for filth and Polluted water and an entirely
ain water and unpolluted sub-soil water or both rain
unpolluted sub-soil wat

water and
iter, each emptying into Separate cantonment drains or other
Suitable places.

sibilities of the Parties for maintaining, repairing, flush-
ig the aforesaid drain,
it is provided in this

219. For the Purpose of efficient drainage of, any premises,
may, by notice in writing —

the Chief Executive Officer

(b) require such Paving to be kept in Proper

220, The Chief Executive Officer may cause any
bon Into, and all Sewage to be Collected of at, suc
le:

Tepair.

or all of the

cantonment drains to
h place or p

laces as he considers

Use of drain
by a person
other than
the owner.

Sewage and
‘main water drains
to be distinct.

Power to
require owner
to carry out
Certain works
for satisfac.
tory drainage.

Appointment
Of places for the
emptying of

drains and col-
lection of sew-
age.


« B

‘ been before the commencement of this

ided that no place which has not ¢ -
for nah he purposes specified in this section shall, after such commencemen, hi ~
therefor without the appraval of the Board:

Provided further that on and after such date as may be appointed by the

in thi ischarged into any water course Cony
is behalf no sewage shall be disc 8 n until
apne as not to affect prejudicially the purity and quality of the water into te 1
it is discharged.
Miscellaneous
Connection 221. Without the written permission of the Chief Executive Officer, no PETSOn sha
with water Connection

i ake or cause to be made any :
for any purpose whatsoever, at any time make as
SS = to communicate with any drajn referred to in section 210 or any water works, Constructed ५.
02 का maintained by, or vested in, the Board.
permission.

\ i itonment drain or
Buildings, 222. (1)(a) No railway works shall be constructed on any can ay
porte es water works constructed or maintained by, or vested in the Board, without the approval of
Not to be the Central Government.

ic

2
erected or 2 ores
constructed (b) If any railway works are constructed om any drains or water works as af
over drains or without the written permission of the Central Government, the Chief Executive Officer may
पड सजा remove or otherwise deal with the same as he thinks fit.
permission.

(2)(@) No private street shall be constructed and no building, wall, fence or other
structure shall be erected on any cantonment drain or on any water works constructed or 25
maintained by, or vested in, the Board without the approval of the Board.

(b) If any private street is constructed or any building, wall, fence or structure erected
on any drain or water works as aforesaid without the written permission of the Board, the
Chief Executive Officer may remove or otherwise deal with the same as he may think fit.

(3) The expenses incurred by the Chi
the owner of the private street or of the bui
may be, by the railway adminis

ief Executive Officer in doing so shall be paid by 25
Iding, fence wall or other structure or, as the case
tration or the person offending and shall be recoverable as an

arrears of tax under this Act.
Rights of user 223. (1) The Cfiief Executive Officer may place and maintain aqueducts, conduits
Hs patcic and lines of mains or Pipes or drains over,

fm under, along or across any immovable property 20

ees; whether within or without the local limits of the cantonment without acquiring the same,
and may at any time for the purpose of examining, repairing, altering or removing any
aqueducts, conduits or lines of mains or Pipes or drains, enter on any property over,
under, along or across which the aquedu

cts, Conduits or lines of, ins ipes, or drains
have been placed: mains or pipes, or

Bs
Provided that the Board shall not acquire any right other than a right of user in the

Property over, under, along or across which any aqueduct, conduit or line of mains or pipes,

or drain is placed,

Provided that the Chief Executive Officer may,
or amend any existing wo

fr rks of which the character or Position is not to be altered if such “5
repair, renewal or amendment i i


\S

20

as

30

Yo

us

67

(3) In exercise of the powers conferred upon him by this section, the Chief Executive
Officer shall cause ds little damage and inconvenience as may be possible, and shall make
full compensation for any damage or inconvenience caused by him.

224, (1) If it appears to the Chief Executive Officer that the only or most convenient
means of water supply to, and drainage of, any premises is by placing or carrying any pipe
or drains over, under, alofig of across the immovable property of another person, the Chief
Executive Officer may, by order in writing, authorise the owner of the premises to place or
carry such pipe or drain over, under, along or across such immovable property:

Provided that before making any such order the Chief Executive Officer shall give to
the owner of the immovable property a reasonable opportunity of showing cause within
such time as may be prescribed by bye-laws made in this behalf as to why the order should
not be made:

Provided further that the owner Of the premises shall notgcquire any right other than
aright of user in the property over, under, along or across whith any such pipe or drain is
placed or carried.

(2) Upon the making of an order, under sub-section (1), the owner of the premises
may, after giving reasonable notice of his intentien so to do, enter upon the immovable
property with assistants and workmen at any time between sunrise and sunset for the
purpose of placing a pipe or drain over, under, along or across such immovable property or
for the purpose of repairing the same.

(3) In placing or carrying a pipe or drain under this section, as little damage as
possible shall be done to the immovable property and the owner of the premises shall—

(a) cause the pipe or drain to be placed or carried with the least practicable
delay;

(8) fill in, re-instate and make good at his own cost and with the least practicable
delay, any land opened, broken up or removed for the purpose of placimg or carrying
such pipe or drain; and

(c) pay compensation to the owner of the immovable property and to any other
person who sustains damage by reason of the placing or carrying of such pipe or
drain.

(4) If the owner of the immovable property, over, under, along or across which a pipe
or drain has been placed or carried under this section whilst such immovable property was
not built upon, desires to erect any building on such property, the Chief Executive Officer,
shall, by notice in writing, require the owner of the premises to close, remove or divert the
pipe or drain in such manner as shall be approved by hint and to fill in, fe-instate and make
80०१ the immovable property as if the pipe or drain had not been placed or carried over,
under, along or across the same:

Provided that no such requisition shall be made unless in the opinion of the Chief
Executive Officer it is necessary or expedient for the construction of proposed building or
the safe enjoyment thereof that the pipe or drain should be closed, removed or diverted.

225, Ifthe Board places or tarries any pipe or drain d#does any other work connected
with the water supply or drainage across any railway line, it may, with the sanction of the
Central Government and at the cost of the cantonment fund, require the railway administration
to raise or lower the level thereof.

tex 226. (7) When under the provisions of this Chapter, any person may be required or is
1९10 execute any work, the Chief Executive Officer may, in accordance with the provisions
ofthis Act and of any bye-laws made in this behalf, cause such work to be executed after

giving such person an op in such time as may be
portunity of executing the same within y
specified by him for this purpose,

Power of
owner of
Premises to
place pipes
and drains
through land
belonging to
other

Power to
require railway
level, ete., to
be raised or
lowered.
Power to
‘execute work
after giving
notice to the
person liable.


> |
68

(2) The expenses incurred or likely to be incurred १ कण कप Officer jn the
execution of any such work shall be payable by the sai a win af ee ॥0॥९॥
by the Chief Executive Officer in connection with the ay आल work aa a. OF the
enjoyment of amenities and conveniences rendered = ie Shall be Paya,
by the Person or persons enjoying such amenities and con y

4
(3) The expenses referred to in sub-section (2) on हा recoverable from the Pericg,
or persons liable therefor as an arrears of tax under this Act.

Power to affix 227. For the purpose of ventilating any drain or cesspool, ~~ Vested iq
shafts etc. जि. Board or not, the Chief Executive Officer may, in accordance with bye-laws made jn this
Sanitation of behale. erect upon any premises or affix to the outside of any building or to any tree ay |
a or esses such shaft or pipe as may appear to him to be necessary.

Power to 228. (1) Where it appears to the Chief Executive Officer that there are Teasonable
cxamineand grounds for believing that a private drain or cesspool is in such oe a be haar
tent drains, to health or a nuisance or that a private drain communicating directly or indirectly with 8
Stokke, पाला draia is so defective as to admit sub-soil water, he may examine its Condition, 1g
४७७७७ and for that purpose may apply any test, other than a test by water under pressure, and ithe

deems it necessary, open the ground.

(2) If on examination the drain or cesspool is found to be in proper condition, the
Chief Executive Officer shall, as soon as possible, re-instate any ground which has been

opened by him and make good any damage done by him. 4
Bulk delivery 229. (1) The Board shall deliver in bulk all the sewage to, the authority Prescribed by
of sewage bY the Central Government or the State Government, subject to such charges for the delivery of
जय sewage of the area of cantonment as may be determined by means of an agreement entered
into between that other authority and the Board.
(2) The agreement mentioned in sub-section (/) shall provide also for a stipulation 2 i
therein that in case of. any dispute about the Payments to be made to that other authority by
the Board, the matter shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon
shall be final and binding on both parties.
Employment of 230. The Central Government may, for reason to be recorded, direct that any specified
Government work, repair, renewal or replacement which is to be undertaken by or for the Board under 3०
pineal this Chapter, shall be carried out on behalf of the Board by the Central Government and
जय the Board shall pay the Charges therefor at the rates and subject to the terms for the time
being applicable in the case of works constructed by that Government on behalf ofa local
authority.
Works to be 231. (1) No person other than a licensed plumber shall execute any work described in 35"
ponent this Chapter and no person shall permit any such work to be executed except by a licensed

plumber, plumber:

Provided that if, in the opinion of the Chief, Executive Officer, the work is of a trivial
nature, he may grant permission in writing for the execution of ‘such work by a person other
than a licensed plumber, Yo

(2) Every person who employs a licensed Plumber to execute any work shall, when so
required, furnish to the Chief Executive Officer the name of such plumber.

(3) When any work is executed except in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section (1), such work shall be liable to be dismantled at the discretion of the Chief Executi ve
Officer without Prejudice to the right of the Board to Prosecute under this Act the person at US
whose instance such work has been executed.

(4) The Board may make bye-laws for the guidance of licensed plumbers and a Copy
of all such bye-laws shall be attached to every licence granted to a plumber by the Board.


69
(5) The Board may, from time to time, prescribe the charges to be paid to licensed
plumber for any work done by them under or for any of the Purposes of this Chapter,

(6) No licensed plumber shall, for any work referred to in sub-section (5), demand or
receive more than the charges prescribed therefor, under that sub-section.

5 (7) The Board shall make bye-laws providing for—
(a) the exercise of adequate control on all licensed plumbers;
(6) the inspection of all works carried out by them; and

(c) the hearing and disposal of complaints made by
premises with regard to the quality of work done, material
lo work, and the charges made, by a licensed plumber,

the owners or occupiers of
used, delay in execution of

(8) No licensed plumber shall contravene any of the bye-laws made under this section

or execute carelessly or negligently any work under this Act or make use of bad materials,
appliances or fittings.

(9) Ifany licensed plumber contravenes sub-section (8),
\§ भ cancelled whether he is prosecuted under this Act or not.

232. (1) No person shall—

his licence may be suspended

Prohibition of
certain acts,
(a) wilfully obstruct any person acting under the authority of the Board, or the
Chief Executive Officer, in setting out the lines of: ‘any works or pull up or remove any
pillar, post or stake fixed in the ground for the purpose of setting out lines of such
20 work, or deface or destroy any works made for the same Purpose; or
(28) wilfully or negligently break, injure, turn on, open, close, shut off or otherwise

interfere with any lock, ceck, valve, Pipe, meter or other work or apparatus belonging
to the Board; or

(c) unlawfully obstruct the flow of or flush, draw off, or divert, or take water
नहा from any water work belonging to the Board; or

(d) unlawfully obstruct the flow of or flush, draw off, or divert, or take sewage
from any sewage work belonging to the Board or break or damage any electrical
transmission line maintained by the Board; or

(९) obstruct any officer or other employee of the Board in the discharge of his
3० duties under this Chapter or refuse or wilfully neglect to furnish him with the means
necessary for the making of any entry, inspection, examination or inquiry thereunder

in relation to any water or sewage work; or

@ bathe in, at or upon any water work or wash or throw or cause to enter

therein any animal, or throw any rubbish, dirt or filth into any water work or wash or

3" clean therein any cloth, wool or leather or the skin of any animal, or cause the water of
any sink, or drain or any steam-engine or boiler or any polluted water to turn or be

brought into any water work, or do any other act whereby the water in any water work

is fouled or likely to be fouled.
५ (2) Nothing in clause (8) of sub-section (1) shall apply to a consumer closing the
® stopcock fixed on the service pipe supplying water to his premises so long as he has
obtained the consent of any other consumer whose supply will be affected thereby.
CHAPTER X
TOWN PLANNING AND CONTROL OVER BUILDINGS, ETC.

us 233. (1) On the commencement of this Act, the Chief Executive Officer shall with the Preparation of
appr

oval of the Board, cause to be prepared a spatial plan for land use to be followed inthe and use plan.
cantonment which shall include—


|
70

)) narking of zones for residential, institutiowal, commerciay 7
(a) earn

activities; and

fe ९ b-standard 6,
i es for areas considered su ard on
hag mph yr Tighting, poor ventilation or irregular line कं

narro $

a street.

(2) The Board shall give publicity to the land use plan prepared under subsetn
by publishing a gist of the plan in a local newspaper.

Sanction for 234. No person shall erect or re-erect a building on any land in a Cantonment
building. (a) in an area, other than the civil area, except with 16 previous बाद, of

5

(b) in a civil area, except with the previous sanction of the Chief Executing
Officer,

nor otherwise than in accordance with the Provisions of this Chapter and of the rules ang
bye-laws made under this Act relating to the erection and re-erection of buildings:

i i ilding i for public purposes then
Provided that if an erected or re-erected bui Iding is meant r public then (
shall be made accessible to and barrier free for the persons with disabilities,

Notice of new 235. (1) Whoever intends to erect or Te-erect any building in a cantonment shal
buildings. apply for sanction by giving notice in writing of his intention—
(a) where such erection or re-erection is in ararea, other than the civil area, to
the Board;

a
(6) where such erection or re-erection is in 8 civil area, to the Chief Executive

(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person shall he deemed to erect or re-erect 4
building who—

(a) makes any material Alteration or enlargement of any building; or £)]

(8) converts into a Place for human habitation any building not originally
constructed for human habitation; or

(52 converts into more than one Place for human habitation a building Originally
Constructed as one such place; or

(d) converts two or more places of human habitation into a greater number of 3
such places; or

(६) converts into a stable, cattle-shed or cow-house any building originally
constructed for human habitation; or

@ converts into a dispensary, stall, shops, warehouse, godown, factory or _
Garage any building originally constructed for human habitation; or 35

(g) makes any alteration which there is reason to believe is likely to affect
Prejudicially the stability or safety of any building or the condition of any building in
respect of drainage, sanitation or hygiene; or

(h) makes any alteration to any building which increases or diminishes the
height of, or area covered by, or the cubic capacity of, the building, or which reduces 4°
the cubic capacity of any room in the building below the minimum prescribed by any
bye-law made under this Act.

Conditions of 236. (1) A person giving the notice required

by section 235 shall specify the purpose
valid notice. for which it is intended to use the building to whi

ich such notice relates.


IS

ao

ao

30

3s

Yo

4s

71

237, The powers, duties and functions of the Board under section 238, sub-section
(Dofsection 241, section 243, section 245 and section 248 excluding the provisions to sub-

section (/) and the provisio to sub-section (2) of the said section 248 shall be exercised or
discharged in a civil area by the Chief Executive Officer,

238. (1) The Board may either refuse to sanction the erection or re-erection, as the
case may be, of the building, or may sanction it either absolutely or subject to such
directions as it thinks fit to make in writing in respect of all or any of the following matters,
namely:—

(a) the free passage or way to be left in front of the building;

(8) the space to be left about the building to secure free circulation of air and
facilitate scavenging and the prevention of fire;

(c) the ventilation of the building, the minimum cubic area of the rooms and the
number of height of the storeys of which the building may consist;

(d) the provison and position of drains, latrines, urinals, cesspools or other
receptacles for filth; -

(९) the level and width of the foundation, the level of the lowest floor and the
stability of the structure;

@ the line of frontage with neighbouring buildings if the building abuts on a
street;

(g) the means to be provided for egress from the building in case of fire;

(A) the materials and method of construction to be used for external and party
walls for rooms, floors, fire-places and chimenys;

(0 the height and slope of the roof above the uppermost floor upon which
human beings are to live or cooking operations are to be carried on; and
(/) any other matter affecting the ventilation and sanitation of the buildings, and
the person erecting or re-erecting the building shall obey all such written directions in
every particular.
(2) The Board may. refuse to sanction the erection or re-erection of any building on
any grounds sufficient in the opinion of the Board affecting the particular building:

Provided that the Board shall refuse to accord sanction the erection or re-erection of

any building if such erection or re-erection is not in conformity with any general scheme
sanctioned under section 240.

(3) The Board, before sanctioning the erection or re-erection of a building on land
which is under the management of the Defence Estates Officer, shall refer the application to
the Defence Estates Officer for ascertaining whether there is any objection on the part of the
Government to such erection or re-erection; and the Defence Estates Officer shall return the
application together with his report thereon to the Board within thirty days after it has been
received by him.

(4) The Board may refuse to sanction the erection or re-erection of any building—

(०) when the land on which it is proposed to erect or re-erect the building is held

on a lease from the Government, if the erection or re-erection constitutes a breach of
the terms of the lease; or

(2) when the land on which it is proposed to erect or re-erect the building is
entrusted to the management of the Board by the Government if the erection or re-
Srection constitutes a breach of the terms of the entrustment of management or

Powers of
Board under
certain
Sections
exercisable by
Chief
Executive
officer.

Power of Board
to sanction or
refuse.


Order of
‘stoppage of
building or
works in
certain cases
and disposal of
things

|
72

contravenes any of the instructions issued by the Government regarding the

management of the land by the Board; or
ich iti -erect the building |
when the land on which it is proposed to erect or re-erec’ ding. is nog
held Pd lease from the Government, if the right to build on such land is in dispute
between the person applying for sanction and the Government. &

i i i re-erection of the buildi
(5) If the Board decides to refuse to sanction the erection or m4
it shall communicate in writing the reasons for such refusal to the person by whom Notice

was given.

(6) Where the Board neglects or omits, for one month after the receipt of a valiq
notice, to make and to deliver to the person who has given the notice any order of any lo
nature specified in this section, and such person thereafter by a written communication sent

by registered post to the Board calls the attention of the Board to the neglect or omission,
then, if such neglect or omission continues for a further period of fifteen days from the date

of such communication the Board shall be deemed to have given sanction to the erection or Is
re-erection, as the case may be: हु

Provided that in any case to which the provisions of sub-section 3) apply, the period
of one month herein specified shall be reckoned from the date on which the Board has
received the report referred to in that sub-section.

239. (1) Where the erection of any building or execution of any work has been
tommenced or is being carried on without or contrary to the sanction, but has not been Qo
completed, referred to in section 238 or in contravention of any condition subject to which
such sanction has been accorded or in contravention of any provision of this Act or bye-
laws made thereunder, the Chief Executive Officer may in addition to any other action that
may be taken under this Act, by order require the Person at whose instance the building or
the work has been commenced or is being carried on to stop the same forthwith. a5

(2) If an order made by the Chief Executive Officer under sub-section (1) directing
any person to stop the erection of any building or execution of. any work is not complied
with, the Chief Executive Officer may require any police officer to remove such person and
all his assistants and workmen from the Premises or to seize any construction material, tool,

(3) Any of the things caused or to be seized by the Chief Executive Offi
sub-section (2) shall be disposed of by him in a manner specified in bes sta rl
and (7). 32

building or the execution of work is not continued.

under sub-section (4) fo watch the premises, the cost of such d a p
the person at whose instance such erection or execution a beg —_— shall be paid by
notice under sub-section (/) was given and shall be recoverable from aati or to whom
arrear of tax under this Act. ‘uch person as an

- (6) Any of the things caused to be removed by the Chief Executi
section shall unless the owner thereof tums up to take back such on under this
Chief Executive Officer charges for removal and storage of such things be dis Pays to the US
the Chief Executive Officer by a public auction or in such other manner as he Peed by
jt:

Provided that such things shall only be disposed of by the Chief Executive Office
the expiry of fifteen days in case of non perishable things and twenty-four ron
hours in

case of perishable things from the date and time of seizure, s
°


73

(7) The charges for removal and storage and sale of things sold under sub-section (6)
shall be paid out of the proceeds of the sale thereof and the balance, if any, shall be paid to
the owner of the things sold on a claim being made therefor within a period of one year from
the date of sale and if no such claim is made within the said period, shall be credited to the

5 cantonment fund.

240. The General Officer Commanding-in-Chief the Command in Consultation with
the Principal Director may sanction a general scheme of erection or re-erection of buildings
within such limits as may be specified in the sanction for the Prevention of over-crowding
or for purpose of sanitation, or in the interest of persons residing within those limits or for

10 any other purpose, and may, in pursuance of such scheme, impose restrictions on the
erection or re-erection of buildings within those limits:

Provided that no such scheme shall be sanctioned by the General Officer Commanding
in Chief, the Command unless an opportunity has been given by a public notice to be
published locally by the Chief Executive Officer requiring persons affected or likely to be

[हर affected by the proposed scheme, to file their objections or suggestions in the manner
specified in the notice, within a period of thirty days of the publication of such notice, and
the Chief Executive Officer shall after considering such objections and suggestions, if: any,
forward the same along with his recommendations to the Principal Director.

241. (1) No compensation shall be claimable by any person for any damage or loss
2b which he may sustain in consequence of the refusal of the Board of sanction to the erection
of any building or in respect of any direction issued by it under sub-section (1) of section

238.

(2) The Board shall make compensation to the owner of any building for any actual
damage or loss sustained by him in consequence of the prohibition of the re-erection of any
25 building or of its requiring any land belonging to him to be added to the street:

Provided that the Board shall not be liable to make any compensation in respect of the
prohibition of the re-erection of any building which for a period of three years or more
immediately preceding such refusal has not been in existence or has been unfit for human
habitation.

i) 242. Every person to whom sanction for the erection or re-erection of any building
in any area in a cantonment has been given under section 237 or section 238 by the
Chief Executive Officer or, as the case may be, by the Board shall, within thirty days
after completion of the erection or re-erection of the building give a notice of completion
in writing to the Chief Executive Officer or the Board, as the case may be, and the

36 Chief Executive Officer or the Board shall on receipt of such notice cause the building
to be inspected in order to ensure that the building has been completed in accordance
with the sanction given by the Chief Executive Officer or the Board, as the case may

243. Every sanction for the erection or re-erection of building given or deemed to

4 have been pri as hereinbefore provided shall be available for two years from the date on

Which it is given, and, if the building so sanctioned is not begun by the person who has

obtained the sanction or some one lawfully claiming under him within that period, it shall

not thereafter be begun unless the Chief Executive Officer, on application made therefor has

an extension of that period.

244. (1) No person shall, without the written permission of the Board or otherwise
than in conformity with the conditions, if any, of such permission,

ilding not

(a) use or permit to be used for human habitation any part of a bu
Originally and weed to be used for that purpose or not used for that

ted in
Purpose before any alteration has been made therein by any work execu
dd cordance with the provisions of this Act and the bye-laws made thereunder;

(6) change or allow the change of the use of any land or building;

us

Power to
sanction
general
scheme for
Prevention of
overcrowding,
etc.

Lapse of

on use of


74

(c) convert or allow the conversion of one kind of tenement into another king

isi f sub-section (/) shall on CONVictio
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions 0 y viction
be punishable with a fine which may extend to one lakh repees and in the case of continuing
contravention with an additional fine of rupees ten thousand for every day during which
the contravention continues after the date if comes to the notice. 5

Period for 245. A Board, when sanctioning the erection or re-erection of a building as hereinbefore
completion of provided, shall specify a reasonable period after the work has commenced within which the
meee erection or re-erection is to be completed, and, if the erection or re-erection is not completed
within the period so fixed, it shall not be continued thereafter without fresh sanction obtained
in the manner hereinbefore provided, unless the Board on application made therefor has Jo
allowed an extension of that period:

Provided that not more than two such extensions,
shall be allowed in any case.

Completion 246. The Chief Executive Officer shall on receipt of the notice under section 242 of
cortificate this Act cause thebuilding to be inspected either by himself or by the officer authorised by Ig
hint in his behalf in order to ensure that the building has been completed in accordance with
the sanction given and issue completion certificate provided that the person seeking the
completion certificate shall assist the Chief Executive Officer in inspection of such building:

Provided that the building shall not be occupied for habitation unless a certificate is
issued by the Chief Executive Officer or an officer authorised by him in this behalf: 26

Provided further that if the Chief Executive Officer fails within a period of thirty days
after the receipt of the notice of completion, to communicate his refusal to issue such
Certificate, such certificate shall be deemed to have been granted,

Mlegal erection 247. Whoever begins, continues or completes the erection or re-erection ofa
andre-erection. building—

(a) without having given a valid notice as required by sections 235 and 236, or
before the building has been sanctioned or is deemed to have been sanctioned; or

(8) without complying with any direction made under sub-section (1) of section
238; or ®
(c) when sanction has been refused, or has ceased to be available or has been 30

suspended by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, under clause
(8) of sub-section (1) of section 58,

shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand Tupees and the cost of
Sealing the illegal construction and its demolition,

Power to stop 248. (1) The Board may, at any time, by notice in writing, direct the owner. lessee or 35
erection orre- occupier of any land in the cantonment to stop the erection or re-erection of a building in >

wee Pasi हट
proses or any case in which the Board considers that such erection or re-erection is an offence under

each for not more than one year,

as

Provided that the Board may, instead of requiri i iti
ildi ing the alteration or demolition of ‘any
such building or part thereof, accept by way of iti it thinks
reasonable: 'Y way of composition such sum as it thinks ei

Provided further that the Board shall Not, without the previous concurrence of the
General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, pron by way of composition


75

under the foregoing proviso in respect of any building on land which is not under the
management of the Board,

(2) ABoard shall by notice in writing direct the owner, lessee or occupier of any land
in the cantonment to stop the erection or re-erection of a bui ing in any case in which the
order under section 238 sanctioning the erection or re-erection has been suspended by the

5 General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
section 58, and shall in any such case in like manner direct the demolition or alteration, as
the case may be, of the building or any part thereof so erected or re-erected where the
General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, thereafter directs that the order of the

Jo Board sanctioning the erection or re-erection of the building shall not be carried into effect
or shall be carried into effect with modifications specified by him:

Provided that the Board shall Pay to the owner of the building compensation for
any loss actually incurred by him in consequence of the demolition or alteration of
any building which has been erected or re-erected prior to the date on which the order

IF ofthe General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, has been communicated
to him.

249. (1) It shall be lawful for the Chief Executive Officer, at any time, before or after
making an order of demolition under section 248 or of the stoppage of erection of any
building, or execution of any work, to make an order directing the seal ing of such erection or

2b work or of the premises in which such erection or work is being carried on or has been
completed at the cost of the offender in such manner as may be prescribed by rules for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act or for preventing any dispute as to the
nature and extent of such erection or work.

(2) Where any erection or work or any premises in which any erection or work is being
aS carried on, has or, has been sealed, the Chief Executive Officer may, for the purpose of
demolishing such erection or work in accordance with the provisions of this Act, order such

seal to be removed.

(3) No person shall remove such seal except—

(a) under an order made by the Chief Executive Officer under sub-section (2);
30 or

(8) under ati order of an appellate authority in an#ppeal made under this Act.

(4) Any person who contravenes the provisions contained in sub-section (3) shall
be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may
extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.

a5 150. (1) After the commeiicement of this Act, no court shall entertain any suit,
application or other proceedings in respect of any order or notice unless an appeal under
‘section 340 is preferred and the same is disposed of by the appellate authority under sub-
section (3) of section 343 of this Act.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (J), every suit, application or

YO other proceedings pending in any court immediately before the commencement of this Act

shall continoe to be dealt with and disposed of by that court as if the said section has not
been brought into force.

251. A Board may make byé-laws prescribing—

i i i i i building in
(a) the mammer in which notice of the intention to erect or re-erect a 3
us the cantonment shall be given to the Board or, as the case may be, the coal Executive
Officer and the information and plans to be furnished with the notice;

i fe i i letion af erection
(0) the manner in which and the form in which a notice of comp
OF re-erection of any butlding in the cantonment shall be given to the Board or, as the

Power to seal
unauthorised
construc-
tions.

Courts not to

proceedings in
certain cases.

Power to make


Prohibition of
fixtures which

cause

76 NN

case may be, the Chief Executive Officer and the information and plans to be furnishes
with the notice;

(c) the type or description of buildings which may or may not, and the pur,
for which a building may or may not, be erected or re-erected in the cantonment or any
part thereof, 5

(d) the minimum cubic capacity of any room or rooms in a building which isty
be erected or re-erected;

fe ‘d of plans or Specification

(e) the fees payable on provision by the Boar ड़
of the type of buildings which may be erected in the cantonment or any pay
thereof; lo

(0 the circumstances in which mosque, temple or church or other sacred building
may be erected or re-erected; and

(g) with reference to the erection or re-erection of buildings, or of any class of
buildings, or any of the following matters, namely:—

(i) the line of frontage where the building abuts on a street; Is

(ii) the space to be left about the building to secure free circulation of air
and facilities for scavenging and for the prevention of fire;

(iii) the materials and method of construction to be used for external and
Party walls, roofs and floors;

(iv) the position, the materials and the method of construction of २०
stair-cases, fire places, chimneys, drains, latrines, privies, urinals and
cess-pools;

(v) height and slope of the roof above the uppermost floor upon which
human beings are to live or cooking operations are to be carried on;

(vi) the level and width of the foundation, the level of the lowest floor, 257
the stability of the structure and the protection of building from dampness
arising from sub-soil;

(vii) the number and height of the storeys of which the building may
consist;

(viii) the means to be provided for egress from the bui Iding in case of fire; 30

(ix) the safeguarding of wells from pollution; or

(x) the materials and method of Construction to be used for godowns
intended for the storage of foodgrains in excess of eighteen quintals in order to
render them rat proof.

252. (1) No person shall, except with the permission of the Chief Executive Officer, 387
erect or set up any wall, fence, nail, pdst, step, booth or other structure whether fixed or
movable or whether of a permanent or temporary nature, or any fixture in Or upon any street
so as to form an obstruction to, or an encroachment upon, ora Projection over, or to occupy
any portion of such street, channel, drain, well or tank,

(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or ५७
occupier of any such building to alter or remove any such projection or encroachment as
aforesaid:

Provided that in the case of any projection or encroachment lawfully in existence at
the commencement of this Act, the Chief Executive Officer shall make compensation for any
damage caused by the removal or alteration, ५३४४

(3) The Chief Executive Officer may, by order in writing, give permission to the


| — W

iers of buildings in any particul:
nett or occup Particular street to put uy
omronies oF ००७ projecting from any upper storey thereof to an pi ie oe पट

bl
bribe ae fa — wall at such height from the level ground or street as may be

353. The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing require
Fs, without his permission in writing, newly erected or ects ity abe eoerone

sewer, drain, culvert, water-course or wate nment
podlic 2०० with the same as he thinks fit. ५४४७७४1७७४७७७४ eam

cy The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in

essee of आए. building or land in any street, at ee anal tkeeenn

thinks fit, ० put up and keep in good condition, proper troughs and pipes for receivii ‘i
rain water from the building or land and for discharging the same or to contin

ol maintain any other connection or communication between such buildings or land and

Grain or sewer of a water harvesting structure or facility. . .

the purpose of efficiently draini |]
छः (2) For pened ining any building or land in the cantonment, the
catenin Oem yeaa mune ree he emer ox een ae ans

(a) to pave, with such materials and in such manner as h
thinks
courtyard, alley or passage between two or more buildings, or हु wae

yo (8) to keep any such paving in proper repair; or

2S tree in the cantonment,

40

Yo

us

(c) to make such arrangements as may be specified by the Board undi
laws to deliver rain water from roof top to the water harv i ili ie
Pr sate oe bened esting facility or

255. The Chief Executive Officer may attach to the outside of any building, or to any

५ brackets for lamps or any accessories for non-conventional sources
of energy in such manner as not to occasion injury thereto of inconvenience.

256. (1) All roads in the civil area of a cantonment shall be maintained by the Board.

(2) All roads outside the civil area as have been vested in the Board shall also be
maintained by the Board.

Streets

257. (1) The Chief Executive Officer may, by order in writing, permit the temporary
cccupation of any street, or of any land vested in the Board, for the purpose of depositing
any building materials or making any temporary excavation therein or erection thereon,
subject to such conditions as the Board may prescribe for the safety or convenience of the
public, and may charge a fee for such permission and may in his discretion withdraw such
permission.

(2) Where any article or thing is placed on any street or land under the management
of the Board or the Defence Estates Officer so as to form an obstruction thereto or any
encroachment thereon, the Chief Executive Officer or, as the case may be, the Defence
Estates Officer, may cause such article or thing to be removed and recover from the person
who placed such article or thing the expenses incurred in that behalf in the same manner as
moneys recoverable by the Board under section 324 and may also, if such person fails to
offer satisfactory explanation, order the confiscation of such article or thing.

258. (1) A Board may open any street for public use.

(2) ABoard shall not permanently close any street without the prior permission of the
General Officer Commanding in Chief, or the Principal Director:

buildings over
drains, etc,

Drainage and



Names of
streets and
numbers of

ih

y
78

street shall be closed for reasons other than the

lic notice inviting objections and suggestions font?

Provided that no such
the

reasons and without giving a pu

general public. (०० emporayclow
९
(3) The Chief Executive Officer may, by public notice, tempor Ay street

pose of carrying out any work connected wig :

any part of a street for repair or for the pu ० 200» si

drainage, water-supply or lighting or any 0
required or permitted to carry out: inn other
irs or any Cause
Provided that where, owing to any works or repal the
condition of any street or of any water-works, drain, हमे or ond vested in the Boar,
is such as to be likely to cause danger to the public, the Boar h
(a) take all reasonable means for the protection of the adjacent buildings and

land and provide reasonable means of access thereto;
(b) cause sufficient barriers or fences to be erected for the security of life ang

property and cause such barriers or fences to be sufficiently lighted from sunset t, हि

sunrise.

A which any area, street o

259, (1)A Board may determine the name or number by
Public place in the cantonment shall be known, may cause name or om 10 be affixed on
any building in the cantonment in such place as it thinks fit and may cause a number to
be affixed to any such building.

(2)Whoever destroys, pulls down, defaces or alters any such name or number of puts 3,
up any name or number differing from that put up by the order of the Board shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.

(3)When a name or number has been affixed to any building under sub-section (1),
the owner of the building shall maintain the name or number in order, and shalll replace it if
removed or defaced, and if he fails to do so the Chief Executive Officer may by notice in ss
writing require him to replace it.

260. A Board, may in accordance with the bye-laws framed for the purpose, allow the
Group Housing Schemes for construction of houses.

261. (1) No boundary wall, hedge or fence of any material or description Shall be
erected in a cantonment without the permission in writing of the Chief Executive Officer. 30

(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or lessee
of any land in the cantonment—

(०) to remove from the land any boundary wall, hedge or fence which is in his
opinion unsuitable, unsightly or otherwise objectionable; or
(2) to construct on the land sufficient boundary walls, hedges or fences of 35°
such material, description or dimensions as may be specified in the notice; or
ne (c) to maintain the boundary walls, hedges or fences of such lands in good

Provided that in the case of any such boundary wall, hed fence which
erected with = consent or under the orders of the Chief Executive Otticer orwhich wes a 4
existence at the commencement of this Act, the Board compensation
damage caused by the removal thereof, tall seen ao

(3) The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or

occupier of any such land to cut or trim any hedge on the land in such manner and within
such time as may be specified in the notice. iat हु ५६


| 79

362. (1) Where, in the opinion of a Board, the felling of any tree of mature growth
ro"

in a private enclosure in the cantonment is necessary reason,
soniyy tk? in writing, require the owner, lessee or cousnlar a is tal 8 Goes
oy yeh time 8७ may be specified in the notice, to fell the tree

(2) A Board may—

cause to be lopped or trimmed
हि on ny any tree standing on land in the cantonment
(b) by public notice require all owners, lessees or occupiers of land in the

or by notice in writing require the owner, |
, lessee or occupier of.
jand, to lop or trim, in such manner as may be specified in the peice al = esd —

\ standing on such land or to remove any dead trees from such land.

263. Whoever, without the permission in writi i i,
Sr enn 6 लीक दजी ing of the Chief. Executive Officer, digs
up the — fine which lonment, which is not private property, shall be
punishable i i may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees, and, in the
4 case of 8 continuing offence, with an additional fine which may extend to five tamed
for every day after the first during which the offence continues.
264. (1) If, in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, the workii i
> ‘ing of a quarry in the
cantonment, of the removal of stone earth or other material from the soil in any place in the
is dangerous to persons residing in or frequenting the neighbourhood or such
2० oY भा शा or is likely to create, a nuisance, the Chief Executive Officer may,
by notice in writing, prohibit the owner, lessee or occupier of such quarry or place or the
person responsible for such working or removal, from continuing or permitting the working,
of such quarry or the moving of such material, or require him to take such steps in the matter
as he may direct for the purpose of preventing danger or abating the nuisance arising or
95 likelyto arise therefrom.

(2) If, in any case referred to in sub-section (1), the Chief Executive Officer is of
opinion that such 8 course is necessary in order to prevent imminent danger, he may, by
order in writing, require a proper hoarding or fence to be put up for the protection of
passers-by.

CHAPTER XI
MARKETS, SLAUGHTER-HOUSES, TRADES AND OccupaATIONS

265. (1) A Board may provide and maintain, on the land under its control public
markets and public slaughter-houses, to such number as it thinks fit, together with stalls,
shops, sheds, pens and other buildings or conveniences for the use of persons carry’ng of

डर vr business in or frequenting such markets or slaughter-houses, and may provide and
maintain in any such market buildings, places, machines, weights, scales and measures for
the weighment or measurement of goods sold therein.

(2) When such market or slaughter-house is situated beyond cantonment limits,
8०४९ pall have the same power forthe inspection and proper regulation ofthe same as if
५० itwere situated within those limits.

(3) The Board may at any time, by public notice, close any public market or public
slaughter-house or any part thereof.
in this authorise jishment of a public
(4) Nothing inthis section shall be deemed to authorise the estab sional
market or public slaughter-house within the limits of any area administered by any local
YS authority other than the Board, without the permission of such local authority or otherwise
than on such conditions as such local authority may approve.
i ‘ in writing of
266. (1) No person shall, without the general or special permission in wri 0
— Chief Executive Officer, sell or expose for sale any animal or article in any public

»

Felling,
lopping and
trimming.

Digging of

Improper use
of land.

Public markets
and slaughter-
houses.

Use of public


Power to trans-
fer by public
auction, etc.

H

HE

. है

(2) Any person contravening the — of this — “ any animal wm

posed for sale by such person, may be sum 7 oe scott अल bad

हंस ofthe Chief Executive Officer or any official author! byhna
behalf.

267. (1) The Board may transfer by public auction, poe हर Seeding,
years at a time, the right to occupy or use any stall, — reirsenidl '
market, or public slaughter-house or the right to expose g ; . .
the right to weigh or measure goods sold therein, or the right to $ lughter animal, an
public slaughter-house:

Provided that where the Board is of opinion that such —— of the Mere,
rights by public auction is not considered desirable or expedient, it may, with the Previn
sanction of the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command or in his absence &
Principal Director,—

(a) either levy such stallages, rents or fees as it thinks fit; or

(8) farm the stallages, rents and fees leviable under clause (a) for any perigg 5
not exceeding one year at a time:

Provided further that the enjoyment of any such aforesaid right by any person for any
length of time shall never be deemed to create or confer any tenancy right in such sali
shop, standing, shed, pen, public market or public slaughter-house,

(2) The Board may transfer by public auction or otherwise any immovable property 25

other than in a public market or a public slaughter house if such property is capable of being

Put to remunerative use for such period and on such terms and conditions as may be

approved by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command or in his absence, 0०
268. A copy of the table of stallages, rents and fees, if any, leviable in any public क्र

market or public slaughter-house, and of the bye-laws made under this Act for the Purpose

of regulating the use of such market or slaughter-house, printed in English language or in

such other language or languages as the Board may direct, shall be affixed in some

conspicuous place in the market or slaughter-house,

269. (1) No place in a cantonment other than a public market shall be used asa market, 30

hen Place in acantonment other than a public slaughter-house shall be used asa slaughter
० less such place has been licensed as a market or slaughter-house, asthe case may
be, by the Board:

a ed that nothing in this sub-section shall apply in the case of slaughte-howe
seer hed and maintained by the Central Government or the State Government ० x
may be.

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed—

ion of the District Magistrate may, ५९
by public or special notice, impose in this behalf; or

(6) to prevent the Chief Executive Officer, with the sanction of the Board, from
setting apart places for the slaughter of animals in accordance with religious custom.

(3)Whoever omits to comply with any condition imposed by the Chief Executive
Officer under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall be punishable with fine which may extend
1 five thousand rupees and, in the case of continuing offence, with an additional fits omen
continues’ 0 १1० thousand rupees for every day after the first during which the offence i
continued,


|

81

270. (1) A Board may charge such fees as it thinks fit to impose for the grant of a
licence to any person to open a private market or private slaughter-house in the cantonment,

and may grant such licence subject to such conditions, consistent with this Act and any
bye-laws made thereunder, as it thinks fit to impose.

5 (2) The Board may refuse to grant any such licence without giving reasons for such
refusal.

271. (1) Any person who keeps open for public use any market or slaughter-house in
respect of which a licence is required by or under this Act, without obtaining licence therefor,
or while the licence therefor is suspended, or after the same has been cancelled, shall be

}0 punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and, in the case ofa continuing

offence, with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day after
the first during which the offence is continued.

(2)When a licence to open a private market or private slaughter-house is granted or
refused or is suspended or cancelled, the Board shall cause a notice of the grant, refusal,
\§ suspension or cancellation to be pasted in English or such language or languages as it

thinks necessary in some conspicuous place by or near the entrance to the place to which
the notice relates.

272. Whoever, knowing that any market or slaughter-house has been opened to the

public without a licence having been obtained therefor when such licence is required by or
2 under this Act, or that the licence granted therefor is for the time being suspended or that it

has been cancelled, sells or exposes for sale any article in such market, or slaughters any

animals in such slaughter-house, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five

thousand rupees and, in the case of a continuing offence, with an additional fine which may

extend to five hundred rupees for every day after the first during which the offence is
aS continued.

273. (1) Where, in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, it is necessary on
sanitary grounds so to do, he may, by public notice, prohibit for such period not exceeding
one month, as may be specified in the notice, or for such further period not exceeding
one month, as he may specify by a like notice, the use of any private slaughter-house

40 specified in the notice, or the slaughter therein of any animal of any description so
specified.

(2) A copy of every notice issued under sub-section (1) shall be conspicuously
pasted in the slaughter-house to which it relates.

274. (1) Any official of a Board, authorised by order in writing in this behalf by the
35 Chief Executive Officer or the Health Officer, may, if he has reason to believe that any animal
has been, is being, or is about to be slaughtered in any place in contravention of the
provisions of this Chapter, enter into and inspect any such place at any time, whether by
day or by night.

(2) Every such order shall specify the place to be entered and the locality in which the

Uo same is situated and the period, which shall not exceed seven days for which the order is to
remain in force.

275. A Board may, by order, regulate all or any of the following matters, namely :—

(a) the days on, and the hours during, which any private market or private
Slaughter-house may be kept open for use;

us (2) the regulation of the design, ventilation and drainage of such market or
Slaughter-houses, and the material to be used in the construction thereof,

(c) the keeping of such markets and slaughter-houses and lands and buildings
4ppertaining thereto in a clean and sanitary condition, the removal of filth and refuse

So therefrom, and the supply therein of pure water and of a sufficient number of latrines
and urinals for the use of persons using or frequenting the same;

Conditions of
grant of
licence for
private market
or slaughter-

Penalty for
keeping market
or slaughter-
house open
without licence,
etc,

using
unlicensed
market or
slaughter-
house.

Prohibition
and restriction
of use of
slaughter-
house.

Power to
‘Inspect
slaughter-

houses.

Power to
regulate

activities.


$2

(d) the manner in which animals shall be stalled at a slaughter-house;

(e) the manner in which animals may be slaughtered;

(0 the disposal or destruction of animals offered for slaughter which 2०, from
disease or any other cause, unfit for human consumption;

(g) the destruction of carcasses which from discase or any other cause we 5
found after slaughter to be unfit for human consumption; and

(A) any other matter with respect to the regulation of such markets and slaughter,
houses.

Trades and occupations

i ide suitab ise by washermen of their
Provision of 276. (1) A Board may provide suitable places for the exercise by = lo
washing places. calling, and may require payment of such fees for the use thereof as it thinks fit.

(2) Where the Board has provided such places as aforesaid it may, by public notice,
prohibit the washing of clothes by washermen at any other place in the cantonment:

Provided that such probibition shall not be deemed to apply to the washing by a
washerman of his own clothes or of the clothes of any other person who is an occupier of s
the place at which they are washed.

(3) Whoever contravenes any prohibition contained in a notice issued under sub-
section (2) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.

—__ 277. (1) No person of any of the following classes, namely:—
carrying on of (a) butchers and vendors of poultry, game or fish; ao
comple: (5) persons keeping pigs for profit, and dealers in the flesh of pigs which have

been slaughtered within or without cantonment;
(42 persons keeping milch cattle or milch goats for profit;

(@) persons keeping for profit any animals other than pigs, milch cattle or milch
goats; ply

(€) dairymen, buttermen and makers and vendors of ghee;

@ makers of bread, biscuits or cake and vendors of bread, biscuits or cake made
within or without cantonment;

(8) vendors of fruits or vegetables;

(h) manufacturers of aerated or other le fi 0
eee Potable waters or of ice or ice-cream, and 3

@ vendors of spirituous liquor;

( vendors of water to be used for drinking purposes;

() washermen;

(m) dealers in hay, Straw, wood, charcoal or other inflammable material;

iis” “00 in fre-works, kerosene cil, petroleum or any other inflammable ०1०८ Yo
spirit

(0) tanners and dyers;

(p) persons carrying on any trade or Occupation from which offensive or
unwholesome smells arise;


83

(4) vendors of wheat, rice and other grain or of flour;
(r) makers and vendors of sugar or sweetmeats;

(s) barbers and keepers of shaving saloons;

() any other person carrying on such other trade,

5 the Central Government may,
behalf,

‘ calling or occupation as
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this

shall carry on his trade, calling Or occupation in any part of a cantonment unless he has
applied for and obtained a licence in this behalf from the Board,

(2) A licence granted under sub-section (1) shall be valid until the end of the year in

\o which it is issued and the grant of such licence shall not be withheld by the Board unless it

has reason to believe that the business which it is intended to establish or maintain would

be offensive or dangerous to the public or that the Premises in which the business is
intended to be established or maintained are unfit or unsuitable for the Purpose.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section M—

iS (a) no person who was, at the commencement of this Act, carrying on his trade,
calling or occupation in any part of a cantonment shall be bound to apply for a licence
for carrying on such trade or occupation in that Part until he has received from the
Board not less than three month’s notice in writing of his obligation to do so, and if

the Board refuses to grant him a licence, it shall Pay compensation for any loss
2o incurred by reason of such refusal;

(5) no person shall be required to take out a licence for the sale or storage
of petroleum or for the sale or possession for sale of poisons or white arsenic in
any case in which he is required to take out a licence for such sale, storage, or

30 of 1934. possession for sale by or under the Petroleum Act, 1934 , or the Poisons Act,
12 of 1919. 48 1919.

(4) The Board may charge for the grant of licences, under this section such reasonable
fees, as it may fix keeping in view the fees levied in this regard in a municipality in the State
wherein such cantonment is situated.

278, Ifthe Chief Executive Officer is of opinion that any eating house, lodging house, Power to stop
3% hotel, boarding house, tea shop, coffee house, café, restaurant, refreshment room or other use of
place where public is admitted for repose or for consumption of any food or drink or where हिल weed
food is sold or prepared for sale or any theatre, cinema hall, circus, dancing hall or similar tion of
other place of public resort, recreation or amusement is kept open without a license or licences.
otherwise than in conformity with the terms of a license granted in respect thereof, he may
35° stop the use of any such premises for any such purpose for a specified period by such
means as he may consider necessary.

279. A licence granted to any person under section 277 shall specify the part of the ०0८५ म जो
cantonment in which the licensee may carry on his trade, calling or occupation, and may = Yh at
Tegulate the hours and manner of transport within the cantonment of any specified articles jicences

Yo intended for human consumption, and may contain any other conditions which the Board
thinks fit to impose in accordance with bye-laws made under this Act.

General provisions

280. If the Board is satisfied that any place used under a licence granted under this mie to vary
us is anuisance or is likely to be dangerous to life, health or property, the vey vom
by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or occupier thereof to discontinue the use ०|
Place or to effect such alternations, additions, or improvements as will, in the opinion
ofthe Board, render it no longer a nuisance or dangerous.


Carrying on
trade, etc,
without licence
or in contra-
vention of
section 280

Feeding animals

‘on ditt, etc

Powers of entry
and seizure.

84

. Whoever carries any trade, calling or occupation for which a licence is require
wiomdinbiog a licence pd or while the licence therefor is suspended or after
same has been cancelled, and whoever, after receiving a notice under section 280, Uses op
allows to be used any building or place in contravention thereof, shall be punishable With
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and, in the case of a continuing offence, With ६
an additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day after the firg,
during which the offence is continued.

282. Whoever feeds or allows to be fed on filthy or deleterious substances any
animal, which is kept for the purpose of supplying milk to, or which is intended to be useq
as food for, the inhabitants of a cantonment or allows it to graze in any place in which le
grazing has, for sanitary reasons, been prohibited by public notice by the Board shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.

Entry, inspection and seizure

283. (1) The President or the Vice-President, the Chief Executive Officer, the Health
Officer, the Assistant Health Officer, or any other official of a Board authorised by it in | s
writing in this behalf— .

(a) may at any time enter into any market, building, shop, stall or other place in
the cantonment for the purpose of inspecting, and may inspect, any animal, article or
thing intended for human food or drink or for medicine, whether exposed or hawked
about for sale or deposited in or brought to any place for the purpose of sale, or of 26
Preparation for sale, or any utensil or vessel for preparing, manufacturing or containing
any such article, or thing, and may enter into and inspect any place used as a slaughter-
house and may examine any animal or article therein;

(b) may seize any such animal, article or thing which appears to him to be
diseased, or unwholesome or unfit for human food or drink or medicine, as the case 25~
may be, or to be adulterated or to be not what it is represented to be, or any such
utensil or vessel which is of such a kind or in such a state as to render any article
prepared, manufactured or contained therein unwholesome or unfit for human food,
drink or medicine, as the case may be.

(2) Any article seized under sub-section (1) which is of a perishable nature may, 36
under the orders of the Health Officer or the Assistant Health Officer, forthwith be destroyed
if, in his opinion, it is diseased, unwholesome or unfit for human food, drink or medicine, as
the case may be.

(3) Every animal, article, utensil, vessel or other thing seized under sub-section )
shall, if it is not destroyed under sub-section (2), be taken before a Magistrate who shall 35
give orders as to its disposal.

(4) The owner or person in possession, at the time of seizure under sub-section (1),
of any animal or carcass which is diseased or of any article or thing which is unwho! A
or unfit for human food, drink or medicine, as the case may be, or is adulterated or meso
what it is represented to be, or of any utensil or vessel which is of such kind or in such state ५७
as is described in clause (6) of sub-section (1), shall be punishable with fine which
extend to five thousand rupees, and the animal, article, utensil, vessel or other thing वह,
liable to be forfeited to the Board or to be destroyed or to be so disposed of as to .
being exposed for sale or. used for the preparation of food, drink or medicine, tae
may be. use
Explanation I—If any such article, having been exposed or stored in, or ७ ‘
any place mentioned in sub-section (/) for sale as ghee, contains any Piha diss
exclusively derived from milk, it shall be deemed, for the purposes of this section, to been
article which is not what itis represented to be.
Explanation II,—Meat subjected to the process of blowing shall be deemed to be 5%
unfit for human food. ०

|


85

Rxplanation ॥1.--116 article of food or drink shall not be deemed to be other than
कामकाज tu 80 merely 00100001 Of te See Ges tens bea hoon 24/०010 OSS?

pubstance not injurious to health:
provided that —
a) such substance has been added to the article because the same is required
s for the preparation or production thereof as an article of commerce in a state fit for
carriage or consumption and not fraudulently to increase the bulk, weight or measure
of the food or drink or conceal the inferior quality thereof; or

(>) in the process of production, preparation or conveyance of such article of
food or drink, the extraneous substance has unavoidably become intermixed therewith;

or

le

(6) the owner or person in possession of the article has given sufficient notice
by means ofa label distinctly and legibly written or printed thereon or therewith, or by
other means of a public description, that such substance has been added; or

iv (d) such owner or person has purchased the article with a written warranty that
it was of a certain nature, substance and quality and had no reason to believe that it
was not of such nature, substance and quality, and has exposed it or hawked it about
or brought it for sale in the same state and by the same description as that in and by
which he purchased it.

20 Import of cattle and flesh

284, (1) No person shall, without the permission in writing of the Chief Executive
Officer, bring into a cantonment any animal intended for human consumption, or the flesh of
any animal slaughtered outside the cantonment otherwise than in a slaughter-house
maintained by the Central Government or the State Government or the Board:

25 Provided that the Chief Executive Officer shall not grant such permission unless he
has considered the recommendation of the Health Officer made in this behalf.

(2) Any animal or flesh brought into a cantonment in contravention of sub-section
(1) may be seized by the Chief Executive Officer or by any official of the Board and sold or
otherwise disposed of as the President of the Board may direct, and, if it is sold, the sale-

3b proceeds may be credited to the cantonment fund.

(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable with
fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees.

(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to cured or preserved meat or

to animals driven or meat carried through a cantonment for consumption outside thereof,

36 or to meat brought into a cantonment by any person for his immediate domestic
consumption:

_ Provided that the Board may, by public notice, direct that the provisions of this
- Section shall apply to cured or preserved meat of any specified description or brought from
any specified place.

५० CHAPTER XII
Spirrruous Liquors AND INTOXICATING 00005

285. If within a cantonment, or within such limits adjoining a cantonment as the

subject may, by notification in the Official Gazette, define, any person not
US law, to Amy, Navy or Air Force law, or any person subject to Army, Navy or Air Force
pees than as a military officer or a soldier knowingly barters, sells or supplies, or
Gurtarnn नली, sell or supply, any spirituous liquor or intoxicating drug to or for
‘any soldier or soldier's wife or minor child without the written permission of the
Commanding the station, or of some person authorised by the Officer Commanding

Import of cattle


N

86

be punishable with fine which ma:
the station, 10 grant such permission, he shall be 90 pp कक Y ex; m
five thousand rupees, 01 with imprisonment for a term ड़ Months .
with both,

Unauthorised 286. If within a cantonment, or within any limits defined under section 285.

| ion of
alia = (a) any person subject to, Army, Navy or Air Force law, otherwise than ९५

i military officer or a soldier; or
(b) the wife or servant of any such person or of a soldier,

has in his or her ssion, except on behalf of the Central Government of foy the
Private use of a स्तन officer, more than one quart of any spirituous liquor, Other
than fermented malt-liquor, without the written permission of the Officer Commanding m
the station or of some person authorised by the Officer Commanding the Station, 1,
Srant such permission, he or she shall be punishable, in the case of a fi 4
with fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees, and, in the cage of
@ subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three Months,
or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees. Ig

saree ot: 287. (1) Any police officer or excise officer may, without an order from a Judiciay
penons and Magistrate, and without a warrant, arrest any person whom he finds committing an offence
# 77: diac Section 285 or section 286, and may seize and detain any spirituous liquor o intoxicating
things for drug in respect of which such an offence has been committed and any vessels or coverings

arc in which the liquor or drug is contained, २०
‘against two हि
last foregoing (2) Where a person accused of an offence under section 285 has been Previously

Sections. convicted of an offence under that section, an officer in charge of a police station may, with
the written permission of a Judicial Magistrate seize and detain any spirituous liquor or
intoxicating drug within the cantonment or within any limits defined under that section
which, at the time of the alleged, commission of the subsequent offence, belonged to, or a5
was in the possession of, such person.

(3) The court convicting a person of an offence under section 285 or section 286 may
order the confiscation of the whole or any part of anything seized under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2).

(6 Subject to the provisions of Chapter XXXIV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 36
1973, anything, seized under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) and not confiscated under oti,
Sub-section (3) shall be restored to the person from whom it was taken.

Saving of 288. The foregoing provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the sale or supply of
saber a auchoris in 4001 faith fr medicinal purposes by a medical practitioner, chemist or drogyst
pose ‘uthorisd in this behalfby a general or special order ofthe Officer Commanding the stare 3s

re CHAPTER XIII
‘
PUBLIC SAFETY AND SUPPRESSION OF NUISANC:
General Nuisances
Penalty for 289. (1) Whoever -
causing
nuisances, (a) in any street or otner public Place within a cantonment - Yo

(9 is drunk and disorderly or drunk and incapable of taking care of himself:
or

(ii) uses any threatening, abusive or insulting words, or behaves in a
threatening or insulting manner with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, or
whereby a breach of the:peace is likely to be occasioned; or 4s

(iii) eases himself, or willfully or indecently exposes his person; or


|

87

(iv) loiters, or begs importunately, for alms; or
(v) exposes or exhibits, with the object of exciting charity, any deformity
of disease or any offensive sore or wound; or
(vi) carries meat exposed to public view; or
5 (vii) is found gaming, or

(viii) pickets animals, or collects vehicles; or
(ix) being engaged in the removal

or rubbish, willfully or negligently permi

neglects to sweep away or otherwi

\o which may spill or fall in such

of night-soil or other offensive matter
its any portion thereof to Spill or fall, or

ise effectually to remove any portion thereof
street or place; or

(x) without proper authority affixes
wall, fence, tree or other thing, any bill

(xi) ‘without Proper authority defaces or writes upon or otherwise marks
any building, monument, post, wall, fence, tree or other thing; or
Iv (xii) without proper authority removes, destroys, defaces or otherwise
obliterates any notice or other document put up of exhibited under this Act: or
(xiii) without proper authority displaces, damages, or makes any alteration
in, or otherwise interferes with, the pavement, gutter, storm water- drain, flags or
other materials of any such street,

upon any building, monument, post,
+ Notice or other document; or

or any lamp, bracket, direction-post, hydrant
go or water-pipe maintained by the Board in any such street or public place, or
extinguishes a public light; or
(xiv) carries any corpse not decently covered or without taking due
Precautions to prevent risk of infection or injury to the public health or annoyance
to passers-by or to persons dwelling in the neighbourhood; or
aT

(xv) carries night-soil or other offensive matter or rubbish at any hour
prohibited by the Chief Executive Officer by public notice, or in any pattern of
vehicle or receptacle which has not been approved for the pi

urpose by the Chief
Executive Officer, or fails to close such vehicle or receptacle when in use; or

(2) carries night-soil or other offensive matter or rubbish along any route in

30 contravention of any prohibition made in this behalf by the Chief Executive Officer by
public notice; or

(c) deposits, or causes or permits to be deposited, earth or materials of any

description, or any offensive matter or rubbish, in any place not intended for the

purpose in any street or other public place or waste or unoccupied land under the
३६ management of the Board; or

(d) having charge of a corpse fails to bury, burn or otherwise lawfully dispose
of the same within twenty-four hours after death; or
(e) makes any grave or buries or burns any corpse in any place not set apart for
such purpose; or
i i lace as a
0 keeps or uses, or knowingly Permits to be kept or used, any p
न dine gaming house, or assists in conducting the business of any common gaming
house; or

i i hibited by the Chief

(g) at time or place at which the same has been pro!
Exeeatve Officer by public or special notice, beats a dram or tomtom, or blows a bor
५६ r trumpet, or beats any utensil, or sounds any brass or other instrument, or plays any
music; or


(h) disturbs the public peace or order by singing, screaming OF shouting ५१३,
using megaphone or loud-speaker; or

(i) lets loose any animal so as to cause, or negligently allows any anima) न
cause, injury, danger, alarm or annoyance to any person; or

which an ani
being the occupier of any building, or land in or upon imal

ae within three hours of the death of the animal, or, if the death occurs ay tgs
within three hours after sunrise, either —

(i) to report the occurrence to the Chief Executive Officer OF to an officer
if any, appointed by him in this behalf with a view to securing the removal oa
disposal of the carcass by the public conservancy establishment; or

(ii) to remove and dispose of the carcass in accordance with any genera
directions given by the Board by public notice or any special direction given by
the Chief Executive Officer on receipt of such report as aforesaid; or
() save with the written permission of the Chief Executive Officer and in such

manner as he may authorise, stores or uses night-soil, manure, rubbish or any other

substance emitting an offensive smell; or

() uses or permits to be used as a latrine any place not intended for the purpose;
or

(m) uses or permits to be used without previous permission of the Chief Executive

Officer any premises for any trade involving offensive smell or smoke;
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees,

(2) Whoever does not take reasonable means to prevent any child under the age of
twelve years being in his charge from easing himself in any street or other public place
within the cantonment shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred fifty
Tupees.

(3) The owner or keeper of any animal found picketed or staying without a keeper in
& street or other public place in a cantonment shall be punishable with fine which may extent
to one thousand rupees.

(4) Any animal found picketed or straying as aforesaid be removed
or employee of the Board to a pound. om 2७७७७

(5) Whoever in a cantonment manufactures, supplies, carries or uses for packaging or
any other purposes material of non-biodegradable nature including polythene bags shall be

unished with fine which may extend to five thousand impri: whi
किक लि हज Tpees or imprisonment which may

Dogs
290. (1) A Board make registration
imo bye-laws to provide for the registration of all dogs kept
(2) Such bye-laws shall —

(०) require the ‘
kept inthe cantonmene atm BY any officer authorised inthis behalf ofall dogs

sr hat at ty dog which has not been registered or which is ७०९ Wearing

$

fo

1

2e

4s

30

35

sien .oken shal, if found in any public place, be detained ata place set apart for ant us

Purpose; and


89

(60 fix the fee which shall be charged for such
such dog shall be liable to be destroyed or others Speech a fire tiny
and the fee in respect thereof is paid withi isposed it is claimed

tnatters as the Board thinks fit n one week, and may provide for such other
(3) The Chief Executive Officer may -

(a) cause to be destroyed, or to be co)
any dog or other animal which is, o is pec such period as he may direct,

rabies, or which has been bitten by any dog or othe हल: 1 10 0० Suftering from
be suffering from rabies; by any dog o animal suffering or suspected to

0 (8) by public notice direct

the houses of their owners, if any, may be destro and
ww ed, and cause them to be destroyed

(4) No damages shall be payable i ‘
6 कमी disposed of under tha reais TesPect of any dog or other animal destroyed or

(5) Whoever, being the owner or person in charge of any dog, neglects to restrain i
that it shall not be at large in any street without being muzzled and without bei domed ty
achain lead in any case in which - 7 _

20 (a) he knows that the dog is likely to annoy or intimidate any person; or

(0) the Board has, by public notice during the prevalence of
that dogs shall not be at large without muzzles and chain leads ७७७७४

shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
(6) Whoever in a cantonment—

45 (०) allows any ferocious dog which belongs to him or is in his charge to be at
large without being muzzled; or

(6) sets on or urges any dog or other animal to attack, worry or intimidate any
person, or

(c) knowing or having reason to believe that any dog or animal belonging to
30 him or in his charge has been bitten by an animal suffering or reasonably suspected
to be suffering from rabies, neglects to give immediate information of the fact to the

Chief Executive Officer or gives information which is false,

shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.
Traffic

35 291. Whoever in driving, leading or propelling a vehicle along a street fails, except in
& ९७७९ of actual necessity,—

(a) to keep to the left when passing a vehicle coming from the opposite direction;
or

Yo (6) to keep to the right when passing 8 vehicle going in the same direction as

shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
Prevention of fire, etc.
lic such
292. (1) The Chief Executive Officer may, by public notice, direct that within
us limits ints (या तय be specified in the notice, the roofs and external walls of

huts or other buildings shall not, without the permission in writing of the Chief Executive
Officer be made or renewed of grass, mats, leaves or other inflammable materials, and may,

‘Traffic Rule of
the road.

Use of inflam-
for building


Stacking or
collecting

Care of naked
lights.

Regulation of
graphic and
dramatic

Discharging
arms, etc.

90

by notice in writing, require any person who has disobeyed any such direction te
to remove or alter the roofs or walls so made or renewed. On

(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the
building in the cantonment which has an external roof or wall made of any such fay
aforesaid to remove such roof or wall within such time as may be Specified in the tote
notwithstanding that a public notice under sub-section (/) has not been issueq OF that « 9
roof or wall was made with the consent of the Chief Executive Officer or before the ina’
of

such public notice:

Provided that in the case of any such roof or wall in existence before the issue of,

a public notice or made with the consent of the Chief Executive Officer, it shall Nich
compensation, not exceeding the original cost of constructing the roof or wall, for ७
damage caused by the removal. =

293, A Board may, by a public notice, prohibit in any case where such Prohibition
appears to it to be necessary for the prevention of danger to life or property, the Stacking oy
Collecting of wood, dry grass, straw or other inflammable materials, or the placing Of mats oy ip
thatched huts or the lighting of fires in any place in the cantonment, or within any limity
therein, which may be specified in the notice:

Provided that Chief Executive Officer may, in case of imminent danger to public life or
Property, enforce such prohibition in consultation with the President or the Vice-President
in the absence of the President. eo

294. No person shall set a naked light on or near any building in any street or other
Public place in a cantonment in such manner as to cause danger of fire:

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of
lights for purpose of illumination on the occasion of a festival or public or private
entertainment.

295. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law relating to sanctioning
of cinematograph films for exhibition, no exhibition of pictures or other optical effects by
means of a cinematograph or other like apparatus for the purpose of which inflammable films
are used, and no public dramatic performance, pantomime, circus, carnival, exhibition, dance
or other similar show for public recreation or amusement, shall be given in any cantonment 30
elsewhere than in premises for which a licence has been granted by the Chief Executive
Officer under this section.

(2) If the owner of a cinematograph or other apparatus uses the apparatus or allows
it to be used, or if any person takes any part in any public dramatic performance, pantomime,
circus, carnival, exhibition, dance or other similar show for public recreation or amusement, 35°
in contravention of the provisions of this section, or if the occupier of any premises
allows them to be used in contravention of the provisions of this section or of any
condition of any licence granted under this section, he shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees, and, in the case of. continuing offence, with an
additional fine which may extend to two thousand rupees for each day after the first 46
during which the offence continues.

(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the giving of any exhibition or
any dramatic performance, pantomime, circus, carnival, exhibition, dance or other similar
show for public recreation or amusement, in any theatre or institute which is the property of
Government where the exhibition, performance, pantomime, circus, carnival, exhibition, dance 4S”
or other similar show for public recreation or amusement, is held with the permission and
under the control of the military authorities.

296. Whoever in a cantonment discharges any fire-arm or lets off fire-works or fire-
balloons, or detonates or engages in any game or carries on works such as quarries, क्र
blasts, timber cutting or building operation in such manner as to cause or to be likelyto $0

Sig

as


| 91

ing by or dwellin, ing i i
er to persons passing Ng OF working in the neighbourhood or ri
rats property shall be liable to fine which may extend to two thousand five [कर
शीएं४0

97, Where in a cantonment any building, or wall, or anythin; affixed ther पु
न 2 reservoir, pool, depression, oF excavation, or any bank oo in कं जा कप अल,
|| 5 Me Chief Executive Officer, in a ruinous state or for want of sufficient repairs, protection or beers he eee
ता 8 nuisance or dangerous to persons Passing by or dwelling or working in the =
er gnbourhood, the Chief Executive Officer, by notice in writing may, require the owner, or
part-owner or person claiming to be the owner #

OF part-owner thereof, or, failing any of them,
" 4 occupiet, thereof, to remove the same or may require him to repair, or to Protect or to

Jose, the same in such manner as he thinks necessary; and, if the d is, i
opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, i sick dupes

imminent, he shall forthwith
arm 0 इस्लर जि आता take such steps as he

298. The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or Enclosure of
|. part-owner, or person claiming to be the owner or part-owner, of any building or land in wasteland
the cantonment, or the lessee or the person claiming to be the lessee of any such land, sed for
which, by reason of disuse or disputed ownership or othe i

॥ cause, has remained : pana
unoccupied and has become the resort of idle and disorderly persons or of persons who purposes

have no ostensible means of subsistence or cannot give a satisfactory account of

2० themselves, or is used for gaming or immoral Purposes, or otherwise occasions or is
likely to occasion a nuisance, to secure and enclose the same within such time as may be
specified in the notice.

CHAPTER XIV
REMOVAL AND EXCLUSION FROM CANTONMENT AND SUPPRESSION OF SEXUAL IMMORALITY

क्र 299, The Officer Commanding the Station or the Board May, on receiving information power to
that any building in the cantonment is used as a brothel or for Purposes of prostitution, by remove
order in writing setting forth the substance of information received, summon the owner, Brothels and
lessee, tenant or occupier of the building to appear before him or the Board as the case may stitutes.
be either in person or by an authorised agent, and, if the Officer Commanding the Station or

30 the Board, is then satisfied as to the truth of the information, may, by order in writing, direct
the owner, lessee, tenant or occupier, as the case may be, to discontinue such use of the
building within such period as may be specified in the order.

300. (1) Whoever in a cantonment loiters for the purpose of prostitution or importunes Penalty for
any person to the commission of sexual immorality, shall be punishable with imprisonment
35 which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees

and in case of subsequent offence shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend be
to one year.

(2) No prosecution for an offence under this section shall be instituted except on

the complaint of the person importuned, or of a military officer in whose presence the

Uo offence was committed, or of a member of the Military, Naval or Air Force Police, being
employed in the cantonment and authorised in this behalf by the Officer Commanding

the Station, in whose presence the offence was committed, or of a Police Officer not
below the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector, who is deployed in the cantonment and

authorised in this behalf by the Officer Commanding the Station with the concurrence
US- of District Magistrate.

301. If the Officer Commanding the Station or the Board is, after such inquiry ashe or Removal of
it thinks necessary, satisfied that any person residing in or frequenting the cantonment is a Persons from
prostitute or has been convicted of an offence, under section 300, or of the abetment of such “amen.
an offence he or, as the case may be, the Board may cause to be served on such person an

50 order in writing requiring such person to remove from the cantonment within such time as
may be specified in the order, and prohibiting such person from re-entering it without the
permission in writing of the Officer Commanding the Station or the Board.


Removal and
exclusion from,
eantonment of
disorderly
persons

Removal and
exclusion
from
cantonment
of seditious
Persons.

92

Class, having jurisdiction ing Aone
303, (/) A Judicial Magistrate of the First ; —
on receiving information that any person residing in or frequenting the cantonmens ॥॒

led more than once of
is a disorderly person who has been convict gam
who Pc i frequents, a common gaming house, a disorderly drinking thy 8
disorderly house of any other description; or ५
thin the Cantonment of
(6) has been convicted more than once either wi ' thee, न
of an offence punishable under chapter XVII of the Indian Penal Code; of वि
Code of Criminal py
(c) has been ordered under chapter VIII of the edn
1973, either within the cantonment or elsewhere to execute a bond for bis goog .
! lo
ved, and may issue a
may record in writing the substance of the information rece! Summon न
such person the can appear and show cause why he should not be requieg
remove from the cantonment and be prohibited from re-entering it.
(2) Every summons issued under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by ॥ Copy of
cin rhea gi td the copy shall be served along withthe summons on theo, Ip
against whom the summon is issued.

35
a rename order shall be made unde this section again Person unless
ck drs ent ignored be pensar 7700 0०७॥०
to make the order and 0: cause why the order should not be made.
of the Dent ade under sub-section (1) shall be sent to Ss
reyes cytherea मी
(3) at tenn’ making of any order unde sub-section), the Officer ling the

a esd that at every such inquiry the person against whom the
‘nae sal be given an opportunity of being headin his ns, . ee


yy ,

ru

30

५०

us

Central Government may, at any time aft
(0110० After the receipt of the copy of an order
ypdet sub-section (3) vt ॥ report has been called for under sub-section (4) on
sent of that report, if it 18 OF OpInton that the order shall be varied or rescinded, make such
ne thereon as it thinks ft, हु

by
may, at any time after the expiry of one month fro thereo!
ree OMT Commanding-in-Chief, the Command for the oie nhs कह नाल

1063018810॥ of the same and, on
lication being made, the said Officer May, after maki ;
~ भा either reject the application ० rescind the — —
304, Whoever -
(a) fails to comply with an order issued under this C
hapter within the period
specified therein or whilst an order prohibiting hitf! from re-entering a Perla
without permission is in force, re-enters the can

ave tonment without such permission; or
(0) kno’ any person has, under this Chapter been femove
from the cantonment and has not obtained the requisite tk amr it,
harbours or conceals such person in the cantonment,

be punishable with fine which may extend to fi thousand rupees
soning ofteace with an additional fine which >>" ir oe

comin at theft बजा which he has persed tat ener pe fo
CHAPTERXV
PoweRS, PROCEDURES; PENALTIES AND APPEALS
Entry and inspection

305. It shall be lawful for the President or the Vice-President of a Board, or the Chief
Executive Officer, or the Health Officer or any person specially authorised by the Chief
Executive Officer, or the Health Officer or for any other person authorised by general or
special order of a Board in this behalf, to enter into or upon any building or land with or
without assistants or workmen in order to make any inquiry, inspection, measurement,
valuation or survey, Or to execute any work, which is authorised by or under this Act or
which it is necessary to make or execute for any of the purposes or in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act or of any rule, bye-law or order made thereunder:

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to confer upon any person any
power such as is referred to in section 274 or section 283 or to authorise the conferment upon
any person of any such power.

306. A Board may by special order authorise or order any member to inspect any work or
institution constructed or maintained, in whole or part at the expense of the Board, and any
register, book accounts or other documents belonging to, or in the possession of, the Board.

307. (1) ABoard or the Chief Executive Officer may, by general or special order, authorise
any person—

(a) to inspect any drain, privy, latrine, urinal, cesspool, pipe, sewer or channel in or
on any building or land in the cantonment, and, in his discretion, to cause, the ground to
be opened for the purpose of preventing or removing any nuisance arising from the
drain, privy, latrine, urinal, cesspool, pipe, sewer or channel, as the case may be;

(b) to examine works under construction in the cantonment, to take levels or to
Temove, test, examine, replace or read any meter.

(2) If, on such inspection, the opening of the ground is found to be necessary for the
prevention or removal of a nuisance, the expenses thereby incurred shall be paid by the
owner or occupier of the land or building, but if it is found that no nuisance exists or but for
such opening would have arisen, the ground or portion of any building, drain or other work

Power of
inspection by
Member of a
Board.

Power of


pened, injured of Femoved for the purpose of Such inspection shall be filleg in,
enn sa as the case may be by the Board or the Chief Executive Officer, १७७
Power to enter hore Sh Oe ocnomen a, with or Without ७
land, adjoining workmen, enter on any land within fifty yards of ‘any work or (74० gg ५
land where the purpose of depositing thereon Any Soil, gravel, stone of other Materials, op of thay कि
prt ACCESS Lo such Work, or for any other Purpose connected with the Carrying on Of the
2) The Chief Executive Officer shall, before entering on any land Under
(1), give the ier, or, if there is no Pecupier, the owner not legs than three day ig Has
Notice in writing of his intention make such entry, and shall state the bee
Shall, if so Fequired by the Occupier or owner, fence Off $0 much of the land ag te
Fequired for such Purpose, h
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall, in exercising any power conferred by this
do as little 0; as may be, compensation ag et 06806608 “०५
oa ran 008 yh 2०000 8.५ ;
Breaking into 309. It shall be lawful for any person, authorised by or under this Act 10 make
Premises, entry into any Place, to open OF cause to be opened ANY door, gate or other barrier "4
(@) ifhe Considers the Opening thereof necessary for the Purpose Of such ety,
and
(6) if the Owner or Occupier is absent, or being present Tefuses to PEN such
door, gate o barrier, 2%»
Entry to be 310. Save ag Otherwise °xpressly provided in this Act, no entry authoriseq bY OF under
छोर inthe day neat al mde pees ee unrise and sunset.
Owner's con 311. Save 8S otherwise expressly Provided in this Act, no building or Shall be
Sent ordinarily entered wi Consent of the Sccupier, or if there is Occupier of the Owner thereof
10 be obtained (00० such entry shall be ut giving the said to make sate 88 the casey २५
Not less than four hours, Notice of the intention to Make such entry;
Provided Such notice shall be Necessary if the Place to be inspected jg a
TY OF wor or Premises or Place used fo carrying trade, Calling of
Ccupation SPecified in Section 277 of 4 stable for h 'S OF 8 shed fo, Cattle or a
Privy or uri OF a Work construction, Or for the pf any 36
animal intendeq for human food is sla ightered in that place पा Contravention Of this A or
any bye-law made thereunder.
Regard to be 312. When any place used as a human Welling is entered under this Act, due Tegard
had to focal shall be Paid to the social and religious ८; id usages of the Occupants of the Place
and religious -entered, tt in the 1 occupancy of 3 female shall be Catered or broken s
Sect. pen until she has been j 18 at liberty to wit and every Teasonable
ity has been afforded to her ing,
Penalty for 313, Whoever Obstructs or Molests any person acting on behalf of, the Board, who is
obstruction, Nota public Servant Within the Meaning Of section 21 of the Indian P © OF any person Sof
with whom the Board has lawfully Contracted, in the ©xecution of his duty or Of anything Yo
which he is em, OF required to do by virtue or in Consequence Of any of the Provisi
Of this Act or any rule, bye-law or Order made thereunder, or in fulfilment of his Contract, as
se ease may be, shal be punishes we ich my enn oe none a
Powers. and duties of police Officers
Arrest 314, Any member of the Police force employed ina can
without arrest any Perso; itting in his yj
warrant. i


| "

५ ble ground for douby
jess there is reasonable gr ‘ loubting the accuracy of
‘ven, the burden of proof of which shall lic on the cicinestioneds i a
shall be detained after his name and address have been piece a °

(0) no person shall be so arrested for an offence under section 300 except

ule IV, no person shall be so arrested who consents to give his name and address,

दर (7 at the request of the person import
os to 0 किए 0७ wan 0, ee ७0९१, or 018 military officer in whose

(ii) by or at the request of a member of th i

; i h e Mil i

Police, who is employed in the cantonment and snthatond in Gis sett bythe
Officer Commanding the Station, and in whose presence the pret 2

» committed or by or at the request of any police officer not below the rink of

assistant sub-inspector who is deployed i rank 0
this behalf by the Officer Comman chown camtonment and authorised in

315. It shall be the duty of all police officers to give immediate informati
‘sha 4 formation to the Board
y ofthe commission of, or attempt to commit any offence against the provisions of this Act or

rule or bye-law made thereunder, and to assist all loyees
pen exercise of their lawful authority. थे eae

Notices

316. Where any notice, order or requisition made under this Act
3 r or any other rule or
: wee ane लक prow to be ra for the doing of which no time is fixed
inthi 4 1000९, order or requisiti i
Noro Sf equisition shall specify a reasonable
317. (7) Every notice, order or requisition issued by a Board under thi:
or bye-law made thereunder shall be signed— —

क्र (a) either by the President of the Board or by the Chief Executive Officer; or

weal by the members of any committee especially authorised by the Board in this

(2) Whenever under this Act or any rule or bye-law made thereunder the doing of, or

the omission to do, any thing or the validity of anything depends upon the approval, sanction,

3 consent, concurrence, declaration, opinion or satisfaction of the Board, a written document

signed by any officer or member specified in sub-section (/) purporting to convey or set-

forth such approval, sanction, consent, concurrence, declaration, opinion or satisfaction
shall be sufficient evidence thereof.

(3) Every license, written permission, notice, bill summons or other document which is

Lf required by this Act or any rule or bye-law made thereunder to bear the signature of the

President, Vice President or the Chief Executive Officer, or of any such member of any

committee as has been specially authorised by the Board in this behalf shall be deemed to be

properly signed if it bears facsimile of the signature of any such officer or member, as the case
may be, stamped thereon.

५० 318. (1) Every notice, order or requisition issued under this Act or any rule or bye-law
made thereunder shall, save as otherwise expressely provided, be served or presented—

(a) by giving or tendering the notice, order or requisition, or sending it by post,
to the person for whom it is intended; or
(b) if such person cannot be found, by affixing the notice order or requisition on
us some conspicuous part of his last known place of abode or business if within the

cantonment, or by giving or tendering the notice, order or requisition to some adult
member or servant or his family, or by causing it to be affixed on some conspicuous
part of the buildings or land, if any, to which it relates.

Duties of
Police Officers.

Notices to fix
reasonable time.

Authentication
and validity of
notices issued

by Board.

Service of
notice, etc.


Method of
giving notice.

Powers of
Board in case
of non-

compliance

Occupier not to
obstruct owner
when
complying with
notice.

Lisbilty of
occupier to
pay in default
of owner.

|
96

is required or permitted to
(2) When any such notice, order or requisition =
upon an owner, lessee or occupier of any building or Jand, it shall not be necessary tnt
the owner, lessee or occupier therein, and the service thereof shall, save as otherwise
provided, be effected either— Pres, 0७,
(a) by giving or tendering the notice, order or requisition, or sending jt
to the owner, lessee or occupier, or, if there are more owners, lessees, or occupie Po 4
‘one to any one of them; or

(b) ifno such owner, lessee or occupier can be found, by giving Or tendering
notice, order or requisition to the authorised agent if any of any such owner, बह
occupier, or to an adult member or servant of the family of any such owner, lees
occupier, or by causing it to be affixed on some conspicuous part of the building lo
land to which it relates. कं

(3) When the person on whom a notice, order or requisition is to be served i$ amino

service upon his guardian or upon an adult member or servant of his family shall be deemeg
to be service upon the minor. Ip

319. Every notice which, by or under this Act, is to be given or served as 8 public
notice or as a notice which is not required to be given to any individual therein specifieg
shall, save as otherwise expressly provided, be deemed to have been sufficiently given o,
served if a copy thereof is affixed in such conspicuous part of the office of the Board or jn
such other public place during such period, or is published in such local news paper or in 2७
such other manner, as the Board may direct.

320. In the event of non-compliance with the terms of any notice, order or requisition
issued to any person under this Act or any rule or bye-law made thereunder, requiring such
person to execute any work or to do any act, it shall be lawful for the Board, or the civil area
committee or the Chief Executive Officer at whose instance the notice, order or requisition oa
has been issued whether or not the person in default is liable to punishment for such default
or has been prosecuted or sentenced to any punishment therefor, after giving notice in
writing to such person, to take such action or such steps as may be necessary for the
completion of the act or work required to be done or executed by him, and all the expenses
incurred on such account shall be recoverable by the Chief Executive officer on demand, and 36
if not paid within ten days after such demand, shall be recoverable in the same manner as
moneys recoverable by the Board under section 324:

Provided that where the action or step relates to the demolition of any erection or re-
erection under section 248 or the removal of any projection or encroachment under section
252 the Board or the civil area committee or the Chief Executive officer may request any police 25
officer to render such assistance as considered necessary for the lawful exercise of any
power in this regard and it shall be the duty of such police officer to render forthwith such
assistance on such requisition.

321. If the owner of any property in respect of which a notice as is referred to in section
320 has been given is prevented by the occupier from complying with the such notice, the ५७
Board or civil area committee or the Chief Executive Officer at whose instance such notice
* has been given, may, by order, require the said occupier to permit the owner within eight days
\ from the date of service of such notice to take all such actions as may be necessary to comply
with the said notice and such owner shall, for the period during which he is prevented as us
aforesaid, be exempt from any fine or penalty to which he might otherwise have become liable
by reason of non-compliance with such notice.

Recovery of Money

322. (/) If any such notice as is referred to in section 320 has been given to any perso"
in respect of property of which he is the owner, and he fails to comply with the notice $° $e
given, the Board or the civil area committee or the Chief Executive Officer at whose inom

such notice has been issued may require any occupier of such property or of any part


re

29194.

97

toitorhim instead of to the owner any rent payabl
te itfalls due, up to the amount recoverable from the ० 7
provided that ifthe occupier, on application
ittee or the Chief Executive Officer at wh
; refuses to truly disclose the amount of his rent or

by him in respect of such Property,
wner under section 320: ,
made to him by the Board or the civil area
1086 instance such notice has been issued,

the name or address of the person to whom
rec
iis Meable under section 320 in the same manner as money पल पड whole amount

itso 324. anner as money is recoverable by the Board

(2) Any amount recovered from an occupier in: owner under

e section (1) shall, in the absence of any cone preceeding fas the occupier so
contrary, be deemed to have been paid to the owner.

323. (1) Where any person, by reason of his receiving the ‘operty
as an agent or trustee, or of his being as an agent or trustee te चालक सेवबुबट पर the
rent if the property were let to a tenant, would under this Act be bound to discharge any

is obligation imposed on the owner of the property for the discharge of which money is required,
he shall not be bound to discharge the obligation unless he has or but for his own improper

act or default might have had funds in his hands belonging to the owner sufficient for the
purpose.

(2) The burden of proving any fact entitling an agent or trustee to relief under sub-
0 section (1) shall lie upon him.

(3) Where any agent or trustee has claimed and established his right to relief under this
section, the Board may, by notice in writing, require him to apply to the discharge of such
obligation as aforesaid the first monies which may come to his hands on behalf, or for the

use, of the owner and on failure to comply with the notice, he shall be deemed to be personally
25 liable to discharge the obligation.

324, (1) Notwithstanding anything elsewhere contained in this Act arrears of any tax,
and any other money recoverable, including rent on land and buildings due or damages and
fine due under leases or licences executed by or in favour of a Board or the Defence Estates
Officer under this Act or the rules made thereunder may be recovergd together with the cost
३० of recovery either by suit or on application to a Judicial Magistrate having jurisdiction in the
cantonment or in any place where the person from whom such tax, rent or money is recoverable
may for the time being be residing, either by the distress and sale of movable property of
such person, or by the attachment and sale of immovable property of that person, which is
within the limits of the jurisdiction of such Judicial Magistrate, or by both these methods,
35 and shall, if payable by the owner of any property as such, be a charge on the property until
paid :

Provided that the tools of artisans, growing crops upto the value of five thousand

190०5 and implements and cattle used for the purposes of agriculture shall be exempt from
such distress or sale.

Yo (2)An application to a Judicial Magistrate under sub-section (/) shall be in writing and
shall be signed by the President or Vice-President of the Board or by the Chief Executive
Officer or the Defence Estates Officer or the Officer Commanding the Station or any other
officer authorised by any of these officers, but shall not require to be personally presented.

(3) Upon receiving the application, the Judicial Magistrate refefred to in sub-section

US (1) may take action for the recovery of the amount of tax, rent or money from the person
specified in the application as if such amount were 8 fine recoverable under a sestence

passed by him and the provisions of section 421 and 422 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,

1973, shall, so far as may be, apply to the recovery of such amount:

Provided that the recovery of no such amount shall be made by the arrest or detention
$0 in prison of the said person.

Relief
Agents
Trustees,

Method of

to
and


Application
for ॥ Commit.
tee of Arbitra-
tion.

Procedure for
convening
Committee of

Constitution of
of Arbitration.

Decisions of

‘

98

Committees of Arbitration

Board to
disagreement as to the liability of a Pay

325. In the event of any materi कवर maycons ton eo nf any
compensation under this Act, mi as to sly to the Board aa ter fir the ven roc
person claiming such compensation may ap; erence

matter to a Committee of Arbitration, and the Board shall forthwith proceed to convene ६ 5
Committee of Arbitration to determine the matter in dispute.

326. When a Committee of Arbitration is to be convened, the Board shall Cause 4
public notice to be published stating the matter to be determined, and shall forthwith send
copies of the order to the District Magistrate, and to the other party concerned, and shai, re
soon as may be, nominate such members of the Committee as it is entitled to nominate Under | 4
section 327 , and by notice in writing call upon the other persons who are entitled to Nominate
amember or members of the Committee to nominate such member or members in accordance
with provisions of that section.

327. (1) Every Committee of Arbitration shall consist of five members, namely;

(a) a Chairman who shall bea person not in the service of the Government or the ir

Board, and who shall be nominated by the Officer Commanding the Station;

(6) two persons nominated by the Board;
(c) two persons nominated by the other party concerned.

(2) If the Board or the other party concerned or the Officer Commanding the Station
fails within seven days of the date of issue of the notice referred to in section 326 to make 25
any nomination which it or he is entitled to make or if any member who has been so
voutinated neglects or refuses to act and the Board or other person by whom such member
was nominated fails to nominate another member in his place with in seven days from the
date on which it or he may be called upon to do so by the District Magistrate, the District

328. (1) No person who has a direct interest in the matter under reference, whose
४, immed ३, bal
Services are not iately available for the Purposes of the Committee shal Nominated
amember of the Committee of Arbitration. सच

ort aloe te Commits sal 8९७७ time and place ofthe metings and sal ५७
necessary,

production tana’: enforce the said us


re

99

(3) The decision of a Committee of Arbitration shall be final and shall not be questioned
in any court.

Prosecutions

331. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no court shall proceed to the Prosecutions.
| trial of any offence made punishable by or under this Act, other
£ le IV, excepton the complaint of or upon information rece
or a person authorised by the Board by a general or special order in this behalf.
332. (/) The Chief Executive Officer or any person authorised by hi enera Composit
special order in this behalf, may, either before or hole mba offence. id

5 after the institution of the proceedin ,
- compound an offence, made punishable by or under this Act other than an offence =
Chapter XIV:

Provided that no offence shall be compoundable which is committed by failure to
comply with a notice, order or requisition issued by or on behalf of the Chief Executive

Officer, unless and until the same has been complied with in So far as compliance is possible.
c (2) Where an offence has been compounded, the offender,

9 , if in custody, shall be
discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of the offence so
compounded.

General Penalty Provisions
333. Whoever, in any case in which a

Zo fails to comply with any notice, order or req
otherwise contravenes any of the provisions

Penalty is not expressly provided by this Act, General
luisition issued under any provision thereof, or penalty.
of this Act, shall be punishable with fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees, and, in the case ofa continuing failure or contravention,

with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred Tupees for everyday after the
during which he has persisted in the failure or contravention.

as 334. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every Offences by
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to companies.
the company for the conduct of the business of the gompany, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:

30 Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/) where an offence under

this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been

35 committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,

any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,

secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against punished accordingly.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, —

(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and

५७

(4) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

335. Where any person to whom a licence or written permission has been granted Cancellation:

under this Act or any agent or servant of such person commits a breach of any of the suspension ९

५६ conditions thereof, or of any bye-law made under this Act for the purpose of regulating the _ licences, ete.
‘manner or circumstances in, or the conditions subject to, which anything permitted by such
lieence or written permission is to be or may be done, or where the Board or the civil area
Committee, as the case may be, is satisfied that such licence or written permission has been
Secured by the holder through misrepresentation or fraud, the Board or the civil area committee,


Recovery of
amount pay-
able in respect
of damage to
cantonment

property.

action of
Board etc.

Notice to be
Biven of suits.

100

other penalty which may have

be, may, without prejudice to any

पहल एप Act, by order in writing, cancel the licence or written perm, -
suspend it for such period as it thinks fit :

has been given,
Provided that no such order shall be made unless an opportunity we
holder of the licence or written permission to show cause why it should not be made

Where an ॥ has incurred a penalty by reason of having causeg
enagets tae ofa Board, he shall be liable to make good tuch damage, me
amount payable in respect of the damage shall, in case of dispute, roar © the
Judicial Magistrate by whom the person incurring such penalty is convicted, and, OM tog,
payment of such amount on demand, the same shall be recovered either by the 400७५ म
and sale of the movable property of such person, or by the attachment and Sale Of the
immovable property of that person, or by both these methods and the Judicial Magistray
shall recover the amount in accordance with the provisions of sections 421 and 422 Of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 as if it were a fine recoverable under a sentence passey ‘
by him. is

; Limitation

337. No court shall try any person for an offence made punishable by or under thi
Act, after the expiry of six months from the date of the commission of the offence, unles,
complaint in respect of the offence has been made to a Judicial Magistrate within the six
months aforesaid, 2

Suits

$

Director, General Officer Commanding in Chief, the Command, Director General Defence
Estates, or against any member of a Board, or against any officer or employee of a Board, for as
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done, under this Act or any rule or
bye-law made thereunder,

339. (1) No suit shall be instituted against any Board or against any member of a
Board, or against any officer or employee ofa Boar, in respect of any act done, or purporting
to have been done, in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or bye-law made thereunder, until 36
the expiration of two months after notice in writing has been left at the office of the Board,
and, in the case of such member, officer or employee, unless notice in writing has also been

(2) If the Board or member, officer or employee has, before the suit is instituted,
tendered Sufficient amounts tothe plaintiff, the plaintiff shall not recover any sum in excess
of the amount so tendered, and shall also pay all costs incurred by the defendant after suck ५
tender. ,

(3) No suit, such as is described in sub-section (1), shall, unless it is an action for the
recovery of immovable property or for a declaration of title thereto, be instituted after the
expiry of six months from the date on which the cause of action arises,

2 Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to apply toa suitin which the only relief
Claimed isan injunction of which the object would be defeated by the giving ofthe notice or ५४४
the postponement of the institution of the suit or proceeding.

” Appeals and Revision

340. (7) Any person aggrieved by any order described in the third column of Schedule
V may appeal to the appellate authority specified in that behalf in the fourth column of the a
said Schedule. se


additional appellate authority in the fourth column of the
sai

80 a8 to desi
(3) No such appeal shall be admitted i id Schedule, “था
in that behalf in the fifth column of the said “के १ after the expiry of the period specified
_ ie.
onienstteUniianenAe, shen shall be computed in accord:
inder. के Fespect to the lance with the

Computation of periods of limitation
341. (1) Every appeal under section
Io bya copy of the order appealed against,

we?

(2) Any such petition may be presented

Petition of
which the appeal is made, and th;

Appeal

342. On the admission of an a
3 a Peal from an ord:
ised ansdee sie P der, other th: tained it
iS me a हक कब क पे me eat 238, section273 or section soe : pose ne
appe 9 rects, all proceedings ६ ace. Ponta
fr ty conversion theeof shale held in abeyance pending teases ees at
. x रन aside on appeal, disobedience theret: ne

Appeal.
[० shall not be deuasdist sa
20 343. (1) Where an appeal from an order
tae | के made ७. पु

the District Magistrate, either party to the proceedings ray bei = been disposed of by _ Revision,
thereof, apply through the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the ids 20 128
Government, or to such authority as the Central 6 poe to the Contral
revision of the decision.

25 (2) The provisions of this Chapter with respect to peals
to the applications for revision made under this teodon seh 0७5 maybe
(3) The appellate authority shall make endeav: i
under section 340 of this Act within a period of ae ane np ete
344, Save as otherwise provided in section 343, ev

rd ‘
30 shall be final. ery order of appellate authority

345. No appeal shall be decided under this Chapter unless the appellant has been heard, |
or has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard in person or through a legal practitioner.

CHAPTER XVI

RULES AND Bye-Laws

Finality of the
Appellate
Orders.
Rightof
‘appellant to be
heard.

25 346. (1) The Central Government may, after previous publication, make rules to carry Power to make
out the purposes and objects of this Act. rules.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :--

(a) the manner in which, and the authority to which, application for permission
५० to occupy land belonging to the Government in a cantonment is to be made;

(6) the authority by which such permission may be granted and the conditions
to be annexed to the grant of any such permission,

(c) the allotment to a Board of a share of the rents and profits accruing from
property entrusted to its management under the provisions of section 63;
aS" (d) the i i fer, tenure of office, salaries and allowances,
appointment, promotion, transfer, fice, s nee
provident funds, pensions, gratuities, leave of absence, discipline and other condition
of service of employees of Boards;


Supplemental
provisions re-
Specting rules.

Power to make
bye-laws.

102

(०) the circumstances in which security shall be demanded from eMPloyee,

Boards and the amount and nature of such security; of
(0) the keeping of accounts by Boards and the manner in which, such ३०८०५,

shall be audited and published;

(g) the definition of the persons by whom, and the manner in which, Money
be paid out of a cantonment fund or cantonment development fund; 5 |
0

nts

(h) the preparation of estimates of income and expenditure by Boards ang the
definition of the persons by whom, and the conditions subject to which, such estimate,
may be sanctioned;

(i) the regulation of the procedure of Committees of Arbitration; \

(/) the prescribing of registers, statements and forms to be used and Maintaineg
by any authority for the purposes of this Act;

(0) the grant of leave to the members of the Board;

(0 the form of notice required to be sent under this Act and the manner of thei
service; and Is

(m) any other matter which is required to be, or may be prescribed.

347.. (/) A rule under section 346 may be made either generally for all cantonments for
the whole or any part of any one or more cantonments.

(2) The power to make rules under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 346 shall
include power to give retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of 2७
commencement of the Cantonments Act, 2006, to the rules or any of them but no retrospective
effect shall be given to any rule so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to
whom such rule may be applicable :

Provided that where any rule has to be given retrospective operation, the reasons
therefor and the effect of giving such retrospective operation shall be published along with 25°
the draft of the rules when such draft is published for eliciting public opinion under sub-
section (/) of section 346.

(3) All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and in such
other manner, if any, as the Central Government may direct and, on such publication, shall
have effect as if enacted in this Act. 3०

(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 35°
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.

348. Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the rules made thereunder a Board YU?
may, in addition to any bye-laws which it is empowered to make by any other provision of
this Act, make bye-laws to provide for all or any of the following matters in the cantonment,
namely :— ¢
(J) the registration of births, deaths and marriages, and the taking of a census;

(2) the enforcement of compulsory vaccination and inoculation and levy of fees US”
“where such vaccination or inoculation is carried out at the houses of residents;

(3) the regulation of the collection and recovery of taxes, tolls and fees under
this Act and the refund of taxes;


103

(4 the regulation of any description of traffic in the streets and the enforcement

of measures for the reduction of noise caused thereby or the prohibition of any
description of such traffic;

(5) the manner in which vehicles standing, driven, led or Propelled in the streets
penween sunset and sunrise shall be lighted;

(6) the seizure and confiscation of ownerless animals straying within the limits
of the cantonments and regulation and control of cattle pounds;

(7) the prevention and extinction of fire;

(8) the construction of scaffolding for building operations to secure the safety
Jo of the general public and persons working thereon;

(9) the regulation in any manner not specifically provided for in this Act of the
construction, alteration, maintenance, Preservation, cleaning and repairs of drains,
ventilation-shafts, pipes, water-closets, privies, latrines, urinals, cesspools and other
drainage works;

is (10) the regulation or prohibition of the discharge into, or deposit in, drains of
sewage, polluted water and other offensive or obstructive matter;

(11) the regulation or prohibition of the stabling or herding of animals, or of any
class of animals, so as to prevent danger to public health;

(12) the proper disposal of corpses, the regulation and management of burial
20 and burning places and other places for the disposal of corpses, and the fees chargeable
for the use of such places where the same are provided or maintained by Government

or at the expense of the cantonment fund;

(13) the permission, regulation or prohibition of the use or occupation of any

street or place by itinerant vendors or by any person for the sale of articles or the

286 exercise of any calling or the setting up of any booth or stall, and the fees chargeable
for such use or occupation;

(14) the regulation anJ control of encamping grounds, sarais, hotels, dak-
bangalows, lodging-houses, boarding-houses, buildings let in tenements, residential
clubs, restaurants, eating-houses, cafes, refreshment-rooms, guest houses, holiday

30 resorts, cinemas and places of public recreation, entertainment or resort;

(75) the regulation of the ventilation, lighting, cleansing, drainage and water-
supply of the buildings used for the manufacture or sale of aerated or other potable
waters and of butter, milk, sweetmeats and other articles of food or drink for human
consumption;

35 (/6) the matters regarding which conditions may be imposed by licences granted
under section 295 or section 277;

(17) the control and supervision of places where dangerous or offensive trades
are carried on so as to secure cleanliness therein or to minimise any injurious, offensive
or dangerous effects arising or likely to arise therefrom;

५० (18) the regulation of the erection of any enclosure, fence, tent, awning ‘or other
temporary structure of whatsoever material or nature on any land situated within the
Cantonment and the fees chargeable in respect thereof,

(79) the laying out of streets, and the regulation and prohibition of the erection

of buildings without adequate provision being made for the laying out and location of
4S streets;

(20) the form of and the particulars which shall be contained in a development
or an improvement scheme and the manner in which such scheme shall be
framed or altered and levy of development charges.


104

6 use of public parks and gardens and othe, हु
आज — १, ca odo grass and other appurtenances ot melt
and other public places;

(22) the regulation of the grazing of animals and the fees chargeable in respec,
thereof, ‘

(23) the fixing and regulation of the use of public bathing and washing Place

(24) the regulation of the posting of bills and advertisment, and of the Position
size, shape or style or name-boards, sign-boards and sign-posts, J

(25) the fixation of a method for the sale of articles whether by measure, weihy,
piece or any other method; ls
(26) the rending necessary of licences within the cantonment for—
(a) persons working as job porters for the conveyance of goods;
(6) animals or vehicles let out on hire or used for hawking articles;

(c) the proprietors of drivers of vehicles, boats or other conveyances, of
of animals kept or plying for hire or used for hawking articles; ir
(d) persons impelling or carrying such vehicles or other conveyances; of

(e) persons practising as nurses, midwives or dais;

(27) the prescribing of the fee payable for any licence required under clause (26),
and of the conditions subject to which such licences may be granted, revised,
suspended or withdrawn;

(28) the regulation of the charges to be made for the services of such job porters
and of the hire of such animals, vehicles or other conveyances, and for the remuneration
of persons impelling or carrying such vehicles or conveyances as are referred to in
clause (26);

(29) the prescribing of fee payable for any licence except as otherwise specifically 2 $~
provided in the Act, sanction or for any written permission granted by the Chief
Executive Officer;

(30) the regulation or prohibition, for purposes of sanitation or the prevention of
disease or the promotion of public safety or convenience, of any act which occasions
or is likely to occasion a nuisance, and for the regulation or prohibition of which no 3३०
provision is made elsewhere by or under this Act;

(3/) the circumstances and the manner in which owners of buildings or land in
the cantonment, who are temporarily absent from, or are not resident in, the
cantonment, may be required to appoint as their agents, for all or any of the purposes
of this Act of any rule or bye-law made thereunder, persons residing within or near 25
the cantonment;

(32) the prevention of the spread of infectious or contagious diseases within
the cantonment;

(33) the segregation in, or the removal and exclusion from, the cantonment, or
the destruction, of animals suffering from or reasonability suspected to be suffering 40
from any infectious or contagious disease;

(34) the supervision, regulation, conservation and protection from injury,
contamination or trespass of sources and means of public water-supply and of
appliances for the distribution of water whether within or without the limits of the us
cantonment;

(35) the manner in which connections with water-works may be constructed or
maintained, and the agency which shall or may be employed for such construction and

maintenance;

ao


| La 10s

Qo

क्र

30

क्र

Yo

4S

(36) the regulation of all matters and things telating to the supply and use of

-ludi Hecti
water कि lection and recovery Of charges therefor and the prevention of
evasion ,

(37) the maintenance of schools, and the furtherance of education, generally;

(38) the regulation of prohibition of the cutt
of the making of “excavations, 0 of the removy,
lation or prohibition appears to the Board to

of ecological balance and to be necessary for
preservation of the soil, the prevention of |

s, or the protection of land against

sand, gravel or stones;

Ng Or destruction of trees or shrubs,
‘al of soil of quarrying, where such
be not prejudicial to the maintenance
the maintenance of a water-supply, the
landscape Or of the formation of ravines or
€rosion, or against the deposit thereon of

(39) the rendering necessary of licences

॥ as stables, kennels, sites or cowho:

goats oF fowls;
(40) the control of the use in the cantonment of mechanical whistles, sirens or
trumpets,

(41) the regulation of supply of copies of official document rescribi
fee payable in respect thereof, -_ —_

for the use of premises within the
uses Or as accommodation for sheep,

(42) the regulation of permission for granting licence for use of loud-speaker

and prescribing the fee payable in respect thereof,
. (43) the conservation and maintenance of ancient and historical monuments,

archaeological sites and remains or place of public importance in the cantonment; and

(44) generally for the regulation of the administration of the cantonment under
this Act.
349. (1) Any bye-laws made by a Board under this Act may provide that a contravention

thereof shall be punishable—
(a) with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees; or

(b) with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and, in the case of a
continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for
the first such contravention; or

(c) with fine which may extend to one hundred fifty rupees for every day during
which the contravention continues after the receipt of a notice from the Board or Chief
Executive Officer by the person contravening the bye-law requiring such person to
discontinue such contravention.

bye-law may also vide that a person contravening the same shall be
कम कि as ties ia his hi the damage or mischief, if any, caused by such
contravention.

350. (1) Any power to make bye-laws conferred by this Act is conferred —
conditions of bye-laws being made after previous publication and of their = er a
until they have been approved and confirmed by the Central Government pub!
the Official Gazette.

(2) The Central Government in confirming a bye-law may make
Which appears to it to be necessary. f
us publication of its intention, cancel any

, after previo
ni hiehpareapeatanarysery” lew ithe bye-law shall cease to have effect.

any change therein

Penalty for
breach of bye-

provisions
laws and


Rules and bye-
laws to be
available for
inspection and
purchase

Provisions of
the Act and
tules to place
beyond
cantonments.

Power to

functions to
the President,

Validity of no-
tices and other
documents.
Admissibility
of document or
entry as evi-
dence.

106

(4) Every bye-law and Regulation made under this Act and every order made te
sub-section (3) shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House :
Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be Compriseg “|
one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the Session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the bye-law and Regulation, of order or both Houses agree 0३ 5
the bye-law and Regulation, or order should not be made, the bye-law and Regulation, pa
order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without Prejudice tg
the validity of anything previously done under that bye-law and Regulation or order. lo

351. (/) Acopy of all rules and bye-laws made under this Act shall be kept at the office
of the Board and shall, during office hours, be open free of charge to inspection by any
inhabitant of the cantonment.

(४) Copies of all such rules and bye-laws shall be kept at the office of the Board and
shall be sold to the public at cost price singly, or in collection at the option of the purchaser ‘5

CHAPTER XVII
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS

352. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and Subject
to any conditions as to compensation or otherwise which thinks fit to impose, extend to any
area beyond 8 cantonment and in the vicinity thereof, with or without restriction or modification, 4७
any of the provisions of Chapters VIII to XV or of any rule or bye-law made under this Act for
the cantonment which relates to the subject-matter of any of those Chapters, and every
enactment, rule or bye-laws so extended shall thereupon apply to that area as if the area were
included in the cantonment.

353. (/)The Board may, by a resolution passed in this behalf, delegate to the President, 424
Vice-President, Chief Executive Officer or Health Officer, subject to such conditions, if any,
as may be specified in the resolution, all or any of its functions under clause (6) of sub-
section (5) of section 290, section 168, section 170, section 175 section 167, section 263 and
section 264.

(2) The civil area committee may, by passing a similar resolution, delegate subject to 30
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in such resolution, all or any of its functions to
the Vice—President, Chief Executive Officer or Health Officer.

354. (/) Paragraphs 2 and 3 of section 54, and section 59, 107 and 123 of the Transfer
of Property Act, 1882, with respect to the transfer of property by registered instrument, shall, sofisx
on and from the commencement of this Act, extend to every cantonment. 35
(2) The Registrar or Sub-Registrar of the district or sub-district formed for the purposes
of the Registration Act, 1908, in which any cantonment is situated, shall, when any document 16 of 1;
relating to immovable property within the cantonment is registered, send information of the
registration forthwith to the Chief Executive Officer and the Defence Estates Officer and
such other authority, as the Central Government may prescribe in this behalf. ५०

355. No notice, order, requisition, licence, permission in writing or other such document
issued under this Act shall be invalid merely by reason of any defect of form.

356. A copy of any receipt, application, plan, notice, order or other document or of ‘any
entry in a register, in the possession of a Board shall, if duly certified by the legal keeper
thereof or other person authorised by the Chief Executive Officer in this behalf, be admissible ५६
in evidence of the existence of the document or entry, and shall be admitted as evidence of
the matters and transactions therein recorded in every case where, and to the same extent to
which, the original documents or entry would, if produced, have been admissible to prove

such matters.


y

1606:
18114

es can be proved under section 356 by a certifi
re any matter or transaction recorded therein

shall be Government in section 4 of 1 he
1" $ 4 of that Act shall be cor fe to tl
State construed as references

w

107

ni No ofioer st pseu 018 Board shall, in any |
ep as quired to produce any ७३८ pgslahtarar to which the
vcument the contents of
ed i
aves OF 10 appear as a witness to
«०० 'y order of the court made for
888. For the purposes of the Government Buildings Act, 1899.
1. , cantonments and Boards

be unietpall A
to be municipalities and municipal authorities res) ively and the refe
pect references

। Government

359. (1) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this A 1, the C
is Ac entral

ernment May, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
|, uch provisions not

pane stent with the provisions of this Act, as aj i
wi Pear to it to be necessary for removing the

provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry ofa period of two from
of two years from

\_ the date of commencement of this Act.

(2) Every order made under sub-section (/) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is

made, before each House of Parliament.

2०

30

yo

us

360. (1) The Cantonments Act, 1924 is hereby repealed.
(2 Notwithstanding the repeal of the Cantonments Act, 1924,—

(a) any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule i
made or issued, and any licence or permission granted wnder| ayant ~~
it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act continue in force and be deemed
to have been made, issued or granted, under the provisions of this Act, unless and
until it is superseded by any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form,
notice or bye-law made or issued or any licence or permission granted under the said
provisions,

(b)all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all
matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the Board shall be deemed to
have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for the Board
constituted under this Act;

(c) all budget estimates, assessments, valuations, measurements or divisions
made by the Board shall in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act, continue in force and be deemed to have been made under the provisions of
this Act unless and until they are superseded by any budget estimate, assessment,

provisions;

(dall properties, able and immovable and all interests of whatsoever nature
and kind therein, vested Wa the Board shall with all rights of whatsoever description,
20 ne sesed bythe said Board ves inthe Board consined unde 8

(yates, te, es ets an ote suns of mone ete Boars hale
deemed to be due to the Board constituted under this Act;

(fall rates, taxes, fees, rents, fares and other charges shall, until and unless they
are varied by the Board constituted under this Act, continue to be levied at the same
rate at which they were being levied by the Board immediately before the
commencement of this Act;

(g) all suits, prosecutions and other legal proceedings instituted or — might
sve i rosea he Board maybe cominued ose क ©
against the Board constituted under this Act.

Evidence by

‘employee of
the Board

Application of
Act 4 of 1899

+ Repeals and

savings.


SCHEDULE |
(see section 100)
Notice of DEMAND

To

residing at

Taking notice that the Board demands from.

(here describe the proper”
occupation, circumstance or thing in respect of which the sum is payable) leviable Under
for the period of. नि

0. and ending on the
- day of .. » and that if, within thirty days from the
service of this notice, the sum is not paid to the Board 2.................................. OF sufficien
cause for non-payment is not shown to the satisfaction of the Chief Executive Offfcer,
warrant of distress/attachment* will be issued for the recovery of the same with costs,

Chief Executive Officer,
Cantonment.

[*Strike out whichever is not applicable.]

108


SCHEDULE {1
(see section 101)
Form OF Warrant
(Here insert the name of the officer charged with the execution of warrant)
has not paid, and has not shown satisfactory cause for

ssssseeeeee GUE ON Account of.
; "नबी OB asaiscssorrsvsssee | रकालमक for the

period ० of which sum is leviable under,

: nd whereas thirty days have elapsed since the service on him of notice of demand for
the samme:

‘This is to command you to [distraint/attach#] subject to the provisions of the Canton-
ments Ac 2006, the[{movable/immovable#] property of the said A.B. to the amount of the

said Of / अमन ; and forthwith to certify to me, together with this warrant,
wri ofthe property [seized/tached #] by you thereunder हु "

Dated this ....""+ AY ०0.......................... # डा
(Signed)
Chief Executive Officer,
Cantonment
*Here describe the liability.
# Strike out whichever is not applicable.

109


SCHEDULE III
(see section 103)
Form oF Inventory oF Provenry DISTRAINED AND NOTICE OF Sai 5

Take notice that I have this day seized the property specified in the
hereto, for the Value ०(.................10० for the liability* mentioned in the margin for 4."
commencing with 0.
the

-20................, together with RS.......... for
notice of demand, and that, unless within seven days from the date serve oa
proper wi gc® the Board the said amount, together with the cost ofrecoven
Property will be sold by public auction.

Dated this “«०«*20..............
(Signature of officer executing the warrant.)
INVENTORY
(Here state particulars of property seized),
*Here describe the liability.

110


SCHEDULE Iv
(see section 314)
CASES IN WHICH POLICE MAY ARREST witout Wannanr
PARTA

ie सैीस फप7-+++-

>>... ४००७ or selling of food, ७, or washing of clone Say Selling of food, etc., or washing of clothes, by infected
174 person.

1७0 Drunkenness, etc.

re ereeinsmerey
१ PART 8
छा... शभपएक, or re-entering, cantonment afer notice of ः Remaining in, or re-entering, cantonment after notice of
0) expulsion for failure to attend hospital or dispensary.
Destroying, etc., name of street or number affixed to building.

. Feeding animal on filth, etc.
. 1XaXii) Using threatening or abusive words, etc.
men Indecent exposure of person, etc.
281 XaXiv) Begging. um
289(1XaX¥) Exposing deformity, etc.
. 28x 1XaXvii) Gaming. oles
enc kil wil r, stormwater drain.
1\XaXxiii) Displaces, damages, alters, pavements, gutter,
_ YG) Keeping common gaming-house, etc.
- Beating drum, etc. ae
hod Singing, etc., so as to disturb public peace or 2
_— Setting loose, or setting on, ferocious dog.
_ Discharging fire-arms, etc., so as to cause danger.
La emma eertc
300 : Pare ear returning to, a can
Remaining in, or

M1


SCHEDULE y
APPRALS Pony WxROUTIVE

५]
(t0¢ section M5)
— ‘Section कोड - Appelisie 7+- पद नमन
No Onder Authority १४० on
> i Gee 2 ते
1 4 i
» ॥ aa 2 (re) Declaring क्रय ‘inhabitant’ Distriet Magistrate «४ >>
2 197 Notice ty fill up well, tank, Principal Director
6९, OF ७ drnin 4०480 “my
Water,
3 138 Notice req the owner Board fi
10 provide mae urinal, pon का ey
paren OF other
4 139 Notice fequiring Provision Board Fi
Of sanitary facilities in preg ae 10 re
‘et, school, theatre of
Of public 3
S. 142 Notice fr removal of General Officer Thiny
Congest building Commanding-in-Chiet Doig 8 i थ
the Command
6. 144 Notice ming a Principal Director Thiny
to be repaired or ahered ©, vate iy
as {0 Femove sanitary
defects,
7. 147 Notice prohibiting ‘Owner or Principal Director ‘Twenty-one
CAPA tse a bulding sxvice of nas पा
© Patt of a bulking fr
habitation
8. 183 Onder directing 4 person to General Officer sevice
femove from — =a जा
tnd | i ny pommandingin-Chie Comman
Sntering it without permission
9 190 Notice Tequiring Board Fifteen
maintenance oF closing NOtice, < toe torn ot
Of private Source of public
drinking water supply,
10. 192 एलन requiring the owner, Board Fifteen from sevice of
lessee or Occupier of a Notice,
building or land to
from a source of public
water Supply,
Il. 195 Notice for cutting off the Board Fifteen days from sevice of
connection any Notice,
Source of public Water
Supply and any building
or land to which Water is
Supplied

12. 238 0७) Refusal to



283

273

297

302

’ 4
Onter of etappage of Hownd

जीतना कु ov werks in
certain cates

(४) Notice to atop erection Principal Director
OF reeretion of, त to
titer cx demolish, hiking
in civil area,

(b) Notice to stp erection or ‘General Officer
feerection of, or to aher or Commanding-in-Chief,
demolish, a buikding ina the Command
Cantonment (Other than a
civil area.)

Notice requiring the owner or Board
the occupier to alter or remove
‘any Projection or encmachment.

+ Notice to Temove, repair, Board

Protect, or enclose a
building, wall or anything
affixed thereto, or well,
tank, reservoir, Pool,
depression or excavation.
Notice directing disorderly District Magistrate
Person to remove from
cantonment and Prohibiting
him from re-entering it
without permi:

Thirty days from servioe
of communication

Thirty days from
service of
communication

‘Thirty days from
service of
communication

‘Thirty days from
service of
notice,

‘Thirty days from
Service of


RAJYA SABHA

-A
BILL ts
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the administration of cantonments with a
view to impart greater democratisation, improvement of their financial base to make

provisions for developmental activities, and for matters connected therewith

or incidental thereto.

(As passed by the Rajya Sabha)

MGIPMRNO—t974R5 (38)--03-08-2006.