Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LXXI of 2006
THE ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS AND OVERSTAYING FOREIGN
NATIONALS (IDENTIFICATION AND DEPORTATION) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory identification of illegal immigrants to the country from the
neighbouring countries and those foreign nationals who are overstaying in the
country or have gone missing after the expiry of their visas and for their deportation
to their countries of origin by setting up a National Commission for that purpose and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the illegal Immigrants and overstaying Foreign Nationals
(Identification and Deportation) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government
(b) “Commission” means the National Commission on illegal Immigrants and
Foreign Nationals established under section 3;
(c) "illegal immigrant" means any person who comes to India without any visa or
proper and valid documents issued by the designated Authority of the Government of
India in any foreign country;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) terms and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Foreigners Act, 1946 shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.
Definitions.
31 of 1946.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON 11TH AUGUST, 2006.

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, establish a Commission
to be known as the National Commission on Illegal Immigrants and Foreign
Nationals, for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name
sue and be sued.
(3) The Commission shall consist of,—
(i) a chairperson who shall be a serving or a retired judge of the Supreme
Court  to be appointed by the President in consultation with the Chief Justice
of the Supreme Court; and
(ii) Three other members to be appointed by the President.
(4) The Chairperson and other members of the Commission shall hold office
for a term of five years and shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances as may
be prescribed.
(5) The Head office of the Commission shall be at Bhubaneshwar in the State
of Orissa.
(6) The Commission shall have a Secretariat consisting of a secretary and such
other officers and employees to assist the Commission in discharging its functions
with such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed and determined by
the Central Government from time to time.
(7) The Commission while discharging its functions shall follow such
procedure and meet in such manner as may be prescribed.
4.  (1) The Central Government shall also by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a State Commission on Illegal Immigrants and Foreign Nationals for a
State or a group of States for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The State Commission shall consist of,—
(i) a Chairperson who shall be a serving or retired judge of a High Court;
and
(ii) four other members.
(3) Provisions of Commission relating to tenure of office, salary and allowances,
secretariat and procedure to be followed shall apply mutatis-mutandis to  the State
Commission.
5. (1) The Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) prescribe guidelines for the State Commissions for identifying illegal
immigrants and their nationality and those foreign nationals who are overstaying in
the country;
(b) hear any complaint against or appeal against the findings of any State
Commission;
(c) identify illegal immigrants and their nationality and the foreign nationals
overstaying in the Union Territories;
(d) direct the appropriate Government for the deportation of illegal immigrants
and foreign nationals found overstaying in the country;
(e) facilitate speedy hearing of cases against illegal immigrants and overstaying
foreign nationals; and
Establishment
of
Commission.
State
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commissions.

3
(f) take such measures as the Commission may deem necessary for the purposes
of this Act.
(2) The State Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) carry out necessary exercise as per the guidelines issued by the Commission
to identify illegal immigrants and their nationalities and those overstaying foreign
nationals in their respective areas of jurisdiction;
(b) prepare and forward the list of the identified illegal immigrants and overstaying
foreign nationals to the Commission and the appropriate Government for their
deportation from the Country; and
(c) discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Commission.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Commission may direct the appropriate Government to,—
(i) stop all assistance enjoyed by the illegal immigrants and overstaying foreign
nationals with immediate effect.
(ii) impound the ration card, voters identity card in the possession of illegal
immigrants and overstaying foreign nationals.
(iii) delete the names of illegal immigrants and overstaying foreign nationals
from the electoral rolls of the territorial jurisdiction of the respective Governments.
(iv) terminate the services of illegal immigrants and overstaying foreign nationals
in case they have got employment either in public or private sector;
(v) take necessary action to recover the loans borrowed by illegal immigrants or
overstaying foreign nationals; and
(vi) take immediate action for deporting the illegal immigrants and overstaying
foreign nationals to their countries.
(2) The appropriate Government shall as soon as may be, take such action as directed
by the Commission.
7. (1) Any person, aggrieved or who has any complaint against a decision or finding of
any State Commission shall be entitled to represent to the Commission who shall hear the
same and dispose it of within one month.
(2) Every person who represents to the Commission under sub-section ( 1) shall be
given an opportunity of being heard before disposing of such application by the Commission.
8. The appropriate Government and the State commission shall ensure that no
inconvenience is caused to any bonafide citizen of the Country during the enforcement of
the provisions of this Act.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this
act.
10. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being applicable to illegal immigrants or overstaying
foreign nationals in the country.
11. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power of the
Commission
to direct the
Governments.
Representations
to the
Commission.
Inconvenience
not to be
caused to
bonafide
citizens.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are millions of illegal immigrants in our country who have come from our
neighbouring countries and are staying in our country. Unfortunately, their infiltration into
our country is going on unabated. Our country is already overpopulated and struggling to
provide the basic necessities of life to its own citizens and can not in any way afford to feed
and sustain these illegal immigrants. They are not only increasing the number of our booming
population, but also indulging in criminal and anti-national activities. They are helping the
extremist activities against our nation and are responsible for creating law and order problem
in the country. The population of illegal immigrants has swelled even in the national capital
which has become unsafe for the people. Since they are from the neighbouring countries,
they easily mix up with the local population and it is not easy to detect them. Similarly,
thousands of foreign nationals who come to our country on a short time visa disappear and
overstay even after the expiry of their visa period. They too are indulging in terrorist activities.
But, unfortunately, many of them have got themselves enrolled as voters in the country and
have also acquired ration cards and  electors card to show themselves as Indian Citizens. As
such they are creating difficulties for the genuine citizens and usurping their rights. It has,
therefore, become necessary to identify them and deport them to their countries.
One Central Law, namely, the Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983
was there to deal with the illegal immigrants but the same has been declared ultra vires of the
Constitution by the Supreme Court of India. As such practically there is no law at present to
deal with the problem of illegal immigrants in the country except invoking the provisions of
the Foreigners Act, 1946. Hence it has become necessary to have a Central Law to deal with
this serious issue.
Hence this Bill.
B.J. PANDA
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Commission on
Illegal Immigrants and Foreign Nationals. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment
of a State Commissions for a State or for a group of State. Clause 9 provides that Central
Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees two hundred crore will involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees fifty crore may also involve as non recurring expenditure.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
6

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the compulsory identification of illegal immigrants to the country from the
neighbouring countries and those foreign nationals who are overstaying in the country
or have gone missing after the expiry of their visas and for their deportation to their
countries of origin by setting up a National Commission for that purpose and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri B.J. Panda, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2218RS(S5)—11-08-2006.