AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LXXIX of 2001

THE INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BILL
Surther to amend the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2001.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 21st day of September, 2001.

59 of 1961. 2. In section 2 of the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as
5 the principal Act), for the words “Kanpur and the Indian Institute of Technology,
Madras”, the words “Kanpur, the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras and the Indian

Institute of Technology, Roorkee” shall be substituted.

3. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(a) in clause (c),—
10 (i) the word “and” appearing at the end of sub-clause (ii) shall be omitted;

(if) in sub-clause (iii) after the words “the Indian Institute of Technology,
Madras;” the word “and” shall be inserted; and

(iii) after sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—

15 “(iv) in relation to the University of Roorkee, Roorkee, the Indian
Institute of Technology, Roorkee;”;

Short title and
commience-
ment.

Amendment
of section 2.

Amendment
of section 3.


Amendment
of section 4.

Insertion of
new section
54.

Effect of

incorporation
of Institute of

Technology,
Roorkee.

2
(6) after clause (k), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

‘()“Univetsity of Roorkee” means the University of Roorkee established
under the Roorkee University Act, 1947.’.

4, In section 4 of the principal Act, after sub-section (19), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—

“(1C) The University of Roorkee, Roorkee shall, on such incorporation, be called

the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee.”.
5. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—

“5A. On and from the commencement of the Institutes of Technology

(Amendment) Act, 2001,—

(a) any reference to the University of Roorkee in any law (other than this
Act) or in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the
Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee;

(6) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the University
of Roorkee, shall vest in the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee;

(c) all rights and liabilities of the University of Roorkee shall be transferred
to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee;

(व) every person employed by the University of Roorkee immediately
before such commencement shall hold his office or service in the Indian Institute
of Technology, Roorkee by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon
the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to
pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held
the same if this Act had not been passed, and shall tontinue to do so unless and
until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms
and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:

Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee,
his employment may be terminated by the Indian Institute of Technology,
Roorkee in accordance with the terms of the contract with the employee or, ifno
provision is made thereitt in this behalf, on payment to him by the Indian Institute
of Technology, Roorkee of compensation equivalent to three months’
remuneration in the case of permanent employees and one month’s remuneration
in the case of other employees:

Provided further that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the
Vice-Chancellor and Pro-Vice-Chancellot of the University of Roorkee in any law
for the time being in force, or in any instrument or other document, shall be
cotistrued as a referenice to the Directot and the Deputy Director, respectively, of
the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee; and

(९) on the commencement of the Institutes of Technology (Amendment)
Act, 2001, the Vice-Chancellor of the University of Roorkee, appointed under the
provisions of the Roorkee University Act, 1947 shall be deemed to have been
appointed as Director under the Act, and shall hold office for a period of three
months or till such time the Director is appointed, whichever is earlier.

Explanation. —The reference in this section to the commencement of this Act

shall be construed in relation to the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee as the
reference to the date on which the provisions of the Institutes of Technology
(Amendment) Act, 2001 come into force.”.

UP Act
IX of 1948

5

20

25

30

35

40

45

एफ, Act
IX of 1948.


20

25

30

35

40

UP. Act
IX of 1948.
10 of 1897. 45

3

6. In section 38 of the principal Act,—

(4) after clause (4), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—

“(e) the Syndicate of the University of Roorkee functioning as such
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to so function
until a new Board is constituted for the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee
under this Act, but on the constitution of a new Board under this Act, the
members of the Syndicate holding office before such constitution shall cease to
hold office;

(f) the Academic Council of the University of Roorkee functioning as such
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to so function
until a new Senate is constituted for the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee
under this Act, but on the constitution of a new Senate under this Act, the
members of the Academic Council holding office before such constitution shall
cease to hold office;

(g) until the first Statutes and the Ordinances in relation to the Indian
Institute of Technology, Roorkee are made under this Act, the Statutes and
Ordinances of the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay as in force immediately
before the commencement of the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act,
2001 shall apply to the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee with the necessary
modifications and adaptations in so far as they are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act;

(A) notwithstanding anything contained in the Institutes of Technology
(Amendment) Act, 2001, any student who joined classes of the University of
Roorkee on or after the commencement of 1994-95 academic session shall, for
the purpose of clause (4) of sub-section (/) of section 6, be deemed to have
pursued a course of study in the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee
provided that such student has not already been awarded degree or diploma for
the same course of study;

(i) if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Institutes
of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2001, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:

Provided that no order shall be made under this clayse after the expiry of
two years from the commencement of the Institutes of Technology (Amendment)
Act, 2001:

Provided further that every order made under this clause shall be laid, 85
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.”.

(b) Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation | thereof and after

Explanation | as so numbered, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:-—

“Explanation 2.—The reference in clauses (०) and (f) of this section to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed in relation to the Indian Institute
of Technology, Roorkee as the reference to the date on which the provisions of
the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2001 come into force.”.

7, (1) The Roorkee University Act, 1947 is hereby repealed.

(2) The provisions of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply to the repeal of the said
Actas if the said Act were a Central Act.

Amendment
of section 38.

Repeal and
savings.


4
(3) The Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 is hereby repealed. Ord.

6-of 2001.
(4) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the repealed
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions
of the principal Act, as amended by this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The need for conversion of the University of Roorkee, a State University in the State
of Uttaranchal, into an Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) and its integration with IIT
system was felt for some time past. This is in line with the overall thinking of the Central
Government to have more IIT level institutions by upgrading existing institutions imparting
technical education. Excellent track record of the University of Roorkee and its inherent
technical strength and capabilities compare favourably with that of the existing IITs. In fact,
there are many areas of technical competence where IIT system is likely to benefit immensely
from the University of Roorkee integrating into IIT system. The State of Uttaranchal will
benefit with the presence of IIT within its geographical jurisdiction with higher level of
technical competence, inter alia, in areas like earthquake engineering, water resource
management and hydropower development.

2. The Expert Committee constituted by the Government of India to assess the
academic, administrative and financial requirements for conversion of the University of
Roorkee into an IIT had recommended that admissions to under-graduate programme for
the year 2002-2003 should be held through a joint entrance examination in the year 2002
along with other IITs.

3. As Parliament was not in session, and there was urgency, the Institutes of
Technology (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 was promulgated by the President on 21st
September, 2001 to convert the University of Roorkee into an IIT and its integration with the
TIT system and it was declared as an institution of national importance. The Roorkee University
Act, 1947 was also repealed by the said Ordinance.

4, The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.

MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI.

New Detyt;
The 22nd November, 2001.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for conversion of the University of Roorkee into an Indian
Institute of Technology and its declaration as an institution of national importance. The
estimated non-recurring expenditure for upgradation of infrastructure and facilities for
conversion of the University of Roorkee into an Indian Institute of Technology would be
about Rs. 150 crore during the period of 9th Five Year Plan and 10th Five Year Plan. The
recurring expenditure would be approximately Rs. 50 crore per annum. The expenditure
would be met from the Consolidated Fund of India through the budgetary provision under
the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Sub-clause (a) of clause 6 of the Bill inserts new clause (g) in section 38 of the Act which
empowers the Institutes of Technology to make Statutes and Ordinances. New clause (i)
empowers the Central Government by order to remove certain difficulties which may appear
to it to be necessary or expedient. Further, such order is not to be made under the said clause
after the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement of this Act. Every such
order shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

2. The matters in respect of which the Statutes, Ordinances or orders may be made or
issued are matters of administrative details and procedure and, as such, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY ACT, 1961

(59 oF 1961)
Declaration 2. Whereas the objects of the institutions known as the Indian Institute of Technology,

of certain Bombay, the College of Engineering and Technology, Delhi, the Indian Institute of Technology,

inners of Guwahati, Assam, the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur and the Indian Institute of
national Technology, Madras are such as to make them institutions of national importance, it is

importance. _ hereby declared that each such institution is an institution of national importan¢e.
Definitions. 3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(c) “corresponding Institute” means—
* * . * *
(ii in relation to the society known as the Indian Institute of Technology
(Kanpur) Society, the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, and

(iii) in relation to the society known as the Indian Institute of Technology,
Madras, the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras;

* * ‘ * *
Transititonal 38. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,—
provisions. . . ‘ वि .


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Institute of Technology Act, 1961.

(Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi, Minister of Human Resource Development)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3678RS—23.1 1.2001.