(As PAssED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
Rajya SaBHA ON 29TH May, 1995
Lok SABHA on 25TH Aucust, 1995)

| Assented to On 22 Nov. 1995
Act No, 43 of 1995, |

|



Bill No. LXXIILF of 1993

ee eg

THE WAKF BILL, 1995

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CHAPTER 1

PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
दे 1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Application of the Act.
3. Definitions.

CHAPTER If
SURVEY OF WAKES

4. Preliminary survey of wakfs.
5. Publication of list of wakfs.
6. Disputes regarding wakts.

7. Power of Tribunal to determine disputes regarding walks.
8. Recovery of costs of survey. J ied
CHAPTER fil
CENTRAL WAKF COUNCIL

9. Establishment and constitution of Central Wakf Council.

10. Finance of Council. 7
11. Accounts and audit.
42. Power of Central Government to make rules.
CHAPTER IV
EsTABLISHMENT OF BOARDS AND THEIR FUNCTIONS

13. Incorporation. 5
14. Composition of Board.
15. Term of office.
16. Disqualification for being appointed, or for continuing as, a mem-
ber of the Board. ;
17. Meetings of the Board.
18. Committees of the Board.



=
CLAUSES =
19. Resignation of Chairperson and गाल,
20. Removal of Chairperson and members.
21. Filling of a vacancy.

22. Vacancies, ete., not to invalidate proceedings of the Board.

23. Appointment of Chief Executive Officer and his term of office
and other conditions of service.

24, Officers and other employees of the Board.
25. Duties and powers of Chief Executive Officer.

26. Powers of Chief Executive Officer in respect of orders or reso-
lutions of Board.

27. Delegation of powers by the Board.

28. Chief Executive Officer to exercise power through Collectors, etc.

29. Powers of Chief Executive Officer to inspect records, registers,
etc. -

30. Inspection of records.
31. Prevention of disqualification for membership of Parliament.
32. Powers and functions of the Board.

33. Powers of inspection by Chief Executive Officer or persons
authorised by him.

34. Recovery of the amount determined under section 33.
35. Conditional attachment by Tribunal.
CHAPTER V 2
REGISTRATION OF WAKFS
36. Registration.
37. Register of wakfs.
38. Powers of Board to appoint Executive Officer.

39. Powers of Board in relation to wakfs which have ceased to exist.

40. Decision if a property is wakfs property. a Ae
41. Power to cause registration of wakf and to amend register. रू
42. Change in the management of wakfs to be notified.

43. Wakfs registered before the commencement of this Act deemed
to be registered.

CHAPTER VI

MAINTENANCE OF ACCOUNTS OF WAEFS
44. Budget.

— 1


4

Gi)

CLAUSES

45. Preperation of budget of wakfs under direct management of the
Board. 3

46. Submission of accounts of wakts.
47, Audit of accounts of wakts.
48. Board to pass orders on auditor's report.
49. Sums certified to be due recoverable as arrears of land revenue.
50. Duties of mutawalli.
51. Alienation of wakf property without sanction of Board to be void.

52. Recovery of wakf property transferred in contravention of
section 51.

53. Restriction on purchase of property on behalf of wakf.
54. Removal of encroachment from wakf property.

55. Enforcement of orders made under section 54.

56. Restrictions on power to grant lease of wakf property.

57. Mutawalli entitled to pay certain costs from income of wakf
property.

58. Power of Board to pay dues in case of default by mutawalli.
59. Creation of reserve fund.

60. Extension of time.

61. Penalties.

62. Mutawalli not to spend any money belonging to wakf for self
defence.

63. Power to appoint mutawallis in certain cases,

64. Removal of mutawalli.

65. Assumption of direct management of certain wakfs by the Board.
+

66. Powers of appointment and removal of mutawalli when to be
exercised by the State Government.

67. Supervision and supersession of committee of management.

68. Duty of mutawalli or committee to deliver possession of records.
ete,

69. Power of Board to frame scheme for administration of wakf.
70. Inquiry relating to administration of wakf.
71. Manner of holding inquiry.



व
72.

73

74

75.
76.
2
78.
79,
80.
81.

(ix)
CHAPTER शा

FINANCE OF THE BOARD

Annual contribution payable to Board.

Power of Chief Executive Officer to direct banks or other person
to make payments.

Deduction of contribution from perpetual annuity payable to
the wakf.

Power of Board to borrow.

Mutawalli not to lend or borrow moneys without sanction.
Wakf Fund.

Budget of Board.

Accounts of Board.

Audit of accounts of Board.

State Government to pass orders on auditor’s report.

82. Dues of Board to be recovered as arrears of land revenue.

CHAPTER शा

JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS

83. Constitution, of Tribunals, ete

84.

85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.

Tribunal to hold proceedings expeditiously and to furnish to the
Parties copies of its decision.

Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts.

Appointment of a receiver in certain cases,

Bar to the enforcement of right on behalf of unregistered wakfs,
Bar to challenge of validity of any notification, etc.

Notice of suits by oe against Board.

Notice of suits, etc., by courts.

91. Proceedings under the Act 1 of 1894.

92.
93.
94.

95.

Board to be party to suit or Proceeding.
Bar to compromise of suits by or against mutawalli.

Power to make application to the Tribunal in case of failure of
mutawalli to discharge his duties.

Power of appellate authority to entertain appeal after expiry of
specified period. i ४३)



a eee hae a Settee ४०

(0)
CHAPTER IX
MiscELLANEOUS
CLAUSES

96. Power of Central Government to regulate secular activities of
wakfs.

97. Directions by State Government.
98. Annual report by State Government.
99. Power to supersede Board.
100. Protection of action taken in good faith.

101. Survey Commissioner, members and officers of the Board, deemed
to be public servants.

102. Special provision for reorganisation of certain Boards,
103. Special provision ‘for establishment of Board for part of a State.

104. Application of Act to Properties given or donated by persons not
professing Islam for support of certain wakf,

105. Power of Board and Chief Executive Officer to Tequire copies of
documents etc., to be furnished,

106. Powers of Central Government to constitute common Boards.
107. Act 36 of 1963 not to apply for recovery of wakf properties.

108. Special provision as to evacuee wakf Properties,

109, Power to make rules.

110. Powers to make regulations by Board.

111. Laying of rules and regulations before State Legislature,

112. Repeal and savings.

113. Power to remove difficulties.



A
Bill No. LXXII-F of 1993
SA We am Co > आप
THE WAKF BILL, 1995
(AS PAsseD EY THE Houses or PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
हल to provide for the better administration of Wakfs and for matters con-
nected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-sixth Year of the Republic
of India as follows :—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1, (7) This Act may be called the Wakf Act, 1995. oa
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and title,
Kashmir, extent and
commence.
(8) It shall come into force in a State on such date as the Central ment.
खा | = Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and

different dates may be appointed for different areas within a State and

for different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any provision bE:
to the commencement of this Act, shall, in relation to any State or area
therein, be construed as reference to the commencement of that provision

in such State or area.

2. Save as otherwise expressly provided under this Act, this Act Applica-
shall apply to all wakfs whether created before or after the commence. tion of
ment of this Act: the Act.

Provided that nothing in this Act shal] apply to Durgah Khawaja
यह Saheb, Ajmer to which the Durgah Khawaja Saheb Act, 1955 applies,
0! 5



5 1

3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —

(a) “beneficiary” means a person or object for whose benefit a
wakf is created and includes religious, pious and Seer
and any other objects of public utility sanctioned by the Mus. alae

(b) “benefit” does not include any benefit which a mutawalli is
entiued to claim solely vy reason of his being such mutawalli;

(०) “Board” means a Board of Wakf established under sub-sec-

tion (1), or as the case may be, under sub-section (2) of section 13

and shall include a common Wakf Board established under section
106;

(५) “Chief Executive Officer” means the Chief Executive Officer
appointed under sub-section (1) of section 23;

(e) “Council” means the Central Wakf Council established
under section 9;

(f) “Executive Officer” means the Executive Officer appointed by
the Board under sub-section (/) of section 38;

(g) “list of wakfs” means the list of wakfs published under
sub-section (2) of section 5;

(h) “member” means a member of the Board and includes the
Chairperson:

(i) “mutawalli” means any person appointed, either verbally
or under any deed or instrument by which a wakf has been created,
or by a competent authority, to be the mutawalli of a wakf and in-
cludes any person who is a mutawalli of a wakf by virtue of any
custom or who is a naib-mutawalli, khadim, mujawar, sajjadanashin,
amin or other person appointed by a mutawalli to perform the duties
of a mutawalli and save as otherwise provided in this Act, any per.
son, committee or corporation for the time being managing or adminis-
tering any wakf or wakf property:

Provided that no member of a committee or corporation shall
be deemed to be a mutawalli unless such member is an

office bearer
of such committee or corporation;

(3) “net annual income”, in relation to a wakf, means net annual
income determined in accordance with the provisions of the
Explanations to sub-section (1) Of section 72;

(k) “person interested in a wakf means 8797 person who is en-

titled to receive any pecuniary or other benefits from the wakf and
includes —

6) any person who has a right to worship or to perform
any religious rite in a mosque, idgah, imambara, dargah, khan-
gah, maqbara, graveyard or any other religious institution con-
nected with the wakf or to participate in any religious or chari-~
table institution under the waktf;

(i) ‘the wakif and any descendant of the wakif and the muta-
walli;

(0. “prescribed”, except in Chapter वा, means prescribed by
tules made by the State Government;

(m) “regulations” means the regulations made by {the Board
under this Act;

(n) “Shia wakf” means a wakf governed by Shia law;

vie


3

(०) “Sunni wakf” means a waki governed by Sunni law;

(p) “Survey, Commissioner” means the Survey Commissioner of Wakt
appointed under sub-section (1) of section 4 and includes any Additional
or Assistant Survey Commissioners of Wakfs under sub-section (2) of
section 4;

=

— =

4 , (4) “Tribunal”, in relation to any area, means the Tribunal constituted
3 under sub-section (1) of section 83, having jurisdiction in relation to that
| area;

‘ (r) “wakf” means the permanent dedication by a person professing
Islam, of any movable or immovable property for any purpose recognised
by the Muslim law as pious, religious or charitable and includes—

+ (i) a wakf by user but such wakf shall not cease to be a wakf
by reason only of the user having ceased irrespective of the period of
such cesser;

(ii) “grants”, including mashrut-ul-khidmat for any purpose
recognised by the Muslim law as pious, religious or charitable; and

| (iii) a wakfalal-aulad to the extent to which the property is
dedicated for any purpose recognised by Muslim law as pious, reli-
gious or charitable,

and “wakf”’ means any person making such dedication;

} (s) “wakf deed” means any deed or instrament by which a wakf
has been created and includes any valid subsequent deed or instrument by
which any of the terms of the original dedication have been varied;

(४) “Wakf Fund” means « wakf fund formed under sub-section (1) of
section 77.

CHAPTER IL
SURVEY OF WAKES

4. (1) The State Government may, by notification in ihe Official Gazette, Prelimi-
appoint for the State a Survey Commissioner of Wakfs and as many Additional nary
जन ः zz or Assistant Survey Commissioners of Wakfs as may be necessary for the purpose survey
of making a survey of wakfs existing in the State at the date of the commence- _°f Wakts.
ment of this Act.

(2) All Additional and Assistant Survey Commissioners of Wakfs shall * 2
perform their functions under this Act under the general supervision and contro!
of the Survey Commissioner of Wakfs.

(3) The Survey Commissioner shall, after making such inquiry as he may
consider necessary, submit his report. in respect of wakfs existing at the date
of the commencement of this Act in the State or any part thereof, to the State
Government containing the following particulars, namely:—


6 of 1908.

Publica-
tion of
Hist of
wakfs,

eel

(a) the number of wakfs in the State showing the Shia wakfs
and Sunni wakfs separately;

(b) the nature and objects of each wakt;
(०) the gross income of the property comprised in each wakf;

(d) the amount of land revenue, cesses, rates and taxes payable
in respect of each wakf;

(e) the expenses incurred in the realisation of the income and
the pay or other remuneration of the mutawalli of each wakf; and

(f) such other particulars relating to each wakf as may be
prescribed.

(4) The Survey Commissioner shall, while making any inquiry, have
the. same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following matters, namely:—

(4) summoning and examining any witness;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(०) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;

(d) issuing commissions for the examination of any witness or
accounts;

(e) making any local inspection or local investigation;
(f) such other matters as may be prescribed.

(5) If, during any such inquiry, any dispute arises as to whether a
particular wakf is a Shia wakf or Sunni wakf and there are clear indi-
cations in the deed of wakf as to its nature, the dispute shall be decided
on the basis of such deed.

(6) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
direct the Survey Commissioner to make a second or subsequent survey
of wakf properties in the State and the provisions of sub-sections (2),
(3), (4) and (5) shall apply to such survey as they apply to a survey
directed under sub-section (1):

Provided that no such second or subsequent survey shall be made
until the exviry of a period of twenty years from the date on which the

report in relation to the immediately previous survey was submitted under
sub-section (3)

5. (1) On receipt of a report under sub-section (3) of section 4, the
State Goverment shall forward a copy of the same to the Board.

in the Official Gazette a list of Sunni wakf or
Shia wakfs in tho State, whether in existence at the commencement of
this Act or coming into existence thereafter. fo which the report relates,
and containing such other particulars as may he prescribed.

ar


™

3

6. (1) ६ any question arises whether a particular property specified
as wakf property in the list of wakfs is wakf property or not or whether
a wakf specified in such li v the Board or
the mutawalli of the wakf or any person interested therein may institute
a suit in a Tribunal for the decision of the question and the decision of
the Tribunal in respect of such matter shall be final:

Provided that no such suit shall be entertained by the Tribunal atrer
the expiry of one year from the date of the publication of the list of wakis.

Expianation.—For the purposes of this section and section 7, the
expression “any person interested therein”, shall, in relation to any
property specified as wakf property in the list of wakfs published aiter
the commencement of this Act, shall include also every person who,
though not interested in the wakf concerned, is interested in such pro-
perty and to whom a reasonable opportunity had been afforded to re-
present his case by notice served on him in that behalf during the course
of the relevant inquiry under section 4.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 0 pro-
ceeding under this Act in respect of any wakf shall be stayed by reason
only of the pendency of any such suit or of any appeal or other proceed-
ing arising out of such suit.

(3) The Survey Commissioner shall not be made a party to any suit
under sub-section (1) and no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding
shall lie against him in respect of anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules made there-
under.

(4) The list of wakfs shall, unless it is modified in pursuance of a
decision or the Tribunal under sub-section (1), be final and conclusive.

in a State, no suit or
ed in a court
sion (1)

(5) On and from the commencement of this Act
other legal proceeding shall be instituted or co
in that State in relation to any question referred to in sui-se

7. (1) If, after the commencement of this Act, 2 question arises,
whether a particular property specified as wakf pro in a list of
wakfs is wakf property or not, or whether a wakf specified in such list is
8 Shia wakf or 2 Sunni wakf, the Board or the muta-valli of the wakf,
or any person interested therein, may apply to the Tribunal having
jurisdiction in relation to such property, for the 0; on of the question
and the decision of the Tribuna thereon shall be final:

Provided that—

(a) in the case st the list of wakis relating to any part or ५
State and published after the commencement ef this Act no such ap-
plication shall be entertained after the expiry of one year from the
date of publication of the list of wakfs; and

(9) in the case of the list of wakfs rela to any part of 1%
State and published at any time within a period of one year imm:
ately preceding the commencement of this Act, such an application

Dispu-
tes re~
garding
wakfs,

Power
of Tri-
bunal te
deter-
mine
dispu-
tes:
regard-
ing
iwakfs,


=
of 0039 of
survey,

Establish-
ment and
constitu-
tion of
Central
Wakf
Council.

6

way be entertained by Tribunal within the period of one year
from such commencement:

Provided further that where any such question has been heard and
finally decided by a civil court in g suit insututed before such commence-
ment, the Tribunal shall not re-open such question,

(2) Except where the Tribunal has no jurisdiction by reason of the
Provisions of sub-section (5), no Proceeding under this section in respect
of any wakf shall be stayed by any court, tribunal or other authority by
weason only of the pendency of any suit, application or appeal or
other proceeding arising out of any such suit, application, appeal or other
proceeding,

(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall not be made a party to any
application under sub-section (1).

(4) The list of wakfs and where any such list is modified in pursu-
ance of a decision of the Tribunal under sub-section (1), the list as so
modified, shall be final.

(5) The Tribunal shall not have jurisdiction to determine any matter
which is the subject-matter of any suit or proceeding instituted or com-
menced in a civil court under sub-section (1) of section 6. before the
commencement of this Act or which is the subject-matter of any appeal
from the decree passed before such commencement in any such suit or
Proceeding or of any application ‘for revision or review arising out of
such suit, proceeding or appeal, as the case may be,

8. (1) The total cost of making a survey including the cost of publi-
cation of the list or lists of wakfs under this Chapter shall be borne by all
the mutawalli of the wakfs the net annual income whereof exceeds five
hundred rupees, in proportion to the net annual income accruing in the
State to such wakfs, such proportion being assessed by the Survey
Commissioner.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the deed or instrument
by which the wakf was created, any mutawalli may pay from the
ineome of the wakf any sum due from him under sub-section (1).

(3) Any sum due from a mutawelli under sub-section (1) may, on a
certificate issued by the State Government, be recovered from the pro-
perty comprised in the wakf in the same manner as an arrear of land
revenue,

CHAPTER, पा
Centra Waxr Counen.

9. (1) For the purpose of advising it, on matters concerning the
working of Boards and the due administration of waktfs, the Centra}
Government may. by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a
Council to be called the Central Wakr Council

(2) The Council shall consist of, —
(a) the Union Minister in charge of wakfs-ex officio Chairperson;

(5) the following members to be appointed by the Central Gov-
ernment from amongst Muslims, namely:—

(४) three persons to represent Muslim organisations having
all India character and national importance;

(#) four persons of national eminence of whom two shall



be ffom amongst persons having administrative and financial

expertise;

(iii) three Members of Parliament of whom two shall be
from the House of the People and one from the Council of
States; पे

(iv) chairpersons of three Boards by rotation;
(¥) two persons who have been Judges of the Supreme
Court or a High Court;
(vi) one advocate of national eminence;
(vii) one person to represent the mutawallis of the wakf hav-
ing a gross annual income of rupees five lakhs and above;
(viii) three persons who are eminent scholars in Muslim Law.
>(3) The term of office of, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of
their functions by, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among, members
of the Council shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Central
Government. .

10. (1) Every Board shall pay from its Wakf Fund annually to the Council
such contribution as is equivalent to one per cent. of the aggregate of the net
annual income of the wakfs in respect of which contribution is payable under
sub-section (1) of section 72:

Provided that where the Board, in the case of any particular wakf has
remitted under sub-section (2) of section 72 the whole of the contribution
payable to it under sub-section (1) of that section, then for calculating the con-
tribution payable to the Council under this section the net annual income of the
wakf in respect of which such remission has been granted shall not be taken
into account..

(2) All monies received by the Council under, sub-section (1) and all other
monies received by it as donations, benefactions and grants shall form a fund
to be called the Central Wakf Fund.

(8) Subject to any rules that may be made by the Central Government in
this behalf, the Central Wakf Fund shall be under the control of the Council and
may be applied for such purposes as the Council may deem fit.

11. (1) The Council shall cause to be maintained such books of account
and other books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as
may be prescribed by rules made by the Central Government.

(2) The accounts of the Council shall be audited and examined annually by
such auditor as may be appointed by the Central Government.

(3) The costs of the audit shall be paid from the Central Wakf Fund.

12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette. make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters,_
namely:—

(a) the term of office of, the procedure to be followed in the dis-
charge of their functions by, and the manner of filling casual vacancies
among, the members of the Council;

(6) control over. and application of the Central Wakf Fund;

(©) the form and manner in which accounts of the Council may be
ined.

Finance
of
Courtcil,

Accounts
and
Audit

Power of
Central
Govern-
ment to
make
rules,


8

(3) Every rule made by the Cemral / under this Chapter shall

be laid, as soon as may be ‘after it is made, before each House of Parliament,

while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised
in one session or in two oF yore successive sessions, and if, before the expiry

. of the session immediately following, the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree jn making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 80,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

CHAPTER IV

Esrasuisament OF Boarp AND THEIR FUNCTIONS

econ 13. (1) With effect from such date: as the State Government may, by
poration. notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be es-
tablished a Board of Wakis under such name as may be specified in the
notification. /

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if the Shia
wakis in any State constitute jn number more than fifteen pet cent. of all the
wakfs in the State or if the income of the properties of the Shia wakfs in the
State constitutes more than fifteen per cent. of the total income of properties
of all the wakfs in the State, the State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, establish a Board of Wakfs each for Sunni wakfs and for Shia.
wakfs under such names as may be specified in the notification.

(3) The Board shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and
a common seal with power to acquire and hold property and to transfer any
such property subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed.
and shall by the said name sue and be sued.

Composi 14. (1) The Board for 8 State and the Union territory of Delhi shall
tion of consist of—
Board.

(a) 8. Chairperson;

(b) one and not more than two members, as the State Government
may think fit, to be elected from each of the electoral colleges consisting
of—

(0) Muslim Members of Parliament from. the: State or, as the
case may be, the Union territory of Delhi,
(i) Muslim Members of the State Legislature,
(ii) Muslim Members of the Bar Council of the State, and
(iv) mutawallis of the wakfs having an annual income of rupees
one lakh and above:
(८) one and rot more than two members to be nominated by the
State Government representing eminent Muslim organisations;
(d) one and not more than two members to be nominated by the
State Government. each from recognised scholars in Islamic Theology;
(e) an officer of the State Government not below the rank of
Deputy Secretary.
(2) Election of the members specified in clause (b) of sub-section
(1) shall be held in accordance with the system of proportional represen-
tation by means of a single transferable vote, in such manner as may

prescribed:



Provided tha: where the number of Muslim Members of Parliament,
the State Legislature or the State Bar Council, as the case may be, is
only one, such iMuslim ‘Member shall be declared to have been elected on
the Board:

yrovided further that where there are no Muslim Members in any of
the categories mentioned in sub-clause (i) to (iii) of clause (b) of sub-
section (1), the ex-Muslim Members of Parliament, the State Legislature
or ex-member of the State Bar Council, as the case may be, shal] consti-
tute the electoral college. $ 1

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where the
State Government is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that
it is mot reasonably practicable to constitute an electoral college for any
of the categones mentioned in sub-clauses (i) to (ii) of clause (9) of sub-
section (1), tue State Government may 7 nvnate such persons as the
members of the Board as it deems fit.

(4) The number of elected members of the Board shall at, all times,
be more than the nominated members of the Board except as provided
under sub-section (3) .

_..@) Where there are Shia wakfs but no separate Shia Wakfs Board
exists, at 17: one of the members from the categories listed in sub-section

(1), shall be a Shia Muslim.

(6) In determining the number of Shia members or Sunni members
of the Board, the State Government shall have regard to the number and
value of Shia wakfs and Sunni wakfs to be administered by the Board and
app’ ointment of the members shall be made, so far as may be, in accordance
with such determination.

(7) In the case of the Union territory other than Delhi, the Board
shall consist of not less than three and not more than five members to be
appointed by the Central Government from amongst the categories of
persons specified in sub-section (1):

Provided that there shall be one mutawalli as the member of the-Board.

(8) Whenever the Board is constituted or re-constituted. the mémbers
of the Board present at a meeting convened for the purpose shall elect one
from amongst themselves as the Chairperson of the Board.

(2) The members of the Board shall be appointed by the State Gov-
ernment by notification in the Official Gazette.

15. The members of the Board shall hold office for a term of five years.

16, A person shall be disqualified for being appointed, or for conti-
seine as, a member of the Board if—

(a) he is not a Muslim and is less than twenty-one years of age;
(5) he is found to be a-person of unsound mind:

(c) he is an undischarged insolvent;

Term
of office,

Disqua-
lification
for being
appoint-
ed, or for
continu-
ing as, a
member
of the
Board.



Meetings
of the

Comunittees
of the

Resigna-
tion of
Chair-
person and
members.

Remove!
of Chair
person and
member.

Filling
of a

10

(4) he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpi-
tude and such conviction has not been reversed or he has not been
granted full pardon in respect of such offence;

(e) he has been on a previous occasion—
(0) removed from his office as a member or as 2 mutawalli, or

(i removed by an order of a competent court or tribunal
from any position of trust either for mismanagement or for cor-
ruption.

17. (1) The Board shall meet for the transaction of business at such
time and places as may be provided by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson, or in his absence. any member chosen by the
members from amongst themselves shall preside at a meeting of the Board.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, all questions which come
before any meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of votes
of the members present, and in the case of equality of votes, the Chair-
person or, in his absence. any other person presiding shall have a second
or casting vote.

18. (1) The Board may, whenever it considers necessary, establish
either generally or for a particular purpose or for any specified area or
areas committees for the supervision of wakfs.

(2) The constitution, functions and duties and the term of office of
such committees shall be determined from time to time by the Board:

Provided that it shall not be necessary for the members of such,
committees to be members of the Board.

19. The Chairperson or any other member may resign his office by
writing under his hand addressed to the State Government:

Provided that the Chairperson or the member shall continue in office ,
until the appointment of his successor is notified in the Official Gazette.

20. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official.
Gazette, remove the Chairperson of the Board or any member thereof if
he—

(a) is or becomes subject to any disqualifications specified in
section 16; or

(b) refuses to act or is incapable of acting or acts in a man-
ner which the State Government. after hearing any explanation
that he may offer, considers to be prejudicial to the interests of
the wakfs; or

(c) fails in the opinion of the Board, to attend three consecutive
meetings of the Board, without sufficient excuse.

(2) Where the Chairperson of the Board is removed under sub-sec-
tion (1), he shall also cease to be a member of the Board.

21. When the seat of a member becomes vacant by his removal, re-
signation, death or otherwise, a new member shall be appointed in his
place and such member shall hold office so long as the member whose



pat

he fills would have been entitled to hold office, if such vacancy had
not occurred.

22. No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid by reason
only of the existence of any vacancy amongst its members or any defect
in the constitution thereof.

23. (1) There shall be 2 Chief Executive Officer of the Board who
shall be 2 Muslim and shell be sppointed by the State Government, in
consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official Gazette.

(2) The =m of office and other conditions of service of the Chief
Executive बीए shall be such as may be prescribed.

(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall be ex officio Secretary of the
cord ae stall be under the administrative control of the Board.

DE @) Whe Board shall have the assistance of such number of offi-
स्का wed ether employees as may be necessary for the efficient perfor-
eemee @f Ge Semctions under this Act, details thereof shall be determined
bp See Beerd & consultation with the State Government.

‘The appointment of officers and other employees, their term of
conditions of service shall be such as may be provided by

\
25. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the rules made
thereunder and the directions of the Board, functions of the Chief Exe-
eutive Officer shall include—

(a) investigating the nature and extent of wakfs and wakf pro-
perties and calling whenever necessary, an inventory of wakf
properties and calling, from time to time, for accounts, retu'ns and
information from mutawallis;

(0) inspecting or causing inspection of wakf properties and
account, records, deeds or documents relating thereto;

(c) doing generally of such acts as may be necessary for the
control, maintenance and superintendence of wakfs.

(2) In exercising the powers of giving directions under sub-section (1)
in respect of any walf, the Board shall act in conformity with the direc-
tions by the wakif in the deed of the wakf, the purpose of wakf and
such usage and customs of the wakf as are sanctioned by the school of
Muslim law to which the wakf belongs.

(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Chief Exe-
cutive Officer shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may
be assigned to him or delegated to him under this Act.

‘Vacancies,
etc., not
to invali-
date Pro
ceedings
of the
Board.
Appoint.
ment of
Chie
Executive
Officer
and his
term of
Office and
other con-
ditions of
service,
Officers
and other
employees
of the
Board,

Duties

powers
of Chief
Executive

rr rn Kn a अंक 9 8 30८ अब 5 अक ड पक


an

Powers of 26. Where the Chief Executive Officer considers that an order or reso-

Chiet jution passed by the Board—
Executive 3 हु ea
Officer in (@), has not been passed in accordance wi 3
onan eee (©) is im excess of or is an abuse of the powers conferred on the
resolu- Board by or under this Act or by any other law; or
ions of
s oo (c) if implemented, is likely to—

(४) cause financial loss to the Board or to the concerned wakr
or fo the wakfs generally, or

(४) lead to a riot or reach of peace; or
(६६) cause danger to human life, health or safety; or

along with his objections to the order or resolution, and the decision of the
State Government thereon shall be final.

Delega- 27. The Board may, by a general or Special order in writing, dele.

tion of Sate to the Chairperson, any other member, the secretary or any other

Powers officer or servant Of the Board or any area committee, subject to such

Hae conditions and limitations as may be specified in the said order, such of
i its powers and duties under this Act, as 1: may deem necessary,

Chief 28. (1) Subject to the Provisions of this Act and of the rules made

1 अल thereunder, the Chief Executive Officer May exercise all or any of the
gre Powers conferred on him by or under this Act with the previous approval

powers of the Board through the Commissioner of the — division
through or the Collector of the district in which the concerned wakf
Collec. Property is situated or through any other Gazetted Officer whom he may
tors, eic,

appoint for such purpose and may, from time to time, delegate any of his

powers: to any such Commissioner of the division or Collector or any other

Gazetted Officer and may, at any time. revoke the delegations so. made
by him.

(2) Where any delegation of powers is made by the Chiet Executive
Officer under sub-section (1), the person to whom such delegation is made
may exercise those powers in the same manner and +
as if they have been conferred on him
of delegation,

o the same extent
directly by this Act and not by way

Powers 29. The Chief Executive Officer OF any officer of the Board duly autho-

of Chieg tised by him in. this behalf shall, subject to such conditions and Testrictions

eee as may be prescribed and subject to the Payment of such fees as may he

ee, leviable under any law for the time being in force, be entitled at ay reason- ~
records, able time to Mspect, in any public Office, any records, registers or other

registers, documents relating to a wakf or movable or immovable Properties which are

Ste. wakf properties or are claimed to be wakf properties,

Tnspee 30. (1) The Board may allow inspection of its proceedings or other

tion of records in its custody and issue conies of the Sams ons-bayment:| of such

records,

fees and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.



3

(2) All copies issued under this section shall be certified by the Chief
Executive Officer of the Board in the manner provided in section 76
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

(3) The powers conferred on the Chief Executive Officer by sub-
section (2) may be exercised by such other officer or officers of the Board as
may cither generally or specially be authorised in this behalf by the Board.

31. It is hereby declared that the offices ef the Chairperson or mem-
bers of a Board shall not be disqualified and shall be deemed never to have
peen disqualified for being chosen as, or for being, a Member of Parliament.

32. (1) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, the
general superintendence of all wakfs in a State shall vest in the Board
established or the State; and it shall be the duty of the Board so to exer-
cise its powers under this Act as to ensure thai the wakfs under its
superintendence are properly maintained, controlled and administered and
the income thereof is duly applied to the objects and for the purposes for
which such wakfs were created or intended:

Provided that in exercising its powers under this Act in respect of any
wakf, the Board shall act in conformity with the directions of the wakf,
the purposes of the wakf and any usage or custom of the wakf sanctioned
by the school of Muslim law to which the wakf belongs.

Explanation.—For the removal of doubts. it is hereby declared that in
this sub-section, “wakf” includes a wakf in relation to which any scheme
has been made by any court of law, whether before or after the commence-
ment of this Act.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the
functions of the Board shall be—
(a) to maintain a record containing information’ relating to the

origin, income, object and beneficiaries of every wakf;

(b) to ensure that the income and other property of wakfs are
applied to the objects and for the purposes for which such wakfs
were intended or created;

(०) to give directions for the administration of wakfs;
(d) to settle schemes of management for a wakt:

Provided that no such settlement shall be made without giving the
parties affected an opportunity of being heard; ;
(e) to direct—

(i) the utilisation of the surplus income of a wakf  consis-
tent with the objects of a wakf;

(ii) in what manner the income of a wakf, the objects of
which are not evident from any written instrument, shall be utilized

Preyen-

tion of

disquali- 1
fication

for

member-

ship vi

Parlja-

ment.

Powers
and
functions
of the
Board,


=

(di) in any case where any object of wakf has ceased to
exist or has become incapable of achievement, that so much of
the income of the wakf as was Previously appiled to that object
shall be applied to any other object, which shall be similar, or
nearly similar or to the original object or for the benefit of the
Poor or for the purpose of promotion of knowledge and learning
in the Muslim community:

Provided that no direction shall be given under this clause with-
out giving the parties affected an Opportunity of being heard.

Explanation —For the Purposes of this clause, the powers of the
Board shall be exercised —

(४) in the case of a Sunni wakf, by the Sunni members of
the Board only; and ts

(i) in the case of a Shia wakf, by the Shia members of the
Board only:

Provided that where having regard to the number of the Sunni
or Shia members in the Board and other circumstances, it appears to
the Board that the power should not be exercised by such members
only, it may co-opt such other Muslims being Sunnis or Shias, as the
case may be, as it thinks fit, to be temporary members of the Board
for exercising its powers under this clause:

(f) to scrutinise and approve the budgets submitted by muta-
wallis' and to arrange for the auditing of account of wakfs;

(g) to appoint and remove mutawallis in accordance with the
provisions of this Act;

(४) to take measures for the Tecovery of lost properties of any
wakf;

(7) to institute and defend suits and proceedings relating to wakfs;

(/) to sanction any transfer of immovable Property of a wakf by
way of sale, gift, mortgage, exchange or lease, in accordance with the
provisions of this Act:

Provided that no such sanction shall be given unless at least two-
thirds of the members of the Board vote in favour of such transaction;

(k) to administer the Wakf Fund;

(0) to call for such Tetums, statistics, accounts and other informa-
tion from the mutawallis with respect to the wakf property as the Board

may. from time to time, require;

(m) to imspect, or cause inspection of, wakf Properties, accounts,
tecords or deeds and documents relating thereto;

(४) to investigate and determine the nature and extent of wakf and
wakf property, and to cause, whenever necessary, ४ sutvey of such wakf

Property;



5

(०) generally do all such acls as may be necessary for the control,
maintenance and administration of wakts.,

(3) Where the Board has settled any scheme of management under clause
(@) or given any direction under clause (e) of sub-section (2), any person
{interested in the wakf or affected by such settlement or direction may institute
a suit in a Tribunal for setting aside such settlement or directions and the deci-
sion of the Tribunal thereon shail be final.

(4) Where the Board is satisfied that any wakf land, which is a wakf
property, offers a feasible potential for development as a shopping centre,

market, housing flats and the like, it may seryo upon the mutawalli of the,

concemed wakf a notice requiring him within such time, but not less than

sixty days, as may be specified in the notice, to convey its decision whether
he is willing to execute the development works specified in the notice.

(5) On consideration of the reply, if any, received to the notice issued
under sub-section (4), the Board, if it is satisfied that the mutawalli is not
‘willing or is not capable of executing the works required to be executed in
terms of the notice, it may, with the prior approval of the Government, take
over the property, clear it of any building or structure thereon, which, in the
opinion of the Board is necessary for execution of the works and execute such
works from Wakf funds or from the finances which may be raised on the secu-
rity of the properties of the wakf concerned. and control and manage the
properties till such time as all expenses incurred by the Board under this
section, together with interest thereon, the expenditure on main-
tenance of such works and other legitimate charges incurred on the
property are recovered from the income derived from the property:

Provided that the Board shall compensate annually the mutawalli of the
concerned wakf to the extent of the average annual net income derived from
the property during the three years immediately preceding the taking over of
the property by the Board.

(6) After all the expenses as enumerated in sub-section (5) have been.
recouped from the income of the developed properties, the developed pro-
perties shall be handed over to mutawalli of the concerned wakf. _

33, (1) With a view to examining whether, by reason of any failure or
negligence on the part of a mutawalli in the performance of his executive or
adminsitrative duties, any loss or damage has been caused to any wakf or wakf
property, the Chief Executive Officer with the prior approval of the Board,
¢ither himself or any other person authorised by him in writing in this behalf,
may inspect all movable and immovable properties. which are wakf properties,
and all records, correspondences, plans, accounts and other documents relating
thereto.

(2) Whenever any such inspection. 2s referred to in sub-section (70) is,
made, the concerned mutawalli and all officers and other employees working
under him and every person connected with the administration of the woke,
shall extend to the person making such inspection, all such assistance and
facilities as may be necessary and reasonably required by him to carry out
such inspection, and shall also produce for inspection any movable property
or documents relating to the wakf as may be called for by the person making
the inspection and furnish to him such information relating to the wakf as
may be required by him.

Powers

of inspec-
tion by
Chief
Executive
Officer or
persons
authorised
by him.



Recovery
of the
ammount

.determi-

ned
under

section 33,

Condi-
tional
attach-
ment by /
‘Tribunal

[6

(3) Where, after any such inspection, it appears that the concerned muta-
walli or any officer or other employee who is or was working under him had
mis-appropriated, misapplied or fraudulently retained, any money or other
wakf property, or had incurred irregular, unauthorised or improper expendi-
ture from the funds of the wakf, the Chief Executive Officer nay,
after giving the mutawalli or the person concerned a reasonable opportunity
of showing cause why an order for the recovery of the amount or property,
should not be passed against him and after considering such explanation, if
any, as such person may furnish, determine the amount or the property, which
has been mis-appropriatéd, misapplied or fraudulently retained, or the amount
of the irregular, unauthorised or improper expenditure incurred by such
person, and make an order directing such person to make payment of the
amount so determined and to restore the said property to the wakf, within
such time as may be specified in the order.

( A mutawalli or other person aggrieved by such order may, within
thirty days of the receipt by him of the order, appeal to the Tribunal:

Provided that no such appeal shall be entertained by the Tribunal unless
the appellant first deposits with the Chief Executive Officer the amount which
has been determined under sub-sectoin (3) as being payable by the appellant
and the Tribunal shall have no power to make any order staying pending the
disposal of the appeal, the operation of the order made by the Chief Execu-
tive Officer.under sub-section (3).

(5) The Tribunal may, after taking such evidence as it may think fit,
confirm, reverse or modify the order made by the Chief Executive Officer,
under sub-section (3) or may remit, either in whole or in part, the amount
specified in such order and may make such orders as to costs as it may think
appropriate in the circumstances of the case.

(6) The order made by the Tribunal under sub-section (5) shall be
final,

34, Where any mutawalli or other person who has been ordered, whether
under sub-section (3) or sub-section (5) of section 33, to make any payment
or to restore the possession of any property, omits or fails to make such pay-
ment or restoration within the time specified in such order, the Chief Executive
Officer, with the prior approval of the Board shall, take such!
steps as he may think fit for the recovery of possession of the property afore-
said and shall also send a certificate to the Collector of the district in which
the property of such mutawalli or other person is situate, stating therein the
amount that has been determined by him or by the Tribunal, as the case may
be, under section 33, as being payable by such mutawalli or other person, and,
thereupon, the Collector shall recover the amount specified in such certificate
as if it were an arrear of land revenue and on the recovery of such amount,
pay the same to the Chief Executive Officer, who shall, on receipt thereof,
credit the amount to the funds of the concerned wakf.

35. (1) Where the Chief Executive Officer is satisfied that the mutawalli
or any other person who has been ordered under sub-section (3) or sub-
section (5) of section 33 to make any payment, with intent to defeat or delay
the execution of the said order,—

(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property: or



7

(8) is about to remove the whole or any pati of his property from

the jurisdiction of the Chief Executive Officer,
he may, with the prior approval of the Board, apply to the Tribunal for the
conditional attachment of the said property or such part thereof, as he may
think necessary. 5

(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall, unless the Tribunal otherwise dir-
ects, specify in the application the property required to be attached and the
estimated value thereof.

(3) The Tribunal may direct the mutawalli or the person concerned, as
the case may be, within a time to be fixed by it, either to furnish security, in
such sum as may be specified in the order, to produce and place at the dispo-
sal of the Tribunal when required, the said property or the value of the same
or such portion thereof as may be suflicient to satisfy the amount specified in
the certificate referred to in section 34, or to appear and show cause why he
should not furnish such security.

(4) The Tribunal may also in the order direct the conditional attachment 7
of the whole or any portion of the property so specified . \

(5) Every attachment made under this section shall be made in accord-
ance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, as if it were an
order for attachment made under the provision of the said Code.

CHAPTER V |
REGISTRATION OF WAKFS i

36. (1) Every wakf, whether created before or after the commencement * Registra-
of this Act, shall be registered at the office of the Board. eck

(2) Application for registration shall be made by the mutawalli:

Provided that such applications may be made by the wakif or his des-

cendants or a beneficiary of the wakf or any Muslim belonging to the sect
to which the wakf belongs.

(3) An application for registration shall be made in such form and man-
ner and at such place as the Board may by regulation provide and shall con-
tain following particulars: —

(०) a description of the wakf properties sufficient for the dentifica-
«tion. thereof;

(6) the gross annual income from such properties;

(c) the amount of land revenue, cesses. rates and tdxes annually
payable in respect of the wakf properties;

(d) an estimate of the expenses annually incurred in the realisa- oe
tion of the income of the wakf properties;

(९) the amount set apart under the wakf for—

(i) the salary of the mutawalli and allowanes to the indivi-
duals;

{ii) purely religious putposes;
(iii) charitable purposes; and



Register
of wakfs,

Powers

Board to
appoint
Executive
Officer.

|

(iv) any other purposes;
@ any other particulars provided by the Board by regulations.

(2) Every such application shail be accompanied by a copy of the wakf
deed or if no such deed has been executed or a copy taereof cannot be ob-
tained, shali contain full Particulars, as far as they are known to the appli-
cant, of the origin, nature and objecis of the wakf.

(5) Every application made under sub-section (2) shall be signed and
verified by the applicant in the manner Provided in the Code of Civil Proced-
ure, 1908 for the Signing and verification of pleadings.

(6) The Board may require ihe applicant to supply any further particu-
Jars or formation that it may consider necessary .

@ On Teceipt of aa application for registration, the Board may,
before the cegistration of the wakf make such inquiries as it thinks fit in
respect of the genuineness and validity of the applicatiog and correctness

(8) In the case of wakfs created before the commencement of this
Act, every application for registration shall be Made, within three months
from such commencement and in the case of walks created after such
commencement, within three mouths from the date of the creation of the
wakf; 4

Provided that where there is no board at the time of creation of a
wakf, such application will be made within three months from the date of
establishment of the Board.

37. The Board shail maintain register of waktfs which shall contain
in respect of each wakt Copies of the wakf deeds, when available and the
following particulars, namely:—

(a) the class of the wald;

(9) the name of the mutawalli;

(०) the rule of succession to the office of mutawalli under the
wakf deed or by custom or by usage;

(d) particulars of all wakf Properties and all title deeds and
documents relating thereto;

(e) particulars of the scheme of administration and the scheme
of expenditure at the time of registration;

(f) such other particulars as may be provided by regulations.

38. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained jn this Act, the Board
may, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary so to do in the interests
of the wakf, appoint on whole-time or Part-time basis or in an honorary

capacity, subject to such conditions as may be provided by regulations, an _

Executive Officer with such supporting staff as it Considers necessary
for any wakf having a gross annual income of not less than five lakhs
rupees:

5S of 1908,



of 1908.

1?

Provided that the person chosen for appointment should be a person
professing Islam.

(2) Every Executive Officer appointed under sub-section (1) shall
exercise such powers and discharge such duties as pertain only to the
administration of the property of the wakf for which he has been appbdini-
ed and shall exercise those powers and discharge those duties under the
direction, control and supervision of the Board:

Provided that the Executive Officer who is appointed for a wakf having,
a, gross, annual.income of not less than five lakhs rupees shal] ensure

that;the: budget of the wakf is submitied. the accounts of the wakf are.

regularly maintained, and the yearly statement of accounts are | sub-
mitted within such time as the Board may specify,

(3) While exercising his powers and discharging his functions under
sub-section (2), the Executive Officer shal] not interfere with any reli-
gious duties or any usage or custom of the wakf sanctioned by the Muslim
Jaw.

(4) The salaries and allowances of the Executive Officer and his staff
shall be fixed by the Board and in fixing the quantum of such salary the
Board shall have due regard to the income’ of the wakf, the extent and
nature of the'duties of the Executive Officer and shall also ensure that the
amounts of such salaries and allowances are not disproportionate to the
income of the wakf and do not operate as an unnecessary financial burden

on it,

(5) The salaries and allowances of the Executive Officer and his staff
shall be’paid by the Board from the Wakf Fund and, if the wakf generates
any additional income as a result of appointment of the Executive Officer,
the Board may claim reimbursement of amounts spent on the salaries and
allowances from the fund of the wakf concerned

(6) The Board may, for sufficient reasons, and after giving to the
Executive Officer or a member of his staff, a reasonable opportunity of
being heard, ‘suspend, remove or dismiss the Executive Officer or a
member of his staff from his post.

(7) Any Executive Officer or a member of his staff who is aggrieved
by any order of removal or dismissa} made under sub-section (6) may.
within thirty days from, the date of communication of the order, prefer
an appeal against the order to the Tribunal and the Tribunal may, after
considering such representation as the Board may. make in the matter,
and_after giving a reasonable opportunity to the Executive Officer or a
member of his staff of being heard, confirm, modify or reverse the order.

39, (1) The Board shall, if it is satisfied that the objects or any part
thereof, of a wakf have ceased to exist, whether such cesser took place
before or after the commencement of this Act, cause an inquiry to be
held py the Chief Executive Officer, in the prescribed manner, to as-
certain the properties and funds pertaining to such wakf.

(2) On the receipt of the report of inquiry of the Chief Executive
Officer, the Board shall pass an order—

(a) specifying the property and funds of such wakf,

Powers-
of

Board in
telation
to wakfs
which
have
ceased
10 exist.

2५223 ee «Se कु अल


20

(b) directing that any property or funds pertaining to such waki
| i which have been recovered shall be applied or utilised for the re-
novation of any wakf property and where there is no need for
i making any such renovation or where utilisation of the funds for
|। such renovation is not possible, be appropriated, to any of the put-
i, poses specific in sub-clause (iii) of clause (९) of sub-section (2) of
। section 32.

(8) The Board may, if it has reason to believe that any building
or other place which was being used for religious purpose or instruction
or for charity has, whether before or after the commencement of this
Act, ceased to be used for that purpose, make an application to the Tri-
bunal for an order directing the recovery of possession of such building
or other place.

(4) The Tribunal may, if it is satisfied, after making such inquiry as
| it may think fit, that such building or other place—

(a) is wakf property; { - 4%

(b) has not been acquired under any law for the time being
in force relating to acquisition of land or is not under any process
of acquisition under any such law, or has not vested in the State
Government under any law for the time being in force relating to
land reforms; and \

(c) is not in the occupation of any person who has been autho-
rised by or under any law for the time being in force to occupy
such building or other place, make an order—

(i) directing the recovery of such building or place from any
person who may be in unauthorised possession thereof, and

(ii) directing that such property, building or place be used
for religious purpose or instruction as before, or if such use is
not possible, be utilised for any purpose specified in sub-clause
(iii) of clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 32.

Das 40. (1) The Board may itself collect information regarding any |
ifa ‘

00०1) perty which it has reason to believe to be wakf property and if any
awake question arises whether a particular property is wakf property or not
property, or whether a wakf is a Sunni wakf or a Shia wakf it may, after making such

inquiry as it may deem fit, decide the question.
(2) The decision of the Board on a question under sub-section (1) shall, ~
unless revoked or modified by the Tribunal, be final.

(3) Where the Board has any reason to believe that any property of
any trust or society registered in pursuance of the Indian Trusts Act,
1882 or under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or under anv other
Act, is wakf property, the Board may notwithstanding anything con-
tained in such Act. hold an inauiry in tegard ty such property and if after
such inquiry the Board is satisfied that such property is wakf property,


2 of 18
21०1;

2

call upon the trust or society, as the case may be, either to register
such property under this Act as wakf property or show cause why such
property should not be so registered: :

Provided that in all such cases, notice of the action proposed to be
taken under this sub-section shall be given to the authority by whom
the trust or society had been registered. पर

(4) The Board shall, after duly considering such cause as may be
shown in pursuance of notice issued under  sub-sectioan (3), pass such
orders as it may think fit and the order so made by the Board, shall be
final, unless it is revoked or modified by a Tribunal.

41: The Board may direct a mutawalli to apply for the registration
of a wakf of to supply any information regarding a wakf or may _ itself
cause the wakf to be registered or may at any time amend the register
of wakfs.

42. (1) In the case of any change in the management of a registered
wakf due to the death or retirement or removal of the mutawalli, the
incoming mutawalli shall forthwith, and any other person may notify
the change to the Board.

(2) In the case of any other change in any of the particulars men-
tioned in section 36, the mutawalli shall, within three months from the
occurrence of the change, notify such change to the Board.

43. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, where any
wakf has been registered before the commencement of this Act, under
any law for the time being in force, it shall not be necessary to register
the wakf under the provisions of this Act and any such registration
made before such commencement shall be deemed to be a registration
made under this Act.

CHAPTER VI

MAINTENANCE OF ACCOUNTS OF WAKFS

44. (/) Every mutawalh “f a wakf shall, in every year prepare, in such
form and at such time as ‘ay be prescribed, a budget in respect of the
financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and expendi-+
ture curing that financial year,

(2) Every such budget shall be submitted by the mutawalli atleast
ninety days before the beginning of the financial year to the Board and
shall make adequate provision for the following: —

(i) for carrying out the objects of the wakf;

(ii) for the maintenance and preservation of the wakf property;

(iit) for the discharge of all liabilities and subsisting commitments
binding on the wakf under this Act or any other law for the time
being in force.

(3) The Board may give such directions for making alterations, omis<
sions or additions in the budget as it may deem fit, consistent with the
objects of the wakf and the provisions of this Act.

Power

10 case.
registra-
tion of
wakf and
to amend
register.
Change in
the man-
agement
of wakfs
to be
notified.

Wakfs
registered
before the
commoence-
ment of
this Act
deemed

10 be

registered.

Budget.

aS ee

irre क््ताा्ााअ्ाोा इस सन सा नि आस जा ये न न चना |


eI
tion of
budget
of
wakfs
under
direct

ment
of the
Board,

Submis-
sion of
Accounts
of wakfs.

manage-

' 22
(4) If in the course of the financial year the mutawalli finds it neces.
“sary to ‘modify the’ provisions’ made in the budget in regard“to the reveipt
८ or-ta'the distribution “of ‘the amounts to: be expended under the different
heads, he may submit to the Board a supplementary or @ revised “badger
and, the -Provisions of sub-section (७) shall, as far as may be, apply’ to! ‘such
«Supplementary or revised budget. Bate.

45. (1) The Chief Executive Officer shail prepare, in such form and at
such time as-may be Prescribed, a budget in respect of the financial year next
ensuing showing the estimated receipts and expenditure for each of the wakfs.
under the direct management of the Board, showing therein’ the estimated f
ceipts and expenditure and submit it to the Board for its approval, ae

5 --(2) While submitting the budget under sub-section (1), the Chief Execu-
tive Officer shall also Prepare statement giving details of the increase, if any,
in the income of each wakf under the direct Management of the Board and
the steps which have been. taken for its better management and the results

accruing therefrom during the year.

(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall keep regular accounts and be res~
Ponsible for the proper management of every wakf under the direct manage~
ment of the Board.

“(4 Every budget submitted by the Chief Executive Officer under sub-
section (1) shall comply with the requirements of section 46 and, for this pur-
Pose, references therein to the mutawalli of the wakf shall be construed as pre-
teferences to the Chief Executive Officer,

(5) The audit of accounts of every wakf under the direct management of
the Board shall be undertaken by the State Examiner of Local Funds or any
other, officer appointed by the State Government for this Purpose, irrespective
‘ofthe income of the wakf.

(6) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 47 and the pro-
visions of sections 48 and 49 shail, in so fat as they are not inconsistent with
the provisions of this section, apply to the audit of accounts referred’ to in
this section. f a

(7) where any wakf is under the direct management of the Board,
such administrative charges as may be specified by the Chief Executive
Officer shall be payable by the wakf to the Board:

Provided that the Chief Executive Officer shall not collect more than ten
Per cent. of the gross annual income of the wakf under the direct manage~
ment of the Board as administrative charges .

46. (1) Every mutawalli shal! keep regular accounts.

(2) Before the Ist day of May next, foliowing the date on which the ap-
plication referred to in section 36 has been madé and thereafter’ before the
Ist day’ of May in every year, every mutawalli ~ of a wakf © ‘shall
prepare and furnish to the Board a full and true statement of accounts; in _
such form and containing such particulars as may be’ provided by-regulations
by the Board, of all moneys received or expended by the mutawalli on behalf
of the wakf during the period of twelve months ending on the 31st day of
March, or, as the case may be, during that portion of the said period during
which the provisions of this Act, have been applicable to ‘the wakf:

- . Provided that the date on which the annual accounts are to be closed may
be varied at the discretion of the Board.



et

#23,

sci (41-Q) The accounts of wakfs submitted to the Board usider section
346; shall. be ‘audited and’ examined in the following mabner, namely:—

(a) in the cast of a wakt having no income or a net annual
income not exceeding ten thousand rupees, the submission of a state-
ment of accounts shal] be a sufficient compliance with the provisions

of section 46 and the accounts of two per cent of such wakfs shall be
audited annually by an auditor appointed by the Board

(0) the accounts of the wakf having net annual income exceeding ten
thousand rupees: shall be audited annually, or at such other intervals as
may be prescribed, by ari auditor appointed by the Board from out of the
panel of auditors prepared by the State Government and while drawing
up such panel of auditors, the State Government shal] specify the scale
scale of remuneration of auditors:

(c) the State Government may, at any time cause the account of any
wakf audited by the State Examiner of Local Funds छः by any ‘other
Officer designated for that purpose by that State Govertiment; —

(2) The auditor shall submit his report to the Board and the report of the
auditor shall, among other thnigs, specify all cases of irregular, illegal or im-
proper expenditure or of failure to recover money or other property caused by
neglect or misconduct and any other matter which the auditor considers it
necessary to report; and the report shall also contain the name of any person
who, in the opinion of the auditor, is responsible for ‘such expenditure or
failure and the auditor shall in every such case certify the amount of such ex-
penditure or loss as due from such person. >

(3) The cost of the audit of the accounts of a wakf shall -bé met — from
the funds of that wakf:

Provided that the remuneration of the auditors appointed’ from out of
the panel drawn by the State Government in relation to wakfs having a net
annual income of more than fen, thousand rupees but less than fifteen thousand
rupees shall be paid in accordance with the scale of remuneration specified by
the State Government under clause (c) of sub-section (7): i Py a

Provided further that where the audit of the accounts of any wakf is made
by the State Examiner of Local Funds or any other officer designated by the
State Government in this behalf, the cost of such audit shall not exceed one
and a half per cent, of the net annual income of such wakf and such costs
shall be met from the funds of the wakfs concerned.



) | का

Board to
Pass
orders on
auditor's
report.

Sums
certified
to be
due re-
coverable
as
arrears
vfland
revenue.

Duties of
muta-
wali.

24

48. (7) The Board shall examine the auditor’s report, and may call for
the explanation of any person in regard to any matter mentioned therein, and
shall pass such orders as it thinks fit including orders for the Tecovery of the
amount certified by the auditor under sub-section (2) of section 47.

(2) The mutawalli or any other person aggrieved by any order made
by the Board may, within thirty days of the teceipt by him of the order,
apply to the Tribunal to modify or set aside the order and the Tri-
bunal may, after taking such evidence as it may think necessary, confirm
or modify the order or remit the amount so certified, either in whole or
in part, and may also make such order as to costs as it may think appro-
priate in the circumstances of the case.

(3) No -application made under sub-section (2) shall be entertained
by the Tribunal unless the amount certified by the auditor under  sub-
section (2) of section 47 has first been deposited in the Tribunal and the
Tribunal shall not have any Power to stay the operation of the order
made by the Board under sub-section (1).

(4) The order made by the Tribunal under sub-section (2) shall be
final.

(5) Every amount for the recovery of which any order has ‘been made
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall, where such amount remains
unpaid, be recoverable in the manner Specified in section 34 or section
35 as if the said order were an order for the recovery of any amount
determined under sub-section (3) of section 35.

49. (1) Every sum certified to be due from any person by an auditor
in his rcport under section 47 unless such certificate is modified or can-
celled by an order of the Board or of the Tribunal made under section 48,
and eyvcry sum due on a modified certificate shall be paid by such person
within sixty days after the service of a demand for the same issued by the
Board.

(2) If such payment is not made in accordance with the provisions
of sub-section (1), the sum payable may, on a certificate issued by the
Board after giving the person concerned an Opportunity of being heard,
be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of Jand revenue.

50. It shall be the duty of every mutawalli—

(a) to carry out the directions of the Board in accordance with
the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder;

(6) to furnish such returns and supply such information or parti-
culars as may from time to time be required by the Board in accor-_
dance with the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made _
thereunder;

(c) to allow inspection of wakf properties, accounts or records
ur deeds and documents relating thereto;

= (d) to discharge all public dues; and

(e) to do any other act which he is lawfully required to do by or
under this Act.

|
|


25

51. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained im the wakf deed, “any gift,
sale. or exchange mortgage of any immovable property which is wakf
property, shall be void unless such gift, sale. exchange or mortgage is effected
with the prior sancticn of the Board:

Provided that no mosque, dargah or khangah shall be gifted, sold, ex-
changed or mortgaged except in accordance with any law for the time being in
force. स्‍

(2) The Board may, after publishing in the Official Gazette, the  par-
ticulars relating to the transaction referred to in sub-section (J) and ine
viting any objections and suggestions with respect thereto and considering
all objections and suggestions, if any, that may be received by it from the
concerned mutawalli or any other person  jnterseted in the wakf, accord
sanction to such transaction if it is of opinion that such transaction is—

(i) necessary or beneficial to the wakf:
(ii) consistent with the objects of the wakf:

(iii) the consideration thereof is reasonable and adequate:
Provided that the sale of any property sanctioned by the Board shall

be effected by public auction and shall be subject to confirmation by the
Board within such time as may be prescribed:

Provided further that the Tribunal may, on the application of the
aggrieved mutawalli or other person, for reasons to be recorded by it in
writing, permit such sale to be made otherwise than by public auction, if it
is of opinion that it is necessary so to do in the interest of the wakf.

(3) The utilisation or investment of the amount realised by the sale or
exchange mortgage of any property shall be made by the mutawalli subject
to the approval of the Board, and where any amount has been raised by
mortgage of any such property, the mutawalli or other person shall make
repayment of the mortgage-debt and obtain a discharge of the mortgage-debt
from the mortgage within such reasonable time as the Board may specify.

(4) Every approval given by the Board under sub-section (3) shall be
communicated to the mutawalli and shall also be published in the manner
prescribed.

(5) The mutawalli or any other person having an interest in the wakf
who is aggrieved by the decision given under sub-section (3), may, within
ninety days from the date of communication to him of such decision or the
publication of the decision, as the case may be, prefer an appeal to the Tri-
bunal against such decision, and, thereupon, the Tribunal may, after giving
the appellant and the Board, a reasonable opportunity of being heard. con-
firm, modify or set aside such decision.

52. (1) If the Board is satisfied, after making any inquiry in such
manner as may be prescribed, that any immovable property of a watf
entered as such in the register of wakf maintained under section 36, has been
transferred without the previous sanction of the Board in contravention of
the provisions of section 51, it may send a requisition to the Collector with-
in whose jurisdiction the property is situate to obtain and deliver possession
of the property to it.

(2) On receipt of a requisition under sub-section (1), the Collector
shall pass an order directing the person in possession of the property to
deliver the property to the Board within a period of thirty .days from the
date of the service of the order.

Aliena-
tion of
wakf
ptoperty.
without
sanction
of Board
to be
void,

Recovery
of wakt
property

“trans-
ferred in
contra-
vention of
section 51.



Restric-
tion on
purchass
of pro-
Perty on
behalf of
अति,

Removal
of encro-
achment
from
wakf
Pro-
perty.

26°
. (3), Every: order passed under sub-section’ (2) shall be served—

(०) by giving or tendering the order, or by sending it by post to the
person for whom it is intended; or

(b) if such person cannot be found, by affixing the order on some

conspicuous part of his last known place of abode or business, or by giving:
or tendering the order to some adult male member or servant of his

family or by causing it to be affixed on some conspicuous part of the |

property to which it relates:

Provided that where the person on whom the order is to be served, is a

minor, service upon his guardian or upon any adult male member or servant ....

of his family shall be deemed to be the service upon the minor.

(4) Any person aggrieved by the order @f the Collector under sub-section
(2) may, within a period of thirty days from the date of the service of the
order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal within whose jurisdiction the property
is situate and the decision of the Tribunal on such appeal shall be final.

(©) Where an order passed under sub-section (2) has not been complied
with and the time for appealing against such order has expired without an
appealhaving been preferred or the appeal, if any, preferred within that
time has been dismissed, the Collector shall obtain possession of the property
in respect of which the order has beer made, using such force, if any, as may
be necessary for the purpose and. deliver it to the Board.

(6) In exercising his functions under this section the Collector shall be

guided by such rules as may be provided by regulations.

53. Notwithstanding anything contained in a wakf deed, no immovable ,

Property shall'be purchased for or on behalf of any wakf from the funds of
any waké except with the prior sanction of the Board, and the Board shall
not accord such sanction unless it considers that the acquisition of such pro-
perty is necessary or beneficial to the wakf and that the price proposed to be
paid therefor is adequate and reasonable:

Provided. that before such sanction is accorded, the particulars relating

to the proposed transaction shall be published in the Official Gazette inviting -

objections and suggestions with respect thereto and, the Board shall, after
considering the objections and suggestions that may be received by it from
mutawallis or other persons interested in the wakf, make such orders as it
may think fit.

54. (४) Whenever: the ChiefExecutive Officer considers whether on
receiving any complaint or on his own motion that there has been an encroach-
ment on any land, building, space or other property which is wakf property.
and, which has been registered as such under this Act, he shall cause to be
served upon the encroacher, a notice specifying the particulars of the encroach-
ment 'and calling upon him to show cause before a date to be specified in such

notice, as to why an order requiring him to remove the encroachment before. .

the date so specified should not be made and shall also send a copy of such
notice to the concerned mutawelli.

“

ae

4.


27

(2) The notice referréd to in sub-section (1) shall be served im such

(3) If, after considering the ‘objections, received during the period “spect>
fied in the notice, and after conducting an inquiry in such manner as may-be
prescribed, the Chief Executive Officer is satisfied that the property ia question
is wakf property and that there has फटा an encroachment om any such waké
property, he may, by an order, require the encroacher to remove such encroach-
ment and deliver possession of the land, building, space or other property en-
croached upon to the mutawalli of the wakf.

(4) Nothing contained in sub-section (3) shall prevent any person ageriev-
ed by the order’ madé by the Chief Executive Officer under that sub-section
from instituting a suit in-a Tribunal to establish that he has right, title or
interest in the land, building, space or other property:

Provided that no such suit shali be instituted by a person who has been {
Jet into possession of the land, building. space or other property as a lessce,
lidensee or mortgagee by the mutawalli of the wakf or by any other person
authorised by him in this behalf.

55. Where the person, ordered under sub-section (3) of section 54 10. srrorce-
remove any encroachment, omits or fails to remove such encroachment, within ~ pent of
the time specified in the order or, as the case may be, fails to vaeate ‘the land, — orders
building, space or other property to which the Grdertelates, Within the tinie ™ade
aforesaid, the Chief Executive Officer may apply to the Sub-divisional Magis- पता,

ता oe erate are en $8 section 54.
trate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the land, building, space
or other property is situate for evicting the Gacroacher, and, thereupon, such
Magistrate shall make an order directing the encroacher to remove the en-
cfoachraent, Or, a8 ‘thé case may be, vacate the land, building, space or other
property, and to deliver possession therof to the concerned mtitawalli and.
in default of compliance with the order, remove the encroachment or, as
the case may be, evict the encroacher ‘from the land, building, space or
other property and may, for this purpose, take such police assistance aS
may be necessary.

56. (1) A lease or sub-lease for any period exceeding three years of ANY — Restejo-
immovable property which is wakf property shall, notwithstanding anything
contained in the deed or instrument of wak£ or in. any other law for the time
being in force, be void and of no effect. ‘i

(2) A lease or sub-lease for a period exceeding one year and not exceed- Property.
ing three years of any immovable property which is wakf property shall, not-
withstanding anything contained in the deed or instrument of wakf or in any-
other law for the time being in force, be’ void and of no effect unless it is made
with the previous sanction of the Board.

(3) The Board shall, in granting sanction for lease or sub-lease} or
renewal thereof under this section review the terms and conditions on.
which the lease or sublease is proposed to be granted or renewed and
make its approval subject to the revision of such terms and conditions
in such manner as it may direct.



Muta-
wally
entitled ¢
to pay
certain
costs

from
income

of wakt
property.

Power
of
Board to
pay dues
in case

fault by

muta-
wali,

Creation of
reserve
fund,

Extension
of time

ia reserve fund from the income of a wakf.

“28
> 57.” Notwithstanding “anything “Contained it ‘ihe> wake" ced. “very
mutawalli may pay from the income of the wakf property Ba expenses
properly incurred by him for the purpose of enabling him to furnish
any. particulars, documents or copies under section 36 or any accounts
under section 46 or any information or documents required by the Board
or for the purpose of enabling him to carry out the directions of the
Board.

. 58. (1) Where a mutawalli refuses to pay or fails to pay any revenue,
cess, rates or taxes due to the Government or any local authority, the
Board may discharge dues from the Wakf Fund and may recover the
amount so paid from the wakf property and may also recover damages
not exceeding twelve and a half per cent. of the amount so paid.

(2) Any sum of money due under sub-section (7) may, on a certifi-
cate issued by the Board after giving the mutawallj concerned an oppor-

tunity of being heard, be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of
jJand revenue.

59. For the purpose of making provisions for the payment of rent
and of revenue, cess, rates and taxes due to the Government or any local
authority, for the dischage of the expenses of the repair of the wakf pro.
perty and for the preservation of the wakf property, the Board may direct
the creation and maintenance, in such manner as it may think fit, of

60. The Board may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, ex-
tend the time within which any act is required to be done by the mutawalli
under this Act.

61. (J) If a mutawalli fails to—
(a) apply for the registration of ६ wakfs;

(0) furnish statements of particulars or

accounts or returns as
required under this Act;

(०) supply information or particulars as required by the Board;

(d) allow inspection of wakf properties, accounts, Tecords or
deeds and. documents relating thereto;

(९) deliver possession of an’
Board or Tribunal;

y wakf property, if ordered by the
(f) carry out the directions of the Board;
(g) discharge any public dues; or

(fh) do any other act which he is lawfully required
er under this Act, : ae



29

he shall, unless he satisfies the court or the Tribunal that there was rea-
sonable cause for his failure, be punishable with fine which may extend
to eight thousand rupees.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section @), if ‘i
(a) a mutawalli omits or fails, with a view to concealing the
existence of a wakf, to apply for its registration under his Act,—

()) in the case of a wakf created before the commencement
of this Act, within the period specified therefor in sub-section
(8) of section 36: $

(ii) mM the case of any wal created after such comence-
ment, within three months from the date of the creation of the
wak; or ea

(b)\a mutawalli furnishes any statement, return or , informa-
tion to the Board, which he knows or has reason to believe to be
false, misleading, untrue or incorrect in any material particular,

he shall be punishable with imprisonment for'a term which may extend
to six months and also with fine which may extend to fifteen thousand

rupees

(3) No court shali take cognizance of an offence punishable under
this Act save upon complaint made by the Board or an officer duly aytho-
_Tised by the Board in this behalf.

(4) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judi-
cial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under
this Act. |

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, the fine imposed under sub-section (1), when realised,
shall be credited to the Wakf Fund.

(6) In every case where offender is convicted after the commenec-
ment of this Act, of an offence punishable under sub-section (1) and
sentenced to a fine, the court shall also impose such term of imprison-
ment in default of payment of fine as is authorised by law for such
default. |

$2. No mutawalli shall spend any money out of the funds of the wakf,

of which he is the mutawalli, for meeting any ‘costs, charges, or expenses-

which are or may be, incurred by him, in relation to any suit, appeal or
any other. proceeding for, or incidental to, his. removal from office or
for taking any disciplinary action against himself

Muta-
walli not
to spend

money
belong-
yng to

* wakf for
Peet

ee ७


Z| to
appoint
muta-
wallis in
certain
cases,

Removal
of Muga-
wall,

0
“63. When there is a yacancy in the office of the mutawalli of a wakt
and there is no one to be appointed under the terms of the deed of the
wakf, or where the right of any person to act as mutawalli is disputed,
the Board may appoint any person to act as mutawalli for such period
and on such conditions as it may think fit.

64. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or the
deed of wakf, the Board may remove a mutawalli from his office if such
mmutawalli—

(a) has been convicted more than once of an offence punishable
under section 61; or

(29) has been convicted of any offence of criminal breach of trust
or any other offence involving moral turpitude, and such conviction
has not been reversed and he has not been granted full pardon with
respect to such offence; or

(०) is of unsound mind or is suffering from other mental or
physical defect or infirmity which would render him unfit to perform
the functions and discharge ‘the duties of a mutawalli; or

(d) is an undischargéd insolvent; or

(९) is proved to be addicted to drinking liquor or other spirity
uous preparations, or is addicted to the taking of any narcotic
drugs; or

(f) is: employed as a paid legal practitioner on behalf-of, or
against, the wakf; or

(g) has failed, without reasonable excuse, to maintain regular
accounts for two consecutive years or has failed to submit, in two
consecutive years, the yearly statement of accounts, as required by
sub-section (2) of section 46; or es

(h) is interested, directly or indirectly, in a subsisting lease in
respect of any wakf property, or in any contract made with, or any
work being done for, the wakf or is in arrears in respect of any sum
due by him’ 10 such wakf; or

(i) continuously neglects his duties or commits any misfeasance,
malfeasance, misapplication of funds or breach of trust in relation
to the wakf or in respect of any money or other wakf property; or

(j) wilfully and persistently disobeys the Jawful orders made
by the Central Government, State Government, Board under any
provision of this Act or rule or order made thereunder;

(k) misappropriates or fradulently deals with the property of the
Wake. . 7

(2) The removal of a person from the office of the mutawalli shall
not affect his personal rights, if any, in respect of the wakf property
either as a beneficiary or in any other capacity or his right, if any, asa
sajjadanashin. i



31

* (3) No action shail be taken by the Board under sub-section (J),
unless it has held an inquiry into the matter in a prescribed manner and
the decision has been taken by a majcrity of nov less than two-thirds of

“the members of the Board.

(4) A mutawalli who is aggrieved by anvorder passed under any of
the clauses (c) to (i) of sub-section (1), may, within one month from
ihe date of the receipt by him of the order, appeal against the order to

Lihe Tribunal and the decision of the Tribyma} on such appeal shall be
final.

(5) Where any inquiry under sub-section (3) is proposed, or com-
menced, against any mutawalli, the Board may, if it is of opinion that it
is necessary 90 to do in the interest of the wakf, by an order suspend
such mutawalli until the conclusion of the inquiry:

Provided that no suspension for a period exceeding ten days shall be
made except after giving the mutawalli a reasonable opportunity of
being heard against the proposed action.

(6), Where any appeal is filed by the mutawalli to the Tribunal under
sub-section (4), the Board may make an application to the Tribunal for
the appointment of a receiver to manage the wakf pending the decision
of the appeal, and where such an application is made, the Tribunal shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
appoint a suitable person as receiver to manage the wakf and direct the
receiver so appointed to ensure that the customary or religious rights of
the mutawalli and of the wakf are safeguarded.

(7) Where a mutawalli has been removed from his office under sub-
section (7), the Board may, by order, direct the mutawalli to deliver
possession of the wakf property to the Board or any officer duly
authorised in this behalf or to any person or committee appointed to act
as the mutawalli of the wakf property.

(8) A mutawalli of a wakf removed from his office under this sec-
tion shall not be eligible for re-appointment as a mutawalli of that wakf
for a period of five years from the date of such removal.

65. (1) Where no suitable person is available for appointment as “a Assummp-
mutawalli of a wakf, or where the Board is satisfied, for reasons to be ‘inof
recorded by it in writing, that the filling up of the vacancy in the office pa
of a mutawalli is prejudicial to the interests of the wakf, the Board acne
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, assume direct management certain
of the wakf for such period or periods, not exceeding five years in the ae

aggregate, as may be specified in the notification. bats, मु



32

(2) The. State Government, may, on jts own motion or oa the applica-
1 tion of any person interesicd ia the wakf, call for the xecords of any 8१७०
q for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness, legality or, »pro-
q priety of the notification issued by the Board under sub-section (1) and pass
such orders as it may think fit and the orders so made by the State Govero-
ment shall be final and shall be published in the manner specified in sub-

section (1).

(3) As soon as possible after the close of every financial year, the Board
shall send to the State Government a detailed report in regard to every waké
under its direct managemeat, giving thercin—

। q (a) the details of the income of the wakf for tae year immediately F
preceding the year under report;
i (b) othe’ steps taken to improve the management and income of the
wakf; मे a

(c) the period during which the wakf has been under the direct
management of the Board and explaining the reasons as to why it has
॥ not been possible to entrust the management of the wakf to the muta-

walli or any committee of management during the year; and

] (d) such other matters as may be prescribed.

i * (4) The State Government ‘shall exmine the report submitted to it
1 under sub-section (3), and after such examination issue such directions or
| instructions to the Board as it may think fit and the Board shall’ comply
i with such directions or instructions on receipt thereof.

$

66, Whenever a deed of wakf or any decree or order of a court of any

eae scheme of management of any wakf provides that a court or any authority
ment and other than a Board may appoint or remove a mutawalli or settle or modify
ह gap 2०4 such. scheme of management or otherwise exercise superintendence over the

eo a wakf, then notwithstanding anything contained in such deed of wakf, decree,

be exer- order or scheme, such powers aforesaid shall be exercisable by the State

cised by Government:

une State

Govyern- 3

ment. Provided that where a Board has been established, the State Government

shall consult the Board before exercising such powers.

Super- 67. (1) Whenever the supervision or management of a wakf is vested

vision in ‘any committee appointed by the wakf, then, notwithstanding anything
| and contained in this Act, such committee shall continue to function until it is

See oa superseded by the Board or until the expiry of its term as may be specified

of com- by the wakf, whichever is earlier:

mittee of रे

seas : Provided ‘that such committee shall function under the direction, control

and supervision of the Board and abide by such directions as the Board may
jssue from time to time: 5 7

Provided further that if the Board is satisfied that day sche
. management of a wakf by a committee ig: inconsistédt ‘with any . provision
oe of this Act or of aay rule’ made’ thereunder of with ‘the tirections of ‘the’ wakf,



33

it may, at any time, modify the scheme in such manner as may be necessary
to bring it in conformity with the directions of the wakf or of the provisions
of this Act and the rules made thereunder

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and in the deed of
the wakf, the Board may, if it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
that a committee, referred to in sub-section (1) is not functioning properly and
satisfactorily, or that the wakf is being mismanaged and that in the interest
of its proper management, it is necessary so to do, by an order, supersede such
committee, and, on such supersession, any direction of the waiki, in so far as
it relates to the constitution of the committee, shall cease to have any force:

Provided that the Board shall, before making any order superseding any
committee, issue a notice setting forth therein the reasons for the proposed
action and calling upon the Committee to show cause within such time, not
being Jess than one month, as may be specified in the notice, as to why such
action shall not be taken.

(3) Every order made by the Board under sub-section (2) shall be pub-
listicd in the prescribed manner and on such publication shall be binding on
the mutawalli and all persons having any interest in the wakf,

(4) Any order made by the Board under sub-section (2) shall be final:

Provided that any person aggrieved by the order made under sub-section (2)
may, within sixty days from the date of the order, appeal to the Tribunal:

Provided further that the Tribunal shall have no power to suspend the
operation of the order made by the Board pending such appeal.

(5) The Board shall, whenever it supersedes any committee under sub-
section (2), constitute a new committee of management simultaneously with
the order made by it under sub-section (2).

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sections, the
Board may, instead of superseding any committee under sub-section (2), remove
any member thereof if it is satisfied that such member has abused his position
as such member or had knowingly acted in a manner prejudicial to the interests
of the wakf, and every such order for the removal of any member shall be
served upon him by registered post:

Provided that no order for the removal of the member shall be made unless

he bas been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the pro-
posed action:

Provided further that any member aggrieved by any order for kis removal
from the membership of the committee may, within a period of thirty days from
the date of service of the order on him, prefer av appeal against such order to



कं वकील

WW,
ip

|

the Tribunal and the Tribunal may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to
the appeliant and the Board of being heard, confirm, modify or reverse the
order made by the Board and the order made by the Tribunal in such appeat
shall be fiwal.

| 68. (0) Where any mutawalli or committee of management has beeii re-
moved by the Board in accordance with the provisions of this Act, or ‘of any
Scheme made by the Board, the mutawalli or the committee so removed from
the office (hereinafter in this section referred to as the removed mutawalli
or committee) shall hand over charge and deliver possession of the records,
accounts and all properties of the wakf (including cash) to the succéssor
mutawalli or the successor committee, within one month from the date specified
in the order.

(2) Where any removed mutawalli or committee fails to deliver charge
or deliver possession of the records, accounts and properties (including cash)
to the successor mutawalli or committee within the time specified in  sub-
section (1), or prevents or obstructs such mutawalli or committee, from ob-
taining possession thereof after the expiry of the period aforesaid, the succes;

- sor mutawalli or. any member of the successor committee may make an appli-

cation, accompanied by a certified copy of the order appointing such successot
mutawalli or committee, to any Magistrate of the first class within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction any part of the wakf property is situated and, there-
upon, such Magistrate may, after giving notice to the removed mutawalli or
members, of the removed committee, make an order directing the delivery of
charge and possession of such records, accounts and properties
(including cash)’ of the walef to the successor mutawalli or the committee,
as the case may be, within such time as may be specified in the order

(3) Where the removed mutawaHi or any member of the removed com-
mittee, omits or fails to deliver charge and possession of the records, accounts
and properties (including cash) within the time specified by the Magistrate
wnder sub-section (2), the removed mutawalli or every member of the re-
moved committee, as the case may be, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend
to eight thousand rupees, or with both.

(4) Whenever any removed mutawalli or any member of the removed
committee omits or fails to comply with the orders made by the Magistrate
under sub-section (2), the Magistrate may authorise the successor mutawalli
or committee to take charge and possession of such records, accounts, pro-
perties (including cash) and may auhot ae such person to take such police
assistance as may be necessary for the p

(5) No order of appointment of the successor mutawalli or committee,
shall-be. called in question in the proceedings before the Magistrate under this



by

|

35

(6) Nothing contained in this section shall bar the institution of any
suit in a competent civil court by any person aggrieved by any order made
under this section, to establish that he has right, title and interest in the pro-
perties specified in the order made by the Magistrate under sub-section (2).

69. (1) Whenever the Board is satisfied, whether: on its own motion or
on the application of not less than five persons interested in any wakf, that
it is necessary or desirable to frame a scheme for the proper administration
of the wakf, it may by, an order frame such scheme ‘for the administration
of the wakf, after consultation with the mutawalli or the applicant in the
prescribed manner,

(2) A scheme framed under sub-section (J) may provide for the
removal of the mutawalli of the wakf holding office as such ‘immediately
before the date on which the scheme comes into force

Provided that where any such scheme provides for the removal of any
hereditary mutawalli, the scheme shall also provide for the appointment
of the person next in hereditary succession to the mutawalli so removed,
as one of the members of the committee appointed for the proper adminis-
tration of the wakf.

(3) Every order made under sub-section (2) shall be published in the
prescribed manner, and, on such publication shall be final and binding on
the mutawalli and all persons interested in the wakf:

Provided that any person aggrieved by an order made under this
section may, within sixty days from the date of the order, prefer an appeal
to the Tribunal and after hearing such appeal, the Tribunal may confirm,
reverse or modify the order:

Provided further that the Tribunal shall have no power to stay the
operation of the order made under this section.

(4) The Board may, at any time by an order, whether made before
or after the scheme has come into force, cancel or modify the scheme.

() Pending the framing of the scheme for the proper administration
of the wakf, the Board may appOint a suitable person to perform all or
any of the functions of the mutawalli thereof and to exercise the powers,
and perform the duties, of such mutawalli.

70. Any, person interested in a wakf may make an application to the
Board supported by an affidavit to institute an inquiry relating to the
administration of the wakf and if the Board is satisfied that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the affairs of the wakf are being
mismanaged, it shall take such action thereon as it thinks fit.

Power of
Board to
frame
scheme
for
adminis-
tration
of wake.

Inquiry
relating
to ad-
minis-
tration of
wake.


Manner 71, (1) The Board may, either on an application received under section
ot hold- 73 or on its own motion,—

ing in-

quiry. (a) hold an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed; or

(b) authorise any person in this behalf to hold an inquiry into any
matter relating to a wakf and take such action as it thinks fit.

(2) For the purposes of an inquiry under this section, the Board or any person
authorised by it in this behalf, shall have the same powers as are vested in a
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for enforcing the ‘attendance
of witnesses and production of documents.

CHAPTER शा \
FINANCE OF THE BOARD

Annual 72. (1) the mutawalli of every wakf, the net annual income of which is

contribu- not Jess than fave thousand rupees, shall pay annually, out of the net annual

tion Pay- income derived by the wakf, such contributions, not exceeding seven per cent.

able to

Board’ of such annual income, as may be prescribed, to the Board for the services
rendered by such Board to the wakf.

Explanation 1—For the purposes of this Act, “net annual income” shall
mean the gross income of the wakf from all sources, including mnazars and
offerings which do not amount to contributions to the corpus of the wakfs, in
a year after deducting therefrom the following, namely: —

(i) the Jand revenue paid by it to the Government;

(ii) the rates, cessers, taxes and licence fees, paid by it to the Govern-
ment or any local authority;

(ii) expenditure incurred for all or any of the following purposes,
namely: — कु

(६) maintenance of, or repairs to, irrigation works, which shall
not include the capital cost of irrigation:

(b) seeds or seedlings;

(c) manure;

(4) purchase and maintenance of agricultural implements;
(०) purchase and maintenance of cattle for cultivation;

1) wages for ploughing, watering, sowing, transplanting, harvest-
ing, threshing and other agricultutal operations:

Provided that the total deduction in respect of an expenditure incurred
under this clause shall not exceed ten per cent. of ihe income derived from
Jands belonging to the wakf;

(iv) expenditure on sundry repairs to rented buildings, not exceeding
five per cent. of the annual rent derived therefrom, or the actual expenditure,
whichever is less;



37

(४) sale proceeds of immovable properties or एंड relating to, or
arisitg out of immovable properties, if such proceeds are reinvested to
earn income for the wakf:

Provided that the following items of receipts shall not be deemed to
be 18००7 for the purposes of this section, namcly:—

(a) advances and deposits recovered and loans taken or recovered;

(6) deposits made as security by employees, lessees or contractors
and other deposits, if any;

(2) withdrawals from barks or of investmeits;
(4) amounts recovered towards costs awarded by courts;

(०) sale proceeds of religious books and publications where such
sales are undertaken as an un-remunerafive enterprise with a view
to propagating religion;

(/) donations in cash or Kind or offerings made by the donors
as contribution to the corpus of the wakf:

Provided that the interest on income, if any, accruing from such
donations or offerings shall be taken into account in calculating the
gross annual income;

(g) voluntary contributions received in cash or kind for a specific
service to be performed by the wakf and expended on stich service;

(i) audit recoveries.

Explanation Il—In determining, the net annual income for the purposes
wf this section, only the net profit derived by any wakf from its remunerative
undertakings, if any, shall be taken as income, and in respect of its non-remune-
rative undertakings, such as, schools, colleges, hospitals, poor homes, orphanages
or any other similar institutions, the grants given by the Government or any
local authority or donations received from the public or fees collected from
the pupils of educational institutions shall not be taken as income.

(2) The Board may in the case of any mosque or orphanage or any parti-
cular wakf reduce or remit such contribution for such time as it thinks fit.

(3) The mutawalli of a wakf may realise the contributions payable by hint
under sub-section (1) from the various persons entitled to receive any pecuniary
or other material benefit from the wakf, but the sum realisable from any one
of such persons shall not exceed such amount as shall bear to the total contri-
bution payable the same proportion, as the value of the benefits receivable by
such person bears to the entire net annual income of the wakf:

Provided that if there is any income of the wakf available in excess of the
amount payable as dues under this Act, other than as the contribution under
sub-section (1), and in excess of the amount payable under the wakf deed, the
contribution shall be paid out of such income.

(4) The contribution payable under sub-section (1) im re8pect of a wakt
shall, subject fo the prior payment of any dues to the Goveriiment of any local
authority or of any other statutory first charge on the Wakf property or the fit


Power of
Chief
Executive
Officer to
direct
‘banks or
other
person to
make pay-
ments.

38

come thereof, be a first charge on the income of the wakf and shall recover-
able, on a certificate issued by the Board after giving the mutawalli concerned
an‘ opportunity of being heard, as an arrear of land revenue.

(5) If a moutawaili realises the income of the wakf and refuses to pay of
does not pay such contribution, he shall also be personally liable for such
contribution which may be realised from his person or property in the manner
aforesaid.

““(6) Where, after the commencement of this Act, the mutawalli of a wakf
fails to submit a return of the net annual income of the wakf within the time
specified therefor or submits a return which, in the opinion of the Chief Executive
Officer is incorrect or false in any material particular, or which does not comply
with the provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder, the Chief
Executive Officer may assess the net annual income of the wakf to the best
of’-his judgment or revise the net annual income as shown in the return sub-
mitted by the mutawalli and the net annual income as so assessed or revised shall
be deemed to be the net annual income of the wakf for the purposes of this
section:

, Provided that no assessment of net annual income or revision of return
submitted by mutawalli shall be made except after giving a notice to the muta-
walli calling upon him to show cause, within the time specified in the notice,
as to why such assessment or revision of the return shall not be made and every
suchi:assessment or revision shall be made after considering the reply if any,
given by the mutawalli.

(7) Any mutawalli who is aggrieved by the assessment or revision made
by the Chief Executive Officer, under sub-section (6), may prefer an appeal to
the’ Board within thirty days from the date of the receipt of the [assessment
or revision of return and the Board may, after giving the appellant a reasonable
opportunity of being heard, confirm, reverse or modify the assessment or revision
or the return and the decision of the Board thereon shall be final.

(8) If, for any reason, the contribution or any portion thereof leviable
under this section has escaped assessment in any year, whether before or
after the commeficement of this Act, the Chief Executive Officer may, within
five years from the last date of the vear to which such escaped assessment
serve upon the mutawalli a notice assessing him with the contribution
mn thereof which had escaped assessment, and demanding payment
thereof within thirty days from the date of service of such notice, and the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, shall, as far as may be,
apply 2s if the assessments. were made under this Act, in the first instance.

73. (1) Notwithstanding anythin contained in any other Jaw for the “time
being.jn force. the Chief Executive Officer, if he is, satisfied that it is necessary
and. expedient so to do. make an order directing any bank in which, or any
person with whom any money belonging to a wakf is deposited, to pay the
contribution, leviable under section 72, out of such money, as may be standing
to the credit of the wakf in such bank or may be deposited with such person,
or out of the moneys which may, from time to time, be received by bank
or other person for or on behalf of the wakf by way of deposit, and on receipt
of such orders, the bank or the other person, as the case: may be, shall when



a)

4

no appeal has been preferred under sub-section (3), comply with such orders,
or where an appeal has been preferred under sub-section (3), shall comply with
the orders made by the Tribunal on such appeal.

(2) Every payment made by a bank or other person in pursuance of any
order made uader sub-section (1), shall operate as a full discharge of the lia-
bility of such bank or other person in relation to the sum so paid.

(3) Any bank or other person who is ordered under sub-section (J) to
make any payment may, within thirty days from the date of the order, prefer
an appeal against such order to the Tribunal and the decision of the Tribunal
‘on such appeal shall be final.

(4) Every officer of the bank or other person who fails, without any
reasonable excuse, to comply with the order made under sub-section (1) or,
as the case may be, under sub-section (3), shall be punishable with impri-
sonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may
extend to eight thousand rupees, or with both.

74 (1) Every authority empowered to disburse any perpetual annuity
payable to a wakf under any law relating to the abolition of zamindaries or
jagirs, or laying down land ceilings, shall, or receipt of a certificate from the
Chief Executive Officer, specifying the amount of contribution payable by the
wakf under section 72 which remains unpaid, deduct before making payment
of the perpetual annuity to the wakf, the amount specified in such certificate
and remit the amount so deducted to the Chief Executive Officer.

(2) Every amount remitted under sub-section (1) to the Chief Executive
Officer shall be deemed to be a payment made by the wakf and shall, to the
extent of the amount so remitted, operate as a full discharge of: the liability of
such. authority with regard to the payment of the perpetual . annuity.

75. (1) For the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Board may, with the previous sanction of the State Government, borrow such
sum of money and on such terms and conditions as the State Government may
determine.

(2) The Board shall repay the money borrowed, together with any interest
or costs due in respect thereof, according to the terms and conditions of the
Joan.

76. (1) No mutawalli, Executive Officer or other person in charge of the
administration of a wakf shall lend any money belonging to the wakf or any
wakf property or borrow any money for the purposes of the wakf except with
the previous sanction of the Board: 4

"Provided that no such sanction is necessary if there is an express provision
in the deed of wakf for such borrowing or lending, as the case may be.

(2) The Board may, while according sanction, specify any terms and
conditions subject to which the person referred to in sub-section (1) is authorised
by him to lend or borrow any money or lend any other wakf property.

Deduc-
tion of
contri-
bution
‘rom
perpe-
tual
annuity
payable
to the
wakf.

Power of
Board

to
borrow,

Muta-
walli not
to lend
Or borrow
moneys
without
sanction,


Ss ess

Budget
of
Board.

40 -

(3) Where any money is lent or borrowed, or other wakf property is lent
in contravention of the provisions of this section, it shall be lawful for the Chief
Executive Officer,—

(a) to recover an amount equal to the amount which has been 80
lent or borrowed, together with interest due thereon, from the personal
funds of the person by whom such amount was lent or borrowed;

(b) to recover the possession of the wakf property lent in conttaven-
tion of the provisions of this Act, from the person to whom it was lent,
or from persons who claim title to such property through the person to
whom such property was lent.

77. (1) All moneys received or realised by the Board under this Act and
ail other moneys received as donations, benefactions or grants by the Board
shall form a fund to be called the Wakf Fund.

(2) All moneys received by the Board, as donations, benefactions and
grants shall be deposited and accounted for under a separate sub-head.

(3) Subject to any rules that may be made by the State Government ut
this behalf, the Wakf Fund shall be under the control of the Board, so, however,
that the Wakf Fund under the control of common Wakf Board shall be subject
to cules, if avy, made in this behalf by the Central Government.

(4) The Wakf Fund shall be applied to—

(@ repayment of any loan incurred under section 75 and payment
of interest thereon;

(0) payment of the cost of audit of the Wakf Fund and the accounts
of wakfs;

(c) payment of the salary and allowances to the officers and staff of
the Board;

@ payment of travelling allowances to the Chairperson, members,
of the Board;

(७) payment of all expenses incurred by the Board in the performance
of the duties imposed, and the exercise of the powers conferred, by or
under this Act:

( payment of all expenses incurred by the Board for the discharge
of any obligation imposed on it by at under any law for the time beittg
in force.

6) If any balance remains after meeting the expenditure referred to in
sub-section (4), the Board may use any portion of such balance for the prescr-
vation and protection of wakf properties or for such other purposes as it may
deem fit.

78. (1) The Board shall in every year prepare, in such form and at such
time as may be prescribed, a budget for the next financial year showing the
estimated receipts and expenditure during that financial year and forward a
copy of the same to the State Government.

(2) On receipt of the budget forwarded to it under sub-section (1), the
State Government shall examine the same and suggest such alterations, correc-
tions, or modifications to be made therein as it may think fit and forward such
suggestions to the Board for its consideration .

(3) On receipt of the suggestions from the State Goverament the Board
may make written representations to that Government with regard to th
alterations, corrections or modifications suggested by that Government and the

,



4

State Government shall, after considering such representations, communicate,
within a period of three weeks from the date of teceipt thereof, to the Board
its final decision in relation to the matter and the decision of the State Govern-
ment shall be final .

(4) On receipt of the decision of the State Government under sub-
section (3), the Board shall incorporate in its budget all the alterations, cor-
rections, modifications finally suggested by the State Government and the
budget as so altered, corrected or modified, shall be the budget which shall be
passed by the Board.

79. The Board shall cause to be maintained such books of account and Accounts
other books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as may Bee 4
be provided by regulations. 4

80. (1) The accounts of the Board shall be audited and examined Audit of

annually by such auditor as may be appointed by the State Government. wet
of

(2) The auditor shall submit his report to the State Government and the Board.
report of the auditor shall, among other things, specify whether the accounts
of every wakf under the direct management of the Board have been kept
separately and whether such accounts have been audited annually by the State
Examiner of Local Funds and shall also specify all cases of irregular, illegal or
improper expenditure or of failure to recover money or other property caused
by neglect or misconduct and any other matter which the auditor considers it
necessary to report; and the report shall also contain the name of any person
who, in the opinion of the auditor is responsible for such expenditure or
failure and the auditor shall in every such case certify the amount of such
expenditure or loss as due from such person.

(3) The cost of the audit shall be paid from the Wakf Fund: ~

81. The State Government shall examine the auditor's report and may State
call for the explanation of any person in regard to any matter mentioned therein, Govern-

and shall pass such orders on the report as it thinks fit. nae 8

orders

on audi-

tor’s
report.

82. (7) Every sum certified to be due from any person by an auditor inj Dues of
his report under section 80, be paid by such person within sixty days after the Board
service of a demand notice by the Board. ine =

recovered

aS arrears
(2) If such payment is not made in accordance with the provisions of eee
sub-section (1), the sum payable may, on a certificate issued by the Board,
after giving the person concerned an opportunity of being heard, be recovered
as an arrear of land revenue.



Constitu-
tion of
‘Tribunals,
etc.

42
= CHAPTER श्ण : i

JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS

83. (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute as many Tribunals as it may think fit, for the determina-
tion of any dispute, question or other matter relating to a wakf or wakf
Property under this Act and define the local limits and jurisdiction under
this Act of each of such Tribunals. i

(2) Any mutawalli person interested in a wakf or any other person
aggrieved by an order made under this Act, or rules made thereunder, may
take an application within the time Specified in this Act or where no such time
has been specified, within such time as may be prescribed, to the Tribunal for
the determination of any dispute, question or other matter relating to the
wakf. @

(3) Where any application made under sub-section (1) relates to any wakf
Property which falls within the territorial limits of the jurisdiction of two or
more Tribunals, such application may be made to the ‘Tribunal within
the local limits of whose jurisdiction the mutawalli or any one of the mutawallis
of the wakf actually and voluntarily resides, carries on business or personally
works for gain, and, where any such application is made to the Tribunal
aforesaid, the other Tribunal or Tribunals having jurisdiction shall not entertain
any application for the determination of such dispute, question or other
matter: t aol

Provided that the State Government may, if it is of opinion that it is
expedient in the interest of the wakf or any other person interested in the
wakf or the wakf property to transfer such application to any other Tribunal
having jurisdiction for the determination of the dispute, question or other
matter relating to such wakf or wakf Property, transfer such application to
any other Tribunal having jurisdiction, and, on such transfer, the Tribunal to
which the application is so transferred shall deal with the application from the
stage which was reached before the Tribunal from which the application has
been so transferred, except where the Tribunal is of opinion that it is necessary
in the interests of justice to deal with the application afresh.

(4) Every Tribunal shall consist of one person, who shall be a member
of the State Judicial Service holding a rank, not below’ that of a District,
Sessions or Civil Judge, Class I, and the appointment of every such person _
may be made either by name or by designation.

©) The Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court and shall have the
same powers as may be exercised by a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, or executing ai decree or order.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, the Tribunal shall follow such Procedure as may be prescribed .



ay

4)

State Government shall, after considering such representations, communicate,
within a period of three weeks from the date of receipt thereof, to the Board
its final decision in relation to the matter and the decision of the State Govern-
ment shall be final.

(4) On receipt of the decision of the State Government under sub-
section (3), the Board shall incorporate in its budget all the alterations, cor-
rections, modifications finally suggested by the State Government and the
budget as so altered, corrected or modified, shall be the budget which shall be
passed by the Board.

79. The Board shall cause to be maintained such books of account and
other books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as may
be provided by regulations.

80. (1) The accounts of the Board shall be audited and examined
annually by such auditor as may be appointed by the State Government.

(2) The auditor shall submit his report to the State Government and the
report of the auditor shall, among other things, specify whether the accounts
of every wakf under the direct management of the Board have been kept
separately and whether such accounts have been audited annually by the State
Examiner of Local Funds and shall also specify all cases of irregular, illegal or
improper expenditure or of failure to recover money or other property caused
by neglect or misconduct and any other matter which the auditor considers it

- necessary to report; and the report shall also contain the name of any person
who, in the opinion of the auditor is responsible for such expenditure or
failure and the auditor shall in every such case certify the amount of such
expenditure or loss as due from such person.

(3) The cost of the audit shall be paid from the Wakf Fund._
81, The State Government shall examine the auditor’s report and may

call for the explanation of any person in regard to any matter mentioned therein,
and shall pass such orders on the report as it thinks fit,

$2. (1) Every sum certified to be due from any person by an auditor ini

his report under section 80, be paid by such person within
service of a demand notice by the Board.

xty days after the

(2) If such payment is not made in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section (1), the sum payable may, on a certificate issued by the Board,
after giving the person concerned an opportunity of being heard, be recovered
as an arrear, of land revenue.

Accounts
of
Board.

Audit of
accounts
of
Board.

State
Govern-
Ment to
Pass
orders
on audi-
tors
report.

Dues of

revenue,


gts
= ————— उ्ककनन

Constitu-
tion Of
‘Tribunals,
etc.

42
= CHAPTER VII ae

JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS

83. (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute as many Tribunals as it may think fit, for the determina-
tion of any dispute, question or other matter relating ta a wakf or wakf
Property under this Act and define the local limits and jurisdiction under
this Act of each of such Tribunals. ड़

(2) Any mutawalli person interested in a wakf or any other person
aggrieved by an order made under this Act, or rules made thereunder, may
make an application within the time specified in this Act or where no such time
has been specified, within such time as may be prescribed, to the Tribunal for
the determination of any dispute, question or other matter relating to the
wakf. ow

(3) Where any application made under sub-section (1) relates to any wakf
Property which falls within the territorial limits of the jurisdiction of two or
more Tribunals, such application may be made to the ‘Tribunal within
the local limits of whose jurisdiction the mutawalli or any one of the mutawallis
of the wakf actually and voluntarily resides, carries on business or personally
works for gain, and, where any such application is made to the ‘Tribunal
aforesaid, the other Tribunal or Tribunals having jurisdiction shall not entertain
any application for the determination of such dispute, question or other
matter: | le

Provided that the State Government may, if it is of opinion that it is
expedient in the interest of the wakf or any other person interested in the
wakf or the wakf property to transfer such application to any other Tribunal
having jurisdiction for the determination of the dispute, question or other
matter relating to such wakf or wakf property, transfer such application to
any other Tribunal having jurisdiction, and, on such transfer, the Tribunal to
which the application is so transferred shall deal with the application from the
stage which was reached before the Tribunal from which the application has
been so transferred, except where the Tribunal is of opinion that it is necessary
in the interests of justice to deal with the application afresh.

(4) Every Tribunal shall consist of one person, who shall be a member
of the State Judicial Service holding a rank, not below’ that of a District,
Sessions or Civil Judge, Class I, and the appointment of every such person
may be made either by name or by designation.

(6) The Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court and shall have the
same powers as may be exercised by a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, or executing ai decree or order.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, the Tribunal shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.



Sof 1908.

%

ui Ol()o THe detision’ OE thE Tribunal shall be final’ a gis upon the
patties (७-8 application ad पी बजा have the force Of @ deere ade by a
ail coud. 22 सडक Domiooncs er 7 Aiumt of OF हाश्प :
12348) (The Execution’ of any” deeision’ of the “Tribitid'stial?’ be “thade by the
‘ivitcourt to Which” such “décisioi is’ Sent for execution, in” dance with,
tnellprovisiond’ of ‘the Code OP Civil’ Procedure, 1908. "” 1288:

(9) No appeal shall lie against dny decision’ oF otder whether’ interim or
otherwise, given or made by the Tribunal:

ig ७ a

| Provided that"a’ High 006 thay; on its own’ motion तो गा thie ‘application.
(6f the’ Board! of atiy petsé “aggrieved; call for’ and” “examine the records
relating to any -dispute;' question’ or" other™ matter which “has” béen® determitted
by the Tribunal for the purpose of satisfying itself as to. the correctness, lega-
lity ‘or propriety’ of such determination’ and may confirm, ‘reve ’ of ‘modify
Such determination or pass such other order ‘as it may think “fit =

boii 3:

६४३०४:इ4:-एफ्भा आदर था कए७100४66 187#:06 167 #0 रोड FOE th
of laity dispute,” question°or other miatter relating’ to है? Wak? 60 Wakf property
6 shall Hold. its’ proceedifigs' as “expeditiously’'as possible’ and /shall'as ‘soft’ ais
practicable, on the concliision “of the ‘hearing “of Such “matter” give’ i dSEISIOR
in writing and furnish a copy OE Such’ decision ‘to cacti of the parties to the
dispute- a z 4

5 to
sittt Yo 2¢

85... Noysuit or other legal proceeding: shall Jie in. any civil court in respect
of any. dispute, question or other matter relating. to any, wakf,; wakf property
or other matter which is required by or under this Act to be determined by. a
Tribunal. aS

©. ३6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, or in any other law for the time being in force, where any suit or other
legal proceeding is instituted or commenced— : |

(a) by or on behalf of a Board—

8. (ty) ae"

6) to set aside the sale of any immovable property, which is
wakf property, in execution of a decree or order of a\civil court;

i) to set aside the transfer of any immovable_property, which
js wakf property, made by the mutawalli thereof, whether for valuable
consideration or not, without or otherwise than in accordance with,
the sanction of the Board;

i
‘Tribunal
to hold
proceed-

ings ix
expedi-.
tiously,s;
and (013. «
furnish

to the
parties
copies

of its
decision,

Bar of

jurisdic |”

tion of
civil,

courts.

Appoint-
ment of

a receiver
in certain
case’.


=

(iii) to recover possession of the Property referred to in
हि 2 clause (4) or clause (b) or (० restore Possession of such pro-
perty to the mutawalli of the concerned wakf; or

a (8) by a mutawaili to recover possession of immovable Property,

Which is wakf property, which has been. transferred by 4 previous
mutawalli, whether for valuable consideration or not, without other-
wise than in accordance with the sanction of the Board, and which
is in the possession of the defendant,

the court may, on the application of the plaintiff, appoint a receiver of
{ such property and direct such receiver to pay from time to time to the
plaintiff, out of the income of the property, such amount as the court may
consider to be necessary for further prosecution of the suit.

to the claim for set-off or any other claim made on behalf of any wakf
which has not been registered in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

Barts 87. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the

theen- - time being in force, no suit, appeal or other legal proceeding for the enforce-

force- ment of any right on behalf of any wakf which has not been registered in

maa के accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall be instituted or commenced

3४४ or heard, tried or decided by any court after the commencement of this

ae behale Act, or where any such suit, appeal or other legal proceeding had been

of instituted or commenced before such commencement, no such suit, appeal or

feed की other legal proceeding shall be continued, heard, tried or decided by any

7 we court after such commencement unless such wakf has been registered, 0

tea accordance with the provisions of this Act.

7

| tt (2) The provisions of sub-section (7). shall apply as far as may be,
bi

i Taare 88. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no notification
challenge or order or decision made, proceeding or action taken, by the Central Gov-
the ernment or the State Government under this Act or any rule made there-
ee under shall be questioned in any civil court. मे
notifica-
tion, etc.

Notice 89. No suit shall be instituted against the Board in respect of any act
of suits purporting to be done by it in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made
by thereunder, until the expiration of two months next after notice in writing
parties has been delivered to, or left at, the office of the Board, stating the cause
ne of action, the name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff and
the relief which he claims; and the plaint shall contain a Statement that
such notice has been so delivered or left.
Notice 90. (2) In every suit or proceeding relating to a title to or possession @
of suits, of a wakf property or the right of a mutawalli or beneficiary, the court or
ete., by Tribunal shall issue notice to the Board at the cost of the party instituting
oats such suit or proceeding.

(2) Whenever any wakf property is notified for sale in execution of a
decree of a civil court or for the recovery of any revenue: cess, rates of
“wes due to the Government or any local authority, notice shall be given


|

45

to the Board by the court, Collector or other person under’ Whose order
the sale is notified. / पु

(3) In the absence of a notice under sub-section (1), any decree or
order passed in the suit or proceeding shall be declared void, if the Board,
within one month of its coming to know of such suit or proceeding, applies
to the court in this behalf.

(4) In the absence of a notice under sub-section (2), the sale shall
be declared void, if the Board, within one month of its coming to know
of the sale, applies in this behalf to the court or other authority under
whose order the sale was held.

91. (7) If in the course of proceedings under the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894 or under any law for the time being in force telating to the
acquisition of land or other property, it appears to the Collector before an
award is made that any property under acquisition is wakf property, a notice
of such acquisition shall be served by Collector on the Board and further
proceedings shall be stayed to enable the Board to appear and plead. as.a
Party to the proceeding at any time within three months from the date of
the receipt of such notice.

Explanation—The reference to the Collector in the foregoing provi-
sions of this sub-section shall, in relation to any other law referred to therein,
be construed: if the Collector is not the competent authority under such
other law to make an award of the compensation or other amount payable
for acquisition of land or other property thereunder, as a reference to the
authority under such other law competent to make such award.

(2) Where the Board has reason to believe that any property under
acquisition is wakf property, it may at anytime before the award is made
appear and plead as a party to the proceeding. 7

(3) When the Board has appeared under the provisions of sub-section
(2) or sub-section (2) no order shall be passed under section 31 or section
32 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 or under the corresponding provi-
sions of the other law referred to in sub-section (1) without giving an op-
portunity to the Board to be heard.

(4) Any order passed under section 31 or section 32 of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 or under the corresponding provisions of the other
law referred to in sub-section (7); without giving an opportunity to the
Board to be heard,, shall be declared void if the Board. within one month
of its coming to know of the order, applies in this behalf to the authority
which made the order.

92. In any suit or proceeding in respect of a wakf or any wakf pro-
perty the Board may appear and plead as a party to the suit or proceeding.

Proceed.
ings under
Act 1

of 1894.

Board to
be party
fo suit
or pro.
ceeding.


|

Bar to
compro-
mise of
Suits

by or
against
mauta-
wallis.

Power to
make
applica-
tion to
the
Tribunal
in case
of fajl-

walli to
discharge.
his
duties.

Power of
appellate
authority
to enter-
tain
appeal
after
expiry

of

Power of
Centrai
Govern-
ment to
regulate
secular
activi-
ties of
waktfs.

46
vabod3.No suitor proceedingiin any.court by or.against the mutawalli of

a wakf relating to title to wakf property or the rights tefitthe: mutawalli

shall be compromised without the sanction of the Board

gilt al (8)

d aid? mi jryos ad of

‘sd: 94, (1) Where a mutawalli is under an obligation to perform any act
which is recognised by Muslim law as pious, religious of’ cliaritablesind ‘thé
miutawalli fails to pérform such act, the Board may «applycto: the! ‘Tribimal
for an order directing the mutawalli to pay to: the Board orito:any: person
authorised by the Board in this behalf the amount Bay for the per-
formarice’ of sich act :

4 w 4 JOA

(2) Where 8 mutawalli is under an‘obligation to re any other
‘imposed’‘on him “under the wakf~ and ‘the Miutawall? fails १6
discharge such duties, the Board or any person ini Ga the walt

may make an application to the Tribtinai and the Tribunal may passsuch
otder'thereoni'as it thinks fit f > grihonsorg Sit of yt

9098 Yo ak

$5, Where, under this Act any period has been specified for the filing
of’any appeal, the appellate authority may, © if it‘is -satisfied that ‘the’ ee lant
was ‘prevented’ by’ sufficient cause from ‘fréferring 6748 i आर Within the
pétiod's0 specified, entertain the appeal ‘after'the expiry Of

of) 0} onsisier # es Mabnus

asbau y
obra रू

CHAPTER TX 09

MISCELLANEOUS

a 198 vo (१
ive 98, (३) For the purpose of regulating the. secular activities of wakfs,
the Central. Government shall have the following. powers: ‘and. functions,
namely: — ait ea

{ (4) ‘to lay down general principles. and policies.of wakf adminis-
tration, in, so’ far.as they relate to the secular. activities of, the :-wakfs;, »

| (09) toco-ordinate the functions ‘ofthe Central. Wakf Council and
J othe Board, in so far'as they relate to their secular functions;

rc is हि

(2) to review administration of the secular activities of wakfs

generally, and to:suggest improvements). if any.

| oii vag

(2) In exercising its powers and functions under sub-section (1), the
Central Government may call for any periodic or other reports from any
Board and may issue to the Board such directions as it may think fit and
the Board shall comply with such directions.



(१

4

0081 १७ et

bast le cs

३9५

lanation,—For the purposes
social, economic, educational and other welfare

a

of this section “secular

section 96, the State Government may, from time to time, give to the Board

such 2

or special directions as the State Government thinks fit and

¢

if ‘the perfor 108 of iis functions... the Board shall comply, with, such
directions.

sila ¢

Legislature consists of one House, before that House, and every such re-

98; As ’sbon'as may ‘be “after “the” lose of a findiicial ‘Year 16 State
Government shall cause a general annual report on the working and ad-
tration of the State Wakf Board and the Administration of wakfs
in the State during that year to be prepared and laid before each House
of! the State: Legislature where it’ consists-Of two Houses, or Where such

port shall.be in:such form:and shall contain such matters as may be! pra.
‘vided! By Yegulations:

C

5९

i च0 3

99, (1) If the State Government is of opinion that the Board is

4987

unable .( to. perform or has.:persistently made default; in. the,, performance, of,
the duty imposed on it by ofetinder-this:cAct! 5७ thas: xeteded) or: abused
its powers, or has wilfully and without sufficient cause failed to comply

with any i
ate Government under section”97, or: if- ‘the Stat

‘@iréction issuéd“by the Central Government’ under section(96 or

'Goversiigit 29Mlig

that the Board’s continuance is likely to be injurious to, the, interes
wakfs in the State, the State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, supersede the Board for.a period not exceeding six months:

to

why it should not bersuperseded and shall consider the explanations .,
Objections, if any, of the Board:

oe

OT

Provided that before issuing a: notification: under, this sub-section, ;the
State Government shall-give-a reasonable time.to the Board .to.show., cause

“"(2) Upon the publicati

superseding the Board —

one

“ol

supersession, vacate

and

neg

Direc-
tions by
State
Govern~
ment.



48

(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the pro-
visions of this Act, be exercised or performed by or on behalf of the
Board shall, during the period of supersession, be exercised and per~
formed by such person or persons as the State Government may
direct; and

(c) all property vested in the Board shall, during the period of
supersession vest in the State Government,

(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the
notification issued under sub-section (1), the State Government may—

(०) extend the period of supersession for such further period as
it may consider necessary; or

(b) reconstitute the Board in the manner provided in section 14:

कक ~ 100. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Board or
tion of Chief Executive Officer or Survey Commissioner or any other person
en duly appointed under this Act in respect of anything which is in good
med faith done or intended to be done under this Act.

faith.

Survey 101. (1) The Survey Commissioner, members of the Board, every
Commis-

sioner officer, every auditaor of the Board and every other person duly appointed
members © discharge any duties imposed on him by this Act or any tule or order

and made thereunder, shall be deemed to be public servants within the
otic meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 11 अत
Boarg Z af
deemed (2) Every mutawalli of a wakf, every member of managing _ com-
. ete mittee, whether constituted by the Board or under any deed of wakf,
हे

servants, every Executive Officer and every person holding any office in a wakf
shall also be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section
21 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1860.

Special 102. (1) Where on account of the reorganisation of States under
provi- any law providing reorganisation of States, the whole or any part of
eas a State in respect of which a Board was, immediately before the day of
tion of such reorganisation, functioning has been transferred on that day to
Sure another State and by reason of such transfer, it appears to the Govern-

ment of a State in any part of which the Board is functioning that the~ 4
Board should be dissolved or that it should be reconstituted as an
Intra-State Board for the whole or any part of that State, the State
Government may frame a scheme or such dissolution or such recon-
stitution, including pfoposals regarding the transfer of the assets, rights
and Habilities of the Board to any other Board or State Government
and the transfer or re-employment of employees of the Board and
forward the scheme to the Central Government,


49

(2) On receipt of a scheme forwarded to it under sub-section (J),
the Central Government may, aiter consulting the State Governments
concerned, approve the scheme with or without modifications and give
@ffect to the scheme so approved by making such order as it thinks fit.

(3) An order under sub-section (2) may provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:—

(a) the dissolution of the Board;

(©) the reconstitution in any manner whatsoever of the Board
including the establishment, where necessary, of a new Board.

(c) the area in respect of which the reconstituted Board or
new Board shali function and operate;

(@) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, rights and
liabilities of the Board (including the rights and liabilities under
any contract made by it) to any other Board or State Government
and the terms and conditions of such transfer;

\

(९) the substitution of any such transferee for the Board, or
the addition of any such transferee, as a party to any legal proceed-
ing to which the Board is a party; and the transfer of any proceed-
ing pending before the Board to any such transferee;

(f) ‘he transfer or re-employment of any employee of the
Board to or by. any such transferee and subject to the provisions
of law providing for the reorganisation of the concerned State, the
terms and conditions of service applicable to such employees after
such transfer or re-employment; and

(g) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as
may be necessary to give effect to the approved scheme.

(4) Where an order is made under this section transferring _ the
assets, rights and liabilities of any Board. then. by virtue of that order,
such assets, rights and Habilities of the Board shall vest in, and be the
assets, rights and Habilities of, the transferee.

(5) Every order made under this section shall be published in the
Official Gazette. /

(6) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each
House of Parliament, as soon as may be, after it is made.

103. (1) Where on account of the territorial changes brought about special
by any. law providing for the reorganisation of any State, this Act is as « provi-
from the date on which that law comes into force applicable only to pa
any, part or parts of a State but has not been brought into force in the menboe
remaining part thereof, then notwithstanding anything contained in this Board
Act, it shall be lawful for the Government of the State to establish one for
or. more Boards for such part or parts in which this Act-is in force and P@t of a
in such a ease any reference in this Act to the word “State” in. relation
of a Board shall be construed as a reference to that part of the State for
which the Board is established.


Applica-
tion of
Act to
properties
given or
donated
by per-
sons not
profes-

Islam for
‘support

of certain.
wakf,

Power of

Board and

Chief Exe-
cutive,

ee ee
ae

to require
copies of
documents,
ete, to be
furnished.

Powers of
Central
Govern-
ment to
consti-
‘tute
common

to toa

612

(1) (@pil¥herévany such 7 8089-जाक्षक फललो, -established!andi it-appears ‘to the
Gexcrament; ofthe: State shat! ‘a ‘Board ‘should be: established.) for: the whole
Sfighd StatesthesSidim Government may; by order-notified inthe: Official Gazette
dissqbiai the: Boardsestablished: for. the .part:-of: the, State or=reconstitute aid
reorganise such Board or establish a new Board for the whole of the State
‘hd WiGretthdh? ae #388 rights” and liabilitiés” of the ‘Board’ for ‘the part of
the State shall vest in and be the assets, rights and liabilities: of the reconstitu:

8750 क्ष gap)! Netwithstaauiniy’ anything’ cofitained “in*this“Act where any movable
or immheyable \prépertyohas been given or“donated“by any person Hot professing

Es 25 gop os पक Use

(a) a mosque, idgah, imambara, dargah, khangah or a maqbara;
bas 2idgin(b) a Muslin Staveyard;” wltas sd? (७)

‘ebou esitilidsil bre aidan f
teoormyayGe) &.choultry.or,a' musafarkhana,

then such property shail’ bE" deemed ‘to ‘be comprised in’ that wakf and be
dealt, in the same manner as the wakf in which it is so comprised.

hassoxq |
-besoo1q yas

FISTS?

adi 7405. Notwithstanding anything -coritained: in any law for the time being
ado fopexgit shall, beoJawiul for the Board: or the Chief Executive Officer to
40GUIzg.FBYHBEFAON, having the custody of any record, register; report or other
sogpment, relying 10.8 wak£ sor. any: immovable: property, which is waké: pro-
perty, to furnish subject to the payment. of mecessary costs, Copies’ of, or ex-
tracts from, any such record, register, report or document and every person
ao whom acts trequisition ismade, shall furnish, ‘as soon as riay be practicable,
to the Boardnon!@hief Executive’ Officer bpies’ or ‘extracts’ from the required

record, register, report or other document.
od Rartieisy soi

10910 tadt 16 आए
308 sd bers nt 7290 18

oft nt badettdnee oc Tse
\
106. (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that by reasons of—

१७७ 9Y0 3

(i) the smallness of the Muslim population in two or more States,
tuods tdarord १
10 5 ii)’ the ‘slender ‘resources ofthe Wakfs in such States, and

at रा वि0 otc -

“the ‘disproportion bitween the number and income of the
and the Muslim population in such States.

¢ ० interest of the wakfs in the States and the Muslim
population of Such Si ies, to have, instead of separate Boards for each of such
“States, a common Board, it may, ‘after sensultation with the Government of

each of the concerned States, establish, by notification in the Official Gazette,



36 of 1963,

“=

31 of 1950,

3

a common Board for such States as it may deem fit, and may, by the same
or any subsequent notification specify the place at which the principal office
of such common Board shall be located.

(2) Eyery common Board established under sub-section (1) shall, as far
as practicable, consist of the persons specified in sub-section (1) or, as the case
may be, sub-section (7) of section 14.

(3) Whenever any common Board is established under sub-section (1),—

६७) all powers vested in the State Government under any deed
of wakf or any provision of law for the time being in force relating to
wokfs_ shall stend transferred to. and vested in, the Central Government
and, thereupon, references in such deed of wakf or law to the State
Governments shall be comstrued as references to the Central Government;

Provided thot while establishine 2 common Board for two or more
States, the Central Government shall ensure that at least one representative
Of each of the concerned States is included 2s a member of the Board;

z (5) references in this Act to 3 State shall be construed as references
to each of the States for which the common Board has been established;

(०) the Central Government may, without prejudice to .any rule
applicable to 2 Board im a State, make, by notification in the Official
Gazette, rules regulating the conduct of business by and affairs of, the
common Board

(4) The common Board shall be a body corporate, with objects not confined
to ome State, having perpetual succession and a common seal with power to
acquire and hold property and to transfer any such property, subject to such
conditions and restrictions as may be specified by the Central Government, and
shall by the said name sue or be sued.

107. Nothing contained in the Limitation Act, 1963 shal] apply to any
suit for possession of immovable property comprised in any wakf or for
possession of any interest in such property.

108. The provisions of this Act shall apply, and shall be deemed _
always to have applied, in relation to any evacuee property within the
meaning of clause (f) of section 2 of the Administration of Evacuee Property
Act, 1950 which immediately before it became such evacuee property within
the said meaning was property comprised in any wakf and, in particular any
entrustment (whether by transfer of any documents or in any other manner
and whether generally or for specified purpose) of any such property to a
Board made before the commencement of this Act in pursuance of the instruc-
tions of the Custodian under the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950
shall have, and shall be deemed always to have had, notwithstanding anything

Act 36
of 1963
not to
apply for
recovery
of wakf
proper.
ties,
Special
provision
as to
evacuee
wakf
proper-

ties,

4


52

Contained in any other Provision of this Act, effect as if such entrustment had
Operated to—

(a) vest such Property in such Board in the same manner and
with the same effect as ina trustee of such property for the purposes
of sub-section (7) of section 11 of the Administration of Evacuee Pro-
perty Act, 1950 with effect from the date of such entrustment, and

(4) authorise such Board to assume direct management of the
wakf concerned for so long as it might deem necessary,

ह to 109. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official

ules Gazette, make rules to catry out the purposes of this Act, other than those
‘i of Chapter III. हि

(2) In particular, and without Prejudice to the generality of the fore~
going powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely :—

(i) other particulars which the report of the Survey Commissioner
may contain, under clause (f) of sub-section (3) of section (4):

(४) any other matter under clause (f) of sub-section (4) of section
(iii) the particulars which a list of Wakfs published under sub-
section (2) of section 5, may contain;

(i) the manner of election of members of the Board by means of
a Single transferable vote, under sub-section, (2) of section 14;

(v) the terms and conditions of service of the Chief Executive
Officer under sub-section (2) of section 23; mi

(vi) the conditions ang restrictions subject to which the Chief
Executive Officer or any other officer may inspect any. public office,
records or registers under section 29;

(vii) the conditions subject to which an Executive Officer and
supporting staff may be appointed under sub-section (7) of section 38;

(viii) the manner in which an inquiry may be held by the Chief
Executive Officer under sub-section (1) of section 39;

(ix) the form in which, and the time within which, a separate
Prepared under sub-section (1) of section 45;

(x) the interval at which accounts of Wakfs may be audited ir
pursuance of the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 47;

fxi) the time within which, the sale of any property is to be
informed under the first proviso to sub-section. (2) of section 51 and
the manner in which the approval given under sub-section (3) of that
section shail be published;

(wit) the guidance subject to which the Collector shall recover
the property transferred in contravention of the provisions of this Act,
under section 52; as.

budget for Wakfs under the direct management of the Board shall be



4 253 eee

(wii) the manner of service of notice issued under sub-section
(2) of section 54 and the manner in which any inquiry is to be made
under sub-section (3) of that section;

(wiv) the manner in which any inquiry may be held under sec-
tion 64 or section 71;

(xv) the other matters which may be specified in the report sub:
mitted under sub-section (3) of section 65;

(xvi) the manner of publication of order made under sub-section
(2) of section 67;

(xvii) the manner in which consultation may be made with
mutawalli under sub-section (7) of seation 68;

(viii) the manner of publication of order made ender sub-section
(3) of section 69;

(ix) the rate at which contribution is to be made by a mutawalli
under section 72;

(zx) the payment of moneys ७ the Wakf Fund, the invest-
ment, the custody and disbursement of such moneys under section 77;

(wai) the form in which. and the time within which, the budget
of the Board may be prepared amd submitted under section 78:

(xaii) the time within which application is to be made to the
Tribunal under sub-section {2) of section. 83;

(xxiii) the procedure which the tribunal shall follow under sub~
section (6) of section 83;

(220) the form in which the annual report is to be submitted. dnd:
the matters which such report shall contain under section 98; and

(xxv) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed.

110. (1)' The Board may, with the previous sanction of the State Gov-
‘ernment, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act or the rules made
thereunder, for carrying out its functions under this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going powers, such regulations may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely: —

(a) the time and places of the meetings of the Board under sub- +

section (J) of section 17;
(b) the procedure and conduct of business at the meetings of the
Board;

(c) the constitution and functions of the committees and the Board
and the procedure for transaction of business at the meetings of suck
committees; ५

Powers to
make
Tegula-
tiong by



ee फुशर ++

Laying of
ruleg and
regulations
before
State
Legis-
Tature,

Repeal *
and °
eavings,

34

+ (6) ‘the allowances or fees to be paid | the Chairperson or mem-
- pers: of ‘the Board or members of committees;

(९) the terms and conditions of service of the officers and other

employees of the Board under sub-section (2) ‘of section 24;

(f) the forms of application for registration of Wakfs further parti-
culars to be contained therein and the manner and place of registra~
tion of Wakfs under sub-section (3) of section 36

(g) further particulars to pe contained in the register of Wakfs
under section 37;

(h) the form in which, and the time within which, the pudgets of
Wakfs may be prepared and submitted by the ‘Mutawalli and approv-
ed by the Board under sub-section (1) of section 44;

(i) the pooks of accounts and other pooks to be maintained by
the Board under section ‘79;

(j) fees payable for inspection of proceedings and records of the
Board or for issue of copies of the same;

(k) persons by whom any order or decision of the Board may
pe authenticated; and

(0) any other. matter which has to be, or may be, provided by
regulations.

(3) All regulations made under ‘this section shall be published in the
Official Gazette and shall have effect from the date of such publication.

411. Every rule made under section 109 and every regulation made
under section 110 shall be laid, as soon as may; be after it is made, before

the State Legislature.

112, (1) The Wakf Act, 1954 and the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 1984
are hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
under the said Acts shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of this Act.

(3) Hf, immediately before the commencement of this Act, in any
State, there is in force jn that State, any law which corresponds to this
‘Act that corresponding Jaw shall stand repealed:

Provided that such repeal shall not affect the previous operation. of
that corresponding law, and subject thereto, anything done oF any action
taken in ithe exercise of any power conferred by or under the correspond-
ing law shall be deemed te have been done or taken in the exercise of



__ the powers conferred by or under this :
the day on which such things were done or action was taken.

113. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the
period of two years from the commencement of this Act.

(2) However, order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.

के



A 5५ हा
BILL

to provide for the better administration of wakfs and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto,

(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)