1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 124 of the Constitution of India, in clause ( 2), for the words "on the
recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments Commission", the words, "on the
recommendation of the National Judicial Commission" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of article 124.
Bill No. LXXII of 2022
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022
5

2
3. For articles 124A, 124B and 124C of the Constitution, the following articles shall be
substituted, namely:—
"124A. (1) There shall be a Commission to be known as the National Judicial
Commission consisting of the following, namely:—
(a) the Chief Justice of India, Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) two other senior Judges of the Supreme Court next in seniority to the
Chief Justice of India—Member, ex officio;
(c) Attorney General of India—Member, ex officio;
(d) two eminent persons nominated by the full court of the Supreme Court
from a panel to be submitted by a Committee consisting of the Prime Minister,
the Chief Justice of India and the Leader of Opposition in the House of the
People or where there is no such Leader of Opposition, then, the Leader of single
largest Opposition Party in the House of the People and a nominee of the Bar
Council of India—Member:
Provided that one of the eminent persons shall be jurist and the other shall
be a person with specialized expert knowledge in any of the branches of social
science, political science, economies etc. nominated from amongst the persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward
Classes or Minorities:
Provided further that one of the eminent persons shall be a woman:
Provided further that an eminent person shall be nominated for a period of
three years and shall not be eligible for renomination.
(2) A Member nominated under clause (d) of sub-section (1),—
(a) may by writing under this hand addressed to the President, resign his office;
(b) shall not be removed from office except on the unanimous recommendation
of the Chairperson and all the other Members of the Commission;
(c) shall not hold any public office or engage in any legal practiced whatsoever
after the completion of his term; and
(d) shall entitled to such privileges, salaries and allowances equivalent to a
Judge of the Supreme Court of India.
(3) No act or proceedings of the National Judicial Commission shall be questioned or
be invalidated merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution
of the Commission.
(4) The office of the National Judicial Commission shall be at New Delhi.
"124B. It shall be the duty of the National Judicial Commission to—
(a) recommend persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India, Judges
of the Supreme Court, Chief Justice of High Courts and other Judges of High
Courts:
Provided that the Commission, before making recommendations for
appointment of a Chief Justice of High Court or a Judge of the High Court, shall
elicit in writing the views of the Governor and the Advocate General or the Chief
Minister of the State concerned in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Commission;
(b) recommend transfer of Chief Justices and other Judges of High Courts
from one High Court to any other High Court;
Substitution
of articles
124A, 124B
and 124C.
National
Judicial
Commission
Functions of
the National
Judicial
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(c) ensure that the person recommended is of ability and integrity; and
(d) to inquire for misbehaviour or incapacity of Chief Justice of India,
Judges of the Supreme Court of India, Chief Justices of a High Courts and other
Judges of High Courts and to regulate the procedure for such inquiry, under
clause (4) of article 124.
124C. (1) Parliament may, by law, regulate the procedure for the appointment of
Chief Justice of India and other Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justice and
other Judges of High Courts and transfer of the Chief Justices and other Judges of the
High Courts from one High Court to any other High Court.
(2) The National Judicial Commission to specify by regulations, the procedure
for the discharge of its functions and duties, exercise of its powers and it such other
procedure, conditions and criteria of suitability for selection and appointment of Judges
of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of High Courts and other Judges of a High Courts
and transfer of the Chief Justices and other Judges of the High Courts from one High
Court to any other High Court as it may consider necessary.
124.D (1) The National Judicial Commission shall have a permanent secretariat
and such investigation committees, secretaries,  officers and employees as may be
deemed necessary by the Commission and specified by regulation and Commission
shall constitute such investigation committees and appoint such number of oficers
and employees for the discharge of functions of the Commission.
(2) The terms and other conditions of service of officers and employees of the
National Judicial Commission appointed under sub-section (1) shall be such as may
be specified by regulations.
124E. The administrative expenses of National Judicial Commission including
all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of officers and employees
of the Commission shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India.".
4. in Article 127 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words ''the National Judicial
Appointments Commission'', the words ''the National Judicial Commission'', shall be
substituted.
5. In article 128 of the Constitution, for the words ''the National Judicial Appointments
Commission'', the words ''the National Judicial Commission'' shall be substituted.
6. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words, ''on the recommendation
of the National Judicial Appointment Commision'', the words, ''on the recommendation of the
National Judicial Commission'' shall be substituted.
7. In article 222 of the Constituion, in clause (1), for the words, ''on the recommendation
of the National Judical Appointments Commission'', the words, ''on the recommendation of
the National Judicial Commission'' shall be substituted.
8. In article 224 of the Constituion,—
(a) in clause ( 1), for the words, ''in consulation with the National Judicial
Appointments Commission'', the words ''in consulation with the National Judicial
Commission'', shall be substituted; and
(b) in clause ( 2), for the words ''in consulation with the National Judicial
Appointment Commision'', the words ''in consulation with the National Judicial
Commission'', shall be substituted.
9. In article 224A of the Consitution, for the words ''the National Judicial Appointment
Commission', the words ''the National Judicial Commission shall be substituted.
Power of
Parliament to
make law.
Secretariat of
the National
Judicial
Commission.
Administrative
expenses of
the National
Judicial
Commission.
Amendment
of article
127.
Amendment
of article
128.
Amendment
of article
217.
Amendment
of article
222.
Amendment
of article
224.
Amendment
of article
224A.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
S3/ F/BILL 2022/ RS /1807RS THE CONSTITUTION
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Judges of the Supreme Court are appointment under clause (2) of article 124 and
the Judges of the High Courts are appointed under clause (1) of article 217 of the Constitution,
by the President. The Ad-hoc Judges and retired Judges for the Supreme Court are appointment
under clause (1) of article 127 and article 128 of the Constitutuion respectively. The
appointment of Additional Judges and Acting Judges for the High Court is made under
article224 and the appointment of retired Judges for sittings of the High Courts is made under
article 224A for the Constitution. The transfer of Judges from one Courts is made under
article 224A of the Constitution. The tranfer of Judges from one High Court to another High
Court is made by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India under clause
(1) of article 222 of the Constitution.
2. The Supreme Court in the matter of the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record
Association Vs. Union of India in the year 1993, and in its Advisory Opinion in the year 1998
in the Third Judges case, had interpreted clause (2) of article 124 and clause (1) of article 217
of the Consitution with respect to the meaning of ''consulation'' as ''concurrence''.
Consequently, a Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of Judges to the Supreme
Court and High Courts was formulated, and is being followed for appointment.
3. Independence of judiciary is a basic feature and part of basic structure of the
Consitution of India, as declared by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Transparency and
accountability in the matter of appointment of the Judges of the High Courts and Supreme
Court is very much linked to this concept. It is widely accepted that the prevailing collegium
system needs to be revisited in this regard. The Constitution (Ninety-nineth Amendment)
Act, 2014 which proposed to establish a Ntional Judicial Appointment Commission was held
to be unconstitutional by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the judgement in Supreme
Court Advocates-on-Record Advocates Association Vs. Union of India (2016) 5 SCC 1.
4- After review of the relevant constitutional provisions, the pronouncements of the
Supreme Court and consultations with eminent Jurists, it is felt that a new broad based
National Judicial Commission should be established for making recommendations for
appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts. The said Commission would
provide a meaningful role for the judiciary and all the important stakeholders to present their
view points and make the participants accountable, while also introducing transparency in
the selction process. The role of the executive in the whole process would be drastically
curbed and curtailed. The Commission shall have independence and autonomy under the
Constituiton and shall have comprehensive powers  for selection of Judges to the High
Courts and Supreme Court and transfer of Judges of the High Courts.
5. The Bill proposes to amend the relevant provisions of the Constitution to set up a
National Judicial Commision with comprehensive powers in the light of judgement in Supreme
Court Advocates-on-Record Advocates Association vs. Union of India. It seeks to substitute
the articles 124A, 124B and 124C of the Constitution inserted by the Constitution (Ninety-
ninth Amendment) Act, 2014 by new articles. It also seeks to bring about consequential
amendment in articles 127, 128, 217, 22, 224A and 231 of Constitution. The said Bill also
provides for the composition and the functions of the proposed National Judicial Commission
with its own independent secretariat for its autonomous function. Further, it provides that
Parliament may, by law, regulate the procedure for appointment of Judges and empower the
National Judicial Commission to lay down procedure by regulation for the discharge of its
functions, manner of selection of persons for appointment and such other matters as may be
considered necessary.
6. The proposed Bill seeks to broad base the method of appointment of Judges in the
Supreme Court and High  Courts, transfer of the judges of the high Courts and for independent

5
inquiry for misbehaviour, misconduct and such misdemeanor of Judges. It brings about an
independent autonomous constitutional institution having sufficient representation from
the judiciary and important stakeholdrs for effective participation with greater transparency,
accountability  and objectivity in the appointment of the Judges in the Supreme Court and
High Courts, tranfer of Judges in the High Courts, and thereby strengthening independence
and acountability of judiciary.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
BIKASH  RANJAN  BHATTACHARYYA

6
S3/ F/BILL 2022/ RS /1807RS THE CONSTITUTION
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill inter-alia  provides for nomination of two eminent persons to the
National Judicial Commission who would be entitled to such privileges, salaries and allowances
equivalent to a Judge of the Supreme Court. Further, clause 3 of Bill also provides for a
permanent secretariat and such investigation Committtees, Secretaries, officers, staffs and
employees as may be deemed necessary  by the National Judicial Commission and that the
administrative expenses of National Judicial Commission including all salaries, allowances
and pensions payable to or in respect of officers, staffs and employees of the Commission
shall be charged upon the Consolidated fund of India.
This Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
However, it is ot possible to access the actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at
this stage.

7
S3/ F/BILL 2022/ RS /1807RS THE CONSTITUTION
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
124. * * * * * *
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal on the recomendation of the National Judicial Appointments
Commission referred to in article 124A and shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-
five years:
Provided that—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the president, resign his
office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in the manner provided in clause (4).
* * * * * *
124A. (1) There shall be a Commission to be known as the National Judicial
Appointments Commission consisting of the following, namely:—
(a) the Chief Justice of India, Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) two other senior Judges of the Supreme Court next to the Chief Justice of India—
Members, ex officio;
(c) The Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice—Member, ex officio;
(d) two eminent persons to be nominated by the committee consisting of the Prime
Minister, the Chief Justice of India and the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People
or where there is no such Leader of Opposition, then, the Leader of single largest Opposition
Party in the House of the People—Members:
Provided that one of the eminent person shall be nominated from amongst the persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, Minorities
or Women:
Provided further that an eminent person shall be nominated for a period of three years
and shall not be eligible for renomination.
(2) No act or proceedings of the National Judicial Appointments Commission shall be
questioned or be invalidated merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy or defect
in the constitution of the Commission.
124B. It shall be the duty of the National Judicial Appointments Commission to—
(a) recommend persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India, Judges of the Supreme
Court, Chief Justices of High Courts and other Judges of High Courts;
(b) recommend transfer of Chief Justice and other Judges of High Courts from one
High Court to any other High Court; and
(c) ensure that the person recommended is of ability and integrity.
124C. Parliament may, by law, regulate the procedure for the appointment of Chief
Justice of India and other Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and other Judges
of High Courts and empower the Commission to lay down by regulations the procedure for
Establishment
and
constitution
of Supreme
Court.
National
Judicial
Appointments
Commission.
Functions of
Commission.
Power of
parliament to
make law.

8
the discharge of its functions, the manner of selection of persons for appointment and such
other matters as may be considered necessary by it.
* * * * * *
127. (1) If any time there should not be a quorum of the Judges of the Supreme Court
available to hold or continue any session of the Court, the National Judicial Appointments
Commission on a reference made to it by the Chief Justice of India, may with the previous
consent of the President and after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court
concerned, request in writing the attendance at the sittings of the Court, as an ad hoc Judge,
for such period as may be necessary, of a Judge of High Court duly qualified for appointment
as a Judge of the Supreme Court to be designated by the Chief Justice of India.
* * * * * *
128. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter , the National Judicial Appointments
Commission] may at any time, with the previous consent of the President, request any
person who has held the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of the Federal Court or
who has held the office of a Judge of High Court and is duly qualified for appointment as a
Judge of the Supreme Court to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court, and every such
person so requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowances as the
President may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but
shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that Court:
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require any such person as
aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge of that Court unless he consents so to do.
* * * * * *
217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant
under his hand and seal on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments
Commission referred to in article 124A, and the Governor of the State, and, in the case of
appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court, shall
hold office, in the case of an additional or acting Judge, as provided in article 224, and in any
other case, until he attains the age of sixty-two years:
Provided that—(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President,
resign his office; (b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the manner
provided in clause (4) of article 124 for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court; (c) the
office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appointed by the President to be a Judge of
the Supreme Court or by his being transferred by the President to any other High Court
within the territory of India.
*****
222. ( 1) The President may, on the recommendation of the National  Judicial
Appointments Commission referred to in article 124A, transfer a Judge from one High Court
to any other High Court.
*****
224. (1) If by reason of any temporary increase in the business of a High Court or by
reason of arrears of work therein, it appears to the President that the number of the Judges of
that Court should be for the time being increased, the president may, in consultation with the
National Judicial Appointments Commission, appoint duly qualified persons to be additional
Judges of the Court for such period not exceeding two years as he may specify.
(2) When any Judge of a High Court other than the Chief Justice is by reason of
absence or for any other reason unable to perform the duties of his offici or is appointed to
act temporarily as Chief Justice, I [the President may, in consultation with the National
Judicial Appointments Commission, appoint] a duly qualified person to act as a Judge of that
Court until the permanent Judge his resumed his duties.
*****
Appointment
of ad hoc
Judges.
Attendance of
retired Judges
at sittings of
the Supreme
Court.
Appointment
and
Conditions of
the office of a
Judge of a
High Court.
Transfer of a
Judge from
one High
Court to
another.
Appointment
of additional
and acting
Judges.

9
Appointment
of retired
Judges at
sittings of
High Courts.
 224A.  Notwithstanding anything in his Chapter, the National Judicial Appointments
Commission on a reference made to it by the Chief Justice of a High Court for any State, may
with the previous consent of the President, request any person who has held the office of a
Judge of the High Court for that State, and every such persons so requested shall, while so
sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowances as the President may by order determine
and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but shall not otherwise be deemed to
be, a Judge of that High Court:
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require any such person
as aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge of that High Court unless he consents so to do.
*****

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1807RS(S3)—12-12-2022.