 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
Bill No. LXXI of 2025 
THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
 
5 
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act,
2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment 
of section 16. 
2. In the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as th e
principal Act), in section 16, in sub -section (2), after clause (c), the following
n
ew clause shall be inserted, namely:―
“(ca) the procedure for regulation, grant and monitoring of 
certifications relating to religious, ethical, or faith -based dietary 
practices, including Halal certification, exclusively through 
Government-notified authorities or agencies under the Union Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare;”.  
 
5 
34 of 2006 
Insertion of 
new sections 
43A to 43C. 
 
 
Regulation of 
Halal 
Certification 
3. After section 43 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely— 
“43A.  (1) No private organization, trust, society, or association shall 
issue, collect fees for, or act as an intermediary in the process of Halal 
certification of any food item. 
(2) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Officia l
G
azette, designate s uch authority or agency under its control for the 
purpose of granting, supervising, renewing and revoking Halal 
certification for food items. 
(3) All fees or charges payable for the issuance, renewal or testing
of Halal certification shall be deposited in the Consolidated Fund of India. 
(4) Halal certification shall apply only to food products intended for
human consumption, and shall not extend to non -edible goods, services, 
industrial products or machinery. 
(5) Any person or entity contravening the provisions of this section
s
hall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both. 
(6) The Central Government may, by rules made under this Act,
prescribe the procedure, forms, validity, and audit mechanism for halal 
certifications under this section. 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
. 
Committee on 
Certification 
of Religious 
Dietary  Food 
Items. 
43B. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a Committee to be called the Committee on 
Certification of Religious Dietary Food Items consisting of the following 
members, namely, — 
(a) Secretary, Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
– C
hairperson ex-officio;
(b) one representative each from the Union Ministries of
Food Processing Industries; Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution; and Minority Affairs, to be nominated by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed – Members ex-
officio; 
(c) two experts, one each in the field of food safety and public 
health, to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner 
as may be prescribed - Members; and 
(d) two representatives from State Food Safety Authorities,
to be nominated by the Central Government in consultation with the 
State Government concerned, in such manner as may be prescribed 
– Members ex-officio.
(2) The Committee shall be administered by the Union Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, which shall provide necessary secretarial 
assistance and bear the expenditure from its existing budget grant for the 
functioning of the Committee. 
(3) The Chairman and Members of the Committee other than ex-
officio Members shall hold office for such term as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government by rules made under this Act. 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 

3 
(4) The salary and/or allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members other than ex-
officio Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government by rules made under this Act. 
 
5
 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
43C.  The Committee shall perform all or any of the following 
functions, namely — 
(a) identify and notify classes of food items that may require
religious dietary certification under this Act or by rules made 
thereunder; 
(b) recommend uniform national standards and procedures for
such certification; 
(c) advise the Central Government on criteria for slaughter,
processing, packaging, and labelling consistent with public health 
and religious dietary considerations; 
(d) review and update standards periodically;
(e) monitor and report on the implementation and misuse of
religious dietary certifications; and 
(f) perform such other functions as may be assigned by the
Central Government, from time to time. 
Explanation. – For the purposes of this section “religious dietary certification” 
means any form of certification, labelling, or declaration that a food item, 
ingredient, or process conforms to any religious dietary requirement, including 
but not limited  to Halal, Ko sher, Jhatka, or any equivalent term, whether 
expressed in writing, mark, symbol, or otherwise.” 
Functions of 
the 
Committee. 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
        At present, there is no statutory authority or law that regulates and 
standardizes halal certification for domestic consumption.  Halal certification is 
voluntary and market-driven for domestic products and private entities conduct and 
charge for such certifications without statutory accountability.    
        The purpose of this Bill is to ensure transparency, standardization, and 
governmental oversight in religious dietary certifications, including Halal 
certification.  
This Amendment Bill to the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 seeks to— 
1. Vest exclusive authority for Halal and similar certifications in
Government agencies; 
2. Establish a Committee on Certification of Religious Dietary Food
I
tems to identify and regulate items requiring such certification; 
3. Ensure that all fees are paid only to the Government; and
4. Re
strict certification strictly to food items to prevent misuse in non -
food sectors. 
       This will promote consumer confidence, uphold public accountability, and 
strengthen the integrity of India’s food regulation system. 
 Hence, this Bill. 
MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI. 

RAJYA SABHA 
____________ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 
____________ 
 (Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS―PMB(E)—341—08.12.2025. 