1
Bill No. LXXIV of  2022
THE HATE CRIMES AND HATE SPEECH (COMBAT, PREVENTION
AND PUNISHMENT) BILL, 2022
A
BILL
to empower the State Governments and the Central Government to take measures to
provide for the prevention and control of hate crimes and hate speech in terms
of the Constitution and international human rights instruments concerning
religion, race, caste or community, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
place  of  birth,  residence, language, disability or tribe and  related
intolerance, in accordance with Constitutional and international
law obligations; define for the offence of hate crime and the offence
of hate speech and the punishment of persons who commit those
offences and rehabilitation of victims of those offences;
to provide for the reporting on the implementation,
application  and  administration  of  this Act;
and to provide for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
Preliminary
1. (1) This Act may be called the Hate Crimes and Hate Speech (Combat, Prevention
and Punishment) Bill, 2022.
AS  INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 9TH DECEMBER, 2022
Short title and
commencement.
5

2
(2) It shall  come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government.
(b) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(c) "Communication" includes any—
(i) display;
(ii) written, illustrated, visual or other descriptive matter;
(iii) oral statement;
(iv) representation or reference; or
(v) an electronic communication, and "communicates" and "communicated"
shall have a corresponding meaning;
(d) "competent authority" means such officer or authority as the appropriate
Government may, by notification, appoint as the competent authority under sub-section
(2) of section 9;
(e) "data" means electronic representations of information in any form as defined
under clause ( o) of sub-section ( 1) and section 2 of the Information Technology
Act, 2000;
(f) "data message" means data generated, sent, received or stored by electronic
means;
(g) "electronic record" means electronic record as defined under clause ( t) of
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000;
(h) "electronic communication" means a communication by means of data
messages;
(i) "electronic communications system" means any electronic communications
infrastructure or facility used for the conveyance of data;
(j) "harm" means any emotional, psychological, physical, social or economic
harm;
(k) "hate crime" has the meaning assigned to it in terms of sub-section ( 1) of
section 3;
(l) "hate speech" has the meaning assigned to it in terms of sub-section ( 1) of
section 5;
(m) "information" includes data, message, text, images, sound, voice, codes,
computer programmes software and databases or microfilm or computer generated
microfiche;
(n) "intermediary", with respect to any particular electronic records, means any
person who on behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that record or
provides any service with respect to that record and includes broadcast channels,
telecom service providers, network service providers, internet service providers, web-
hosting service providers, social media platforms, search engines, online payment
sites, online-auction sites, online-marketplaces and cyber cafes;
(o) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
21 of 2000.
21 of 2000.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Definitions.

3
(p) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(q) “victim” means a person, including a juristic person, or group of persons,
against whom an offence referred to in section 3 or section 4 of this Act has been
committed.
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in
the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall have meaning
respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
CHAPTER II
O
FFENCE OF HA TE CRIMES AND HATE SPEECH
3. (1) Any person who harms or incites harm or promotes or propagates hatred bring
out of his prejudice against or intolerance towards any other person because of one or more
of the following characteristics or perceived characteristics of the victim or his or her family
member or the victim’s association with, or support for, a group of personswho share
anyone or more of such characteristics:
(a) religion,
(b) race,
(c) caste or community,
(d) sex,
(e) gender,
(f) sexual orientation,
(g) place of birth,
(h) residence,
(i) language,
(j) disability, or
(k) tribe
shall be guilty of an offence of hate crime.
4. (1) Whoever commits a hate crime shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years or fine upto five thousand rupees or both.
(2) An offence of hate crime shall be non-cognizable and non-bailable and shall be
triable by magistrate of the first class.
5. (1) Any person:—
(a) who intentionally publishes, propagates or advocates anything or
communicates to one or more persons in a manner that could reasonably be construed
to demonstrate a clear intention to harm or incite harm or promote or propagate
hatred, based on one or more of the following grounds:
(i) religion,
(ii) race,
(iii) caste or community,
(iv) sex,
(v) gender,
(vi) sexual orientation,
(vii) place of birth,
Offence of
hate crime.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Punishment of
hate crime.
Offence of
hate speech.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(viii) residence,
(ix) language,
(x) disability, or
(xi) tribe; or
(b) who intentionally distributes or makes available an electronic communication
which that person knows constitutes hate speech as referred in clause (a) through an
electronic communications system which is—
(i) accessible by any member of the public; or
(ii) accessible by, or directed at, a specific person who can be considered
to be a victim of hate speech; or
(c) who intentionally, in any manner whatsoever, displays any material or makes
available any material which is capable of being communicated any which that person
knows constitutes hate speech as referred inclause ( a), which is accessible by, or
directed at, a specific person who can be considered to bea victim of hate speech,
shall be guilty of an offence of hate speech.
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply in respect of anything done as
referred in sub-section (1), if it is done inith in the course of engagement in—
(a) any bona fide artistic creativity, performance or other form of expression, to
the extent that such creativity, performance or expression doesnot advocate hatred
that constitutes in citement to cause harm, based on one or more of the grounds
referred to in clause (a) of sub-section(1);
(b) any academic or scientific inquiry; fair and accurate reporting or commentary
in the public interest or in the publication  of  information, commentary, advertisement
or notice; or the bona fide interpretation and proselytisation or espousing of any
religious tenet, belief, teaching, doctrine or writings, to the extent that such
interpretation and proselytisation does not advocate hatred that constitutes incitement
to cause harm, based on one or more of the grounds referred to in clause ( a) of
sub-section (1).
6. (1) Whoever who commits hate speech shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years or fine up to five thousand rupees or both.
(2) An offence of  hate crime shall be non-cognizable and non-bailable and shall be
triable by magistrate of the first class.
CHAPTER III
A
ID, ABET OR OTHERWISE ASSISTANCE FOR COMMITTING HATE CRIME OR HATE SPEECH
7. (1) Whoever knowingly or unknowingly believes that commission or omission of
any other person would be an offence under the provisions of this Act, with intent and
thereby aids, abets or otherwise gives that other person any assistance for such offence,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years and shall also be liable to fine or both:
Provided that an act or omission had a substantial effect on the commission a crime is
a fact based inquiry:
Provided further that the aider and abettor’s conduct may occur in a location remote
from the scene of the crime.
(2) Any intermediary who knowingly or unknowingly or due diligently believes that
commission or omission of any other person would be an offence under the provisions of
Punishment
for hate
speech.
Punishment
for aiding,
abetting or
assisting for
committing
hate crime or
hate speech.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
this Act, provide their platform to commit such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term, which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to
fine or both.
(3) Whoever knowingly or unknowingly believe or has reasonable cause to believe
that commission or omission of any other person would be an offence under the provisions
of this Act, expends or supplies any money in furtherance or in support of an act which is
an offence under this Act, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term, which may extend to three years,and shall also be liable to fine or both.
CHAPTER IV
V
ICTIM IMPACT ASSESSMENT
8. The prosecution, when adducing evidence or addressing the court on sentence in
respect of an offence under this Act, consider the interests of a victim of the offence and the
impact of the offence on the victim and, where practicable, furnish the court with a victim
impact statement:
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, a victim impact statement means a
sworn statement or affirmation by a victim or someone authorised by a victim to make such
a statement on his behalf, which contains the physical, psychological, social, economic or
any other consequences of an offence under this Act for a victim and family member or
associate of a victim.
CHAPTER V
P
REVENTION OF ACTS LEADING TO HATE CRIME AND HATE SPEECH
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, whenever the District
Magistrate has reason to believe that in any area within his jurisdiction, a situation has
arisen where there is an apprehension of breach of peace or creation of discord between
members of different groups, castes or communities due to commission of offence under
the provisions of this Act, he may, by order in writing, prohibit any act which in his opinion
is likely to cause apprehension in the minds of another community or caste or group that it
is directed to intimidate, threaten or otherwise promote ill-will against that community or
caste or group.
(2) A competent authority, appointed by the appropriate Government by notification,
in any area within his jurisdiction, may by order in writing,—
(a) direct the conduct of any assembly or procession in any place or street and
specify by general or special notice, if any, by which and the times at which, such
procession may or may not pass;
(b) require, by general or special notice, on being satisfied that any person or
class of persons intend to convene or collect a assembly or an procession in any
place or street or to form an assembly or procession which would in his judgment, if
uncontrolled, is likely to cause a breach of peace due to commission of offence under
the provisions of this Act, that the person convening or collecting such assembly or
procession or directing or promoting such assembly or procession shall not do so
without applying for and obtaining a permission to this effect; and
(c) prohibit or regulate the use of loudspeaker, music or sound amplifier or any
other instrument inducing noise in any street or public place or procession, or in any
private place or procession, if the use of which may cause commission of offence
under the provisions of this Act.
(3) An order under this section shall remain in force for such period as may be
specified or thirty days, whichever is less:
Prevention of
acts leading to
hate crime and
hate speech.
Victim impact
assessment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
Provided that if the appropriate Government, after reviewing the effect of the order,
considers it necessary for the preservation of peace or harmony between different groups,
castes or communities or public safety or maintenance of public order in such area, may, by
notification, direct that the order issued under this section shall remain in force for such
further period not exceeding sixty days from the date of the first order.
CHAPTER VI
A
WARENESS, EDUCATION AND TRAINING
10. (1) The appropriate Government shall have the duty to promote awareness among
public for the prohibition, prevention and combating of hate crimes and hate speech.
(2) In performance of the duty referred to in sub-section ( 1), the appropriate
Government may perform such functions which shall include, but not be limited to—
(a) conducting education and information campaigns to inform the public about
the prohibition against hate crime and hate speech, aimed at prevention and combating
of such offences;
(b) ensuring that all public officials who may be involved in the investigation
and prosecution of hate crimes and hate speech are educated and informed of the
provisions against such offences;
(c) providing assistance and advice to any person who wants to lodge a
complaint of a hate crime or hate speech; and
(d) training public officials on the prohibition, prevention and combating of
hate crimes and hate speech, and such training shall include social context training.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections ( 1) and (2), the appropriate
Government may recommend to the National Human Rights Commission or the State Human
Rights Commission, as the case may be, to perform the functions referred to in sub-section (2).
(4) The National Judicial Academy of India, Bhopal shall develop and implement
training courses, including social context training courses for judicial officers for purposes
of presiding in court proceedings, in connection with offences under this Act.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
11. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer or
authority of the appropriate Government for an act which is done or intended to be done in
good faith under this Act or the rules made thereunder.
12. Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and
not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force except to the extent the
provisions of other law are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, in the Official Gazette make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Ever rule made under this section.
Protection of
action done in
good faith.
Awareness,
education and
training to
prohibit hate
crime and
hate speech.
Power to
make rules.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

7
S3\F\Bill 2022\RS\1771RS
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Preamble of the Constitution of India, set out founding principles and values,
among others, of individual and collective dignity with a sense of equality for all, which
shall help the Republic in achieving unity and integrity of its people. Samanvay (harmony)
and Sadbhavna (compassion for one another) are one of the oldest teachings of the Indian
civilization. Nonetheless, lately, due to narrow political, social and economic prejudices and
benefits, individuals or groups of people have created nuisance and intolerance on the
basis of religion, race, caste or community, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, place of
birth, residence, language, disability or tribe against each other.
The Constitution of India, under article 19 (1), gives everyone the right to freedom of
expression. This right is, however, limited in that it does not extend to breach sovereignty
and integrity of the country, and decency and morality based on religion, race, caste or
community, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, place of birth, residence, language,
disability or tribe, among others. A specific legislation is required with a view to empower
the State Governments and the Central Government to take effective measures to combat,
prevent and punish the conduct of the person constituting hate crimes and hate speech.
Hence, this Bill.
PROF. MANOJ KUMAR JHA

8
S3\F\Bill 2022\RS\1771RS
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 10 of the Bill inter-alia provides that the appropriate Government shall have
the duty for promoting awareness among public and also impart education and training for
preventing and combating hate crimes and hate speech. Existing budgets will be used for
the purpose. No additional expenditure is likely to be incurred to implement the provisions
of the Bill.

9
S3\F\Bill 2022\RS\1771RS
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislation powers is of a normal character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to empower the State Governments and the Central Government to take measures to
provide for the prevention and control of hate crimes and hate speech in terms
of the Constitution and international human rights instruments concerning
religion, race, caste or community, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
place  of  birth,  residence, language, disability or tribe and  related
intolerance, in accordance with Constitutional and international
law obligations; define for the offence of hate crime and the offence
of hate speech and the punishment of persons who commit those
offences and rehabilitation of victims of those offences;
to provide for the reporting on the implementation,
application  and  administration  of  this Act;
and to provide for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1771RS(S3)—12-12-2022.