1
THE UNAUTHORISED COLONIES, SLUMS AND JHUGGI CLUSTERS
(WELFARE, BASIC AMENITIES AND OTHER PROVISIONS)
BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the regularization of unauthorized colonies existing for more than two
years in the urban areas and for the basic amenities like drinking water,
sanitation, healthcare, electricity, toilets and management of garbage,
sewerage in such unauthorized colonies, slums Jhuggi-Jhopri
clusters to be provided by the appropriate Government and
for certain welfare measures to be initiated by the State
 for the residents of such colonies, slums and
Jhuggi clusters and for matters connected
therewith  and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Unauthorised Colonies, Slums and Jhuggi Clusters
(Welfare, Basic Amenities and other Provisions) Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill No.  LXXIV of  2010
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2011

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government"  means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "Jhuggi Cluster" means an area consisting of Jhuggies which may be on the
land belonging to Government or private land, generally built with bricks and mud,
metal or wood having thatched roof, tin shed and roof covered with polythene etc.,
and are unauthorised;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "slum" includes an area consisting of unplanned and shabbily built and
overcrowded houses without civic amenities with unhygienic atmosphere and such
other areas declare as slums by the appropriate Government;
(e) "Unauthorised Colony" means a colony which has not been approved by the
appropriate Government or any of its agency including local self Government and has
been in existence for two or more years.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate and implement a national policy
for the regularisation, betterment, upkeep, removal and rehabilitation and all other related
aspects thereto, for unauthorised colonies, slums and Jhuggis clusters and for the welfare of
the inhabitants of such colonies, slums and clusters particularly in the Metropolitan and
other urban areas.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 3
the measures referred to therein may provide for,—
(a) basic civil amenities such as potable water supply, electricity for domestic
usage, road or street lighting, sewerage, toilets both individual and community toilets
drainage, metallic roads in the streets and surroundings, sanitation, garbage removal,
provision of dumping binds and such other amenities as may be prescribed from time
to time;
(b) healthcare facilities through Health Centres, dispensaries, pathological labs
and mobile clinics for the inhabitants;
(c) educational facilities, playgrounds and recreational facilities for the children;
(d) marketing facilities for daily needs of households including provision for
vegetables, fruits and other needs;
(e) adequate public distribution system facilities and domestic fuel such as
kerosene, LPG , etc.
(f) transportation facilities; and
(g) such other measures as the Central Government may deem necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The National Policy so formulated under this section shall be uniformally
implemented throughout the country by the appropriate Government.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
appropriate Government shall,—
(a) regularise, by notification in the Official Gazette, all unauthorised colonies
which were in existence for the more than two years on the commencement of this
Act, in such manner, as may be prescribed and shall provide all basic civic amenities
to the inhabitants of such colonies;
Definitions.
Special
provisions in
respect of
Slums, Jhuggi
Clusters and
Unanthorised
Colonies.
National Policy
for
Unauthorised
Colonies, Slums
and Jhuggi
Jhopri Clusters.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(b) for the time being recognize the right to use Government land in case
Jhuggis have already been built thereon and were in existence for more than two
years on such land till alternative living arrangements are made for the dwellers by
the appropriate Government;
(c) construct such number of dwelling units as the concerned authority may
deem necessary with required amenities and allot them to the dwellers of the concerned
Jhuggi clusters with such terms and conditions and in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(d) not remove or demolish any Jhuggi cluster, slum or unauthorised colony
without making alternative arrangement of roofs or dwelling units for the residents
of such Jhuggis clusters slums for unauthorised colony, as the case may be;
(e) provide essential healthcare by establishing health centre or through mobile
units by distributing free of costs essential medicines, mosquitio nets and repellants
and fumigate the Jhuggi clusters, slums and unauthorised colonies from time to time
and in particular during rainy season to protect the inhabitants from Vector-borne
disease like malaria, dengue, chickngunya, encephalitis filariasis, etc., and extend
free of cost pathological services to the needy inhabitants thereof;
(f) extend necessary help in cash and kind, advice and training for the self
employment of inhabitants of Jhuggi clusters and slums in such manner as may be
prescribed; and
(g) make such other provisions as the appropriate Government may deem
necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
5. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds every year for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty and the
Government of concern State shall be guided by such direction or order on questions of
policy as may  be given to it by the Central Government under this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for time being
in force but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in
derogation of any other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matter dealt with
in this Act.
8. The Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
.
Central Govt.
to make
provision of
funds.
Power to give
direction and
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
15
20
25
30
10
35

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Our Country is very vast and second most populous nation of the globe after China.
Seventy per cent of our population lives in villages and poverty is rampant in rural India.
Driven by poverty and to earn their livelihood or fulfill their dreams people migrate to urban
areas and more to the metropolitan cities. Millions of such migrant people and also the local
ones settle down in slums, Jhuggi clusters and unauthorised colonies and even on footpaths
or pavements under the open sky in most inhuman conditions without basic civic amenities
like potable water, electricity, toilets, sanitations, sewerage, healthcare, education etc. Such
slums, Jhuggi clusters and unauthorised colonies exist in all parts of most of the urban areas
and the Metropolitan cities including the national Capital, Delhi, are not an exception. In
Delhi regularisation of unauthorised colonies has always been a burning problem for
successive Central Government. However, the number of slums, Jhuggi clusters and
unauthorised colonies is increasing and millions of people continue languishing in stinking
and inhuman conditions and falling victims to various fatal diseases. These slums, Jhuggi
clusters and unauthorised colonies have also gained notoriority for other reasons but majority
of people living there are law abiding citizens. Despite all this, we do not have a national
policy on slums, Jhuggis clusters and unauthorised colonies.
Being a welfare State, the Central and State Governments are duty bound to initiates
welfare measures for the residents of slums, Jhuggi Clusters and unauthorised colonies by
providing them basic civic amenities therein because they too are citizens of our nation and
entitled to lead a healthy and good life. It has been observed that such areas are also
neglected by civic and local authorities which are responsible for providing civic amenities
citing various technical and legal reasons but quite a large number of people should not be
denied the basic amenities. But in this context, the States are not in a position to bear the
huge expenditure on this front. The Central Government should come forward and bear all
the expenses in implementing the provisions of this Bill.
Hence this Bill.
DR.  AKHILESH  DAS  GUPTA

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain facilities and civic amenities to be provided to
the dwellers of slums, Jhuggi clusters and unauthorised colonies. Clause 5 makes it mandatory
for the Central Government to provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the
Bill. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of twenty-five thousand crore rupee may involve as recurring expenditure
per annum.
Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty thousand crore may also involve.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of the Bill. It will relate to matters of details only. The delegation of legislative
power is of normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—6688RS(S3)—28-02-2011.
RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the regularization of unauthorized colonies existing for more than two
years in the urban areas and for the basic amenities like drinking water,
sanitation, healthcare, electricity, toilets and management of garbage,
sewerage in such unauthorized colonies, slums, Jhuggi-Jhopri
clusters to be provided by the appropriate Government and
for certain welfare measures to be initiated by the State for
the residents of such colonies, slums and Jhuggi
clusters and for matters connected therewith
and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta, M.P.)