THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2016
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘‘124A.  (1) Whoever acts by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by
visible representation, or otherwise, urges, incites or promotes violence, against the
Government established by law in India and publishes or causes to be published such
seditious acts, written or spoken words, signs or visual representation shall be
Bill No. LXXI of 2016
Short title
and
commencement.
5
Amendment
of article
124A of Act
45 of 1860.
10
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 10TH MARCH, 2017

2
punished with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment
which may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), any act, speech, words, signs
or visual representation shall not be deemed to be an act of seditions by reason only
that it has a tendency,—
(a) to show that the Government has been misled or mistaken in any of its
measures;
(b) to point out errors or defects in the Government or the Constitution as
by law established or in legislation or in the administration of justice with a view
to remedying of such errors or defects; and
(c) to express disapprobation of the administrative or other action of the
Government, if such act, speech, words, signs or visual representation does not
urge, incite or promote violence against the Government established by law in
India’’.
5
10

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The law relating to sedition that prevails in the country today was enacted by the
imperial British Government during its colonial rule. The purpose of this law, as can be
logically understood today was to curb down protests and uprisings of the ‘subjects’ of
colonialism, against acts of the Government-whether these be legitimate or tyrannical acts.
The law was enacted to clampdown on potential political, cultural, or even intellectual
threats, challenges and possible upheaval of the colonizers.
The Indian Constitution, on the other hand, guarantees two very elemental
fundamental rights to its citizens. Rights, that through their very nature, elevate the people
of the country, from the designation of ‘subjects’ to citizens. Rights, that permit, the
citizens of this democratic nation to speak up against wrongs being committed upon them,
whether by outsiders or fellow citizens, or the ruling, all powerful Government itself. These
are the Right to Freedom of Speech and Expression, the Right to Freedom of Peaceful
Assembly-embodied in articles 19(1)(a) and 19(1)(b) of the Constitution of India.
The sedition law, feudal and imperialist to the extreme in its current wording, cannot
be harmoniously constructed along with the spirit of article 19(1)(a) and article 19(1)(b).
This is because it presumes that acts of opposition against the Government which incite
‘disaffection’,  ‘hatred’ or ‘contempt’ pose a threat to public order. The wide restriction it
imposes on article 19(1)(a) and article 19(1)(b) has allowed for the law to be misused
against bona fide citizens of the country, who have dared to question the policies of the
ruling Government. The restrictions imposed by the current sedition law are arbitrary and
wide and far outreaching the ambit of reasonable restriction as allowed in article 19,
sometimes defeating the purpose of the freedom granted by the Article completely.
This fact has also been recognized by various countries like Britain itself, Australia,
Singapore, and others that have either repealed the old sedition law, or brought about
suitable amendments in the existing one.
The Bill as proposed seeks to restore the article 19(1)(a) and article 19(1)(b) to their
rightful position, wherein acts of opposition against the Government which are carried out
without urging, inciting or promoting violence, and which pose no threat to public order
and national security will not be classified as seditious acts.
Hence,  this Bill.
HUSAIN DALW AI

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * * *
124A. Sedition
Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible representation,
or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or attempts to
excite disaffection towards, the Government established by law in India, shall be punished
with imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment which may
extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
Explanation 1.—The expression ‘‘disaffection’’ includes disloyalty and all feelings of
enmity.
Explanation 2.— Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures of the
Government with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means, without exciting or
attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this
section.
Explanation 3.—Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or other
action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or
disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.
* * * * * *
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Husain Dalwai, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4937RS(S3)—10-03-2017.