AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No. LXXIV of 2024 
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY 
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009. 
      
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of  the Republic of India 
     as follows:— 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education (Amendment) Act, 2024. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 
35 of 2009. 2. After Chapter II of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following new 
Chapter shall be inserted, namely: — 
Insertion of  
new Chapter IIA. 

2 
R
ight of child to 
play. 
CHAPTER II-A 
RIGHT TO PLAY 
5A. (1) Every child of the age of six to fourteen years, including a child 
referred to in clause (d) or clause (e)  of section 2 , shall have the right to play 
and engage in age-appropriate physical activities within the school premises or 
in the playground designated for the purpose by the appropriate Government. 
(2) Every school shall have a playground with an extent of not less than one
hundred square metres for the purposes as specified in sub-section (1).
(3) In case of a school not having a playground as required under sub- section
(2), the appropriate Government shall designate a playground accessible to the
children of such a school,  within a radius of 5 kms. from the premises of such
school.”.
5 
10 
 
Amendment  of 
section 8. 
3. After sub-clause (d) of Section 8 of the principal Act, the following new sub -
clause shall be inserted, namely: —
“(da) ensure designation of a playground, as specified under sub- section (3) of
section 5A, for such schools not having a playground with the stipulated extent
within its premises.”
15 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
         Playing is an integral part of a child’s life. Playing improves motor, cognitive, 
social and emotional skills of children. Playing has major role to play in shaping a 
child’s mental health. Right to play is an internationally recognized right of a child. 
Right to play is enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the 
Child. UNICEF has started commemorating June 11 as the first -ever International 
Day of Play (IDOP), following the adoption of a UN resolution for a day centred 
around play. As such, it is imperative to recognize the above right as a statutory 
right in India. 
 
       The Bill proposes to insert a new Chapter in the Right of Children to Free and 
Compulsory Education Act, 2009 to recognize the Right of a Child to Play and for 
the provision of playgrounds in all schools or in designated spaces near to such 
schools, which do not have playgrounds to ensure that this right is upheld.  
       The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
A.A. RAHIM 

RAJ
YA SABHA 
_______ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education, Act, 2009. 
_______ 
(Shri
 A.A. Rahim, M.P.) 
RS-P&P-PMB(E)—077—10.02.2025 