5

As INTRODUCED IN THR Raya SABHA

Bill No. 15511 of 2000

THE SHAHTOOSH SHAWL (PREVENTION OF
SALE AND POSSESSION) BILL, 2000

A
BILL
to prohibit the sale and possession of shahtoosh shawl which is made from the wool of

an endangered wild animal found in the Himalayas and for matters connected
therewith,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Shahtoosh Shawl (Prevention of Sale and Possession)
Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. The sale and possession of Shahtoosh shawl is hereby prohibited.

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment

Prohibition of
sale and
possession of
shahtoosh
shawl


Penalty.

Offence to be
cognizable and
non batlable

Overniding
effect of the
Act.

3. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 2 shall be punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees or with both.

4. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
the offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non bailable.

5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being 1m force.

5

Zot 1974


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The possession of and trade in Shahtoosh 1५ an offence The Central Government
doesn t allow trade in Shahtoosh, but Jammu & Kashmir Government has been holding
out since 15 craftsmen weave the shawls According to the law, a Shahtoosh shawl can be
possessed Gnly after an ownership certificate 1s provided tor it So far ao one in the
country has been issued an ownership certificate for possession of a Shahioosh shawl
fhe widhite Act and the law governing Shahtoosh shawl therefore give a complex
inference So tt is high ume to enact new law to ban the sale and possession of Shahtoosh
Shaw!

Hence the Bill

SANTOSH BAGRODIA


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL
to prohibit the sale and possession of shahtoosh shawl which is made from the wool of
an endangered wild animal found in the Himalayas and for matters connected
therewith.

(Shri Santosh Bagrodia, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—S020RS—27-1 1-2000.