1
THE  PUBLIC  CREDIT  REGISTRY  OF  INDIA  BILL,  2019
A
BILL
to provide for a public credit registry to serve as a central repository of credit
information and to facilitate efficient distribution of credit, increase financial
inclusion, improve ease of doing business and control delinquencies and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Credit Registry of India Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context requires otherwise,—
(a) “borrower” means a person who has been granted credit or any other credit
facility by a credit institution, and includes a client of a credit institution;
(b) “client” includes—
(i) a guarantor or a person who proposes to give guarantee or security for
a borrower of a credit institution; or
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. LXXIII of  2019
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON 6TH DECEMBER, 2019
5
10

2
(ii) a person who has obtained or seeks to obtain financial assistance from
a credit institution or to raise money by security issues or whose financial
standing is assessed by the Reserve Bank in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) “credit application” means an application for providing credit made to a
credit institution;
(d) “credit agreement” means an agreement made between a credit institution
and a borrower;
(e) “credit information” means any information relating to—
(i) the amounts and the nature of loans or advances, amounts outstanding
under credit cards and other credit facilities, both fund based and non-fund
based, granted or to be granted, by a credit institution to any borrower and also
includes the nature of security and the guarantee taken or proposed to be taken
by a credit institution from any borrower for credit facilities granted or proposed
to be granted to him;
(ii) any other matter as may be prescribed by the Reserve Bank to be
collected and maintained by the Registry, in this behalf on the creditworthiness
of any borrower of a credit institution;
(f) “credit report” means a communication, whether in written or electronic form
prepared by the Registry using customer information provided by a credit institution,
to assess the creditworthiness of a person, including information on the following,—
(i) the person’s history in relation to credit;
(ii) the person’s eligibility to be provided with credit;
(iii) the person’s capacity to repay credit provided to the person; or
(iv) the details of a person that is processed by the Registry in the course
of its credit reporting business;
(g) “credit information company” means a company as defined in sub-section
(20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 and which has been granted a certificate
of registration under sub-section (2) of section 5 of the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2005;
(h) “credit institution” means a banking company and includes—
(i) a corresponding new bank, the State Bank of India, a Co-Operative
Bank, the Nationalised Bank and Regional Rural Bank;
(ii) a non-banking financial company as defined under sub-section (f) of
section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
(iii) a public financial institution referred to in section 4A of the Companies
Act, 2013;
(iv) a financial corporation established by a State under section 3 of the
State Financial Corporation Act, 1951;
(v) a housing finance institution referred to in sub-section (d) of section 2
of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987;
(vi) a company engaged in the business of credit cards and other similar
cards and a company dealing with distribution of credit in any other manner; and
(vii) any other institution which the Reserve Bank may specify, from time
to time, for the purposes of this clause.
(i) “information systems” means data sheets related to banking, non-banking-
corporate, as may be prescribed by the Reserve Bank.
18 of 2013
30 of 2005
18 of 2013
2 of 1934
63 of 1951
53 of 1987
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(j) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette of India;
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(l) “Registry” means the Public Credit Registry of India as provided under section
3 of this Act;
(m) “regulations” means regulations made by the Reserve Bank under this Act;
(n) “Reserve Bank” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted by the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934;
(o) “specified user” means any credit institution, and includes such other person
or institution as may be specified by the Reserve Bank, for the purpose of obtaining
credit information from the Registry;
(p) “specified” means specified by regulations made under this Act;
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 or the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 or the Credit Information
Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 or the Companies Act, 2013 shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
CHAPTER II
P
UBLIC CREDIT REGISTRY OF INDIA
3. (1) The Reserve Bank shall establish, maintain and operate a Registry to be known
as the Public  Credit Registry of India containing of data base of credit information of
Borrowers.
(2)  Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions in sub-section (1) the Reserve
Bank shall hold on the Registry Personal credit information in relation to a borrower and its
details linking any borrower who has availed loan or credit facility with any other borrower
and shall also include other reports produced by the Reserve Bank, as may be specified.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint a Deputy Governor for looking after
work of the Registry with the working background in the specialized Department of
Statistics and Information Management of the Reserve Bank.
CHAPTER III
O
PERA TION OF THE REGISTRY
4. (1) The Reserve Bank may perform the following forms of business for operating the
Registry, namely,—
(i) collecting, processing and collating credit information of related material
events for each loan and information on trade and financial standing of the borrowers
of the credit institution;
(ii) preparing credit report;
(iii) providing credit information to its specified users;
(iv) undertaking research project;
(v) providing interoperability and linkages with other information system.
(2) The Reserve Bank, for the purposes of operating the Registry may charge such
resonable fees for furnishing credit information to a specified user, as may be speicified.
5. (1) Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that in the interest of banks, banking policy,
borrowers, general public etc., it is necessary to issue directions to credit institutions or
specified users generally or to any credit institution or speicified user in particular, it may,
from time to time, issue such directions as it deems fit, and such credit institutions and
specified users, as the case may be, shall be bound to comply with such directions and the
Reserve Bank may also seek information pertaining to its business etc.
2 of 1934
10 of 1949
30 of 2005
18 of 2013
Public Credit
Registry of
India.
Operation of
the Registry.
Power of
Reserve Bank
to give
directions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2 of 1934
45
Appointment
of additional
Deputy
Governor.

4
(2) The Reserve Bank may, modify or cancel any direction issued earlier for reasons to
be recorded in writing.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contrary to any law for the time being in force, the
Reserve Bank, may cause an inspection to be made, by one or more of its officers or through
such other persons or agency as the Reserve Bank may determine, of the books and accounts
of a credit institution or a specified user and the Reserve Bank shall supply to the credit
institution or specified user, as the case may be, a copy of its report of such inspection.
(2) It shall be the duty of every director or other officer or employee of the credit
institution or the speicifed user to produce to any officer or person or agency, as the case
may be, performing inspection under sub-section ( 1), all such books, accounts and other
documents etc.
(3)  Any officer of the Reserve Bank or person or an agency making an inspection
under sub-section (1) may examine on oath any director or other officer or employee of the
credit institution or the speicified user, in relation to their business, and may administer an
oath accordingly.
(4) The expenses of, or incidental to the inspection carried out under sub-section (1),
shall be borne by the concerned credit institution or specified user, as the case may be.
7. The Reserve Bank may, by notice in writing, in such form, as may be specified,
require the credit institution, to furnish such credit information and such other information
as it may deem necessary in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
8.  The Information including the personal and credit information related to a borrower
held on the Registry shall be held on the Registry for such period as may be specified by the
Reserve Bank.
9. (1) A credit institution shall provide to the Reserve Bank such personal information
and credit information relating to a borrower as is required to be provided by regulations to
be specified by the Reserve Bank.
(2) Any person or every credit institution may get the credit information from the
Registry.
(3) The Credit institutions shall maintain one-month time line for updating information
in the Registry if changes like addition or deletion has occurred at the base level credit data.
(4) The Reserve Bank shall change the data in the Registry on receiving of request
from the credit institution or the specified users.
10. (1) A credit institution or a specified user shall make a request to access information
held on the Registry in such a manner as may be specified by the Reserve Bank.
(2) No person or institution shall have access to information from the Registry unless
authorized by the Reserve Bank in such a manner or as may be specified.
11. The Reserve Bank shall specify the framework on suspected impersonation and
the manner of setting of the dispute.
CHAPTER IV
I
NFORMATION, PRIV ACY PRINCIPLES AND VERIFICA TION  OF IDENTITY OF BORROWERS
12. (1) Each credit institution shall provide accurate, complete, duly protected against
any loss or unauthorised access to the Reserve Bank.
(2) Every credit institution and specified user, shall adopt the privacy principles as
may be notified by the Reserve Bank.
Power of
Reserve Bank
to inspect
credit
institution and
specified user.
Furnishing of
credit
information
by credit
institution.
Period for
which
information
may be held
on the
Registry.
Duty of credit
institution to
provide
information.
Access to
information
on the
Registry.
Suspected
impersonation
and settlement
of dispute.
Accuracy and
security of
credit
information.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(3) Every credit institution shall take such   steps as may be specified by regulations by
the Reserve Bank to verify the identity of borrowers.
13. (1) The information collected and maintained by the Reserve Bank for the purpose
of the Registry shall be confidential.
(2) A credit institution shall not disclose any information provided to the Reserve Bank
under this Act:
Provided that this shall not prevent the Reserve Bank or credit institution from
disclosing information held by it to the court, tribunal or authority, if it considers that such
disclosure is necessary in public interest, or otherwise warranted in the circumstances of
the case.
CHAPTER V
O
FFENCE AND PENALITY
14. (1) Whoever contravenes  the provisions of the Act shall be guilty of the Offence
and shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with
fine of rupees five lakh or with both.
(2) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, the director or
every person who at the time offence was committed was in-charge of and was responsible
to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,—
(a) “company” a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of
individuals; and
(b) “director” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
15. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make rules
for the purpose of this Act.
(2) The Reserve Bank in consultation with Government, may by notification in the
Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act to provide for all matters for
which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions
of this Act.
(3) Every rule and every regulation made, and every notification issued, under this
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House  of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or
in two or more sussessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of this session immediately
following the session or the successive session aforesaid, both Houses agree that the rule
or regulation or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation
or notification.
16. (1) No suit or other legal proceedings or prosecution shall lie against the Reserve
Bank or any credit institution or specified user, or their chairman, director, member, auditor,
advisor, officer or other employee, or agent or any person authorised by the Reserve Bank
or credit institution or specified user to discharge any function under this Act, for any loss
or damage caused or as is likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done, in pursuance of this Act or any other law for the time being in force.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall affect the right of any person to
claim damages against the Reserve Bank, a credit institution or specified user or their
chairperson, director, member, auditor, advisor, officer or other employee or agents, as
Confidentiality
of
information.
Penalty.
Power to
make rules and
regulations.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
the case may be, in respect of loss caused to him on account of any such disclosure
made by any one of them and which is unauthrosed or fraudulent or contrary to
provisions of this Act, or practices or usaes customary among them.
17. No court or authority shall have, or be entitled to exercise, any jurisdiction,
powers or authority, except the Supreme Court and a High Court exercising jurisdiction
under articles 32, 226 and 227 of the Constitution, in relation to the matters referred to
in the Act.
18.  ( 1) The Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Reserve
Bank, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any or all of the provisions of
this Act shall not apply to any credit institution or specified user, either generally or for
such period and subject to such exceptions or modifications, as may be mentioned in
that notification.
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 1), shal be laid in draft before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of the notification or both
House agree in making any modification in the notification, the notificaiton shall not be
issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be
agreed upon by both the Houses.
19. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to, and not, save as provided
under this Act, in derogation of, the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 or any other
law for the time being in force.
20. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisins of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period
of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Power of the
Central
Government
to exempt in
certain cases.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Removal of
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
18 of 2013.

7
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There is a need for an all-embracing database of credit information for all credit
products in the country, from point of origination of credit to its termination (repayments,
restructuring, default, resolution, etc.). It should, ultimately, be encompassing all lender-
borrower accounts without a size threshold. As of today, information on borrowings
from banks, non-banking financial companies (NBFCs), corporate bonds or debentures
from the market, external commercial borrowings (ECBs), foreign currency convertible
bonds (FCCBs), Masala bonds, and inter-corporate borrowings are not available in a
single data respository. The main objective of the Bill is the creaton of a Public Credit
Registry is to fill this lacuna and capture  all the relevant information about a borrower,
across different borrowing products, in one place. Moreover, significant parts of this
Registry of borrowing contracts and repayment history will be accessible to all
stakeholders provided they too share their data with the Public Credit Registry.
The Public Credit Registry in India can be conceived as a data infrastructure that
the financial ecosystem within and outside the Reserve Bank would be drawing data
from as per the Public Credit Registry’s access policy. The prospective users will include
lenders like banks and non-bank lenders including the new “fin-tech” lenders; others
providing data analytics such as rating agencies and credit information companies; as
well as regulators.
Our economy faced difficulties in the context of the corporate non-performing
assets (NPA) problem since last 6-7 years. In spite of the private credit bureaus operating
for several years and doing a vital job for retail credit scoring, the regulator could not
precisely assemble data on the quality of the credit portfolio of banks’ large borrowers
at an aggregate level. The data are simply not being reported with integrity and full
coverage in case of large corporate borrowers. That is where RBI’s Central Repository
of Information on Large Credits (CRILC), initiated in 2014, made a huge difference.
Although it was behind the curve. CRILC provides a timely window on any degradation
of credit of a large borrower at a bank to the central bank and to other banks having the
same entity as a borrower. It shows that credit information system, as a whole, has
many such gaps and it leave much scope for improvement and the Public Credit Registry
will fill the gap.
The Public Credit Registry can also support the reportig entities in credit risk
assessment by allowing them access to aggregated information about the indebtedness
of thair actual and potential borrowers. Under the legal framework, the Publc Credit
Registry can provide information which can also be utilised for discharging essential
functions of the central bank, namely banking supervision, financial stability, monetary
policy, research and statistics.
Hence, This Bill.
RAKESH SINHA

8
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-section 3 of section 3 empowers the Central Government to appoint an
additional Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank for looking after work of the Registry.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one crore may be involved.
No non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty lakh will also be involved.

9
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 15 of the Bill empower the Central Government and the Reserve Bank of
India to make rules/regulations to carry out the provision of the Bill. The rules so
framed would pertain to matters of administrative detail only, which cannot be laid
down in the Bill itself. The delegation, is therefore, normal in character.

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a public credit registry to serve as a central repository of credit
information and to facilitate efficient distribution of credit, increase financial
inclusion, improve ease of doing business and control delinquencies and
for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
.
————
(Shri Rakesh Sinha, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4326RS(S3)—11-12-2019.