AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 13TH MARCH, 2026 
Bill No. LXXII  of  2025 
THE RIGHT TO FAIR COMPENSATION AND TRANSPARENCY 
IN LAND ACQUISITION, REHABILITATION AND 
RESETTLEMENT (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement
(Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

 
 
2 
 
Amendment of 
section 10. 
 
 2. In section 10 of the Right to Fair Compensation and  Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2 013, after sub- section 
(4) , the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(5)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) , no 
irrigated multi-cropped agricultural land situated in any district or 
region notified as climate- vulnerable by the Central Government or the 
appropriate State Government shall be acquired for any purpose under 
this Act. 
Explanation 1.  — For the purposes of this sub-section, “climate-
vulnerable district or region” means any district o r region identified as 
being prone to drought, flood, salinity ingress, de sertification, or other 
climate-related risks affecting agricultural produc tivity, as notified 
from time to time by the appropriate Government, on  the basis of a 
scientific assessment made by the appropriate insti tution, as notified for 
the said purpose. 
Explanation 2 . — The appropriate Government shall review and 
update such notification at intervals not exceeding five years. 
(6)(a) Before acquiring any agricultural land under this A ct, the 
appropriate Government shall cause to be conducted a Food Secur ity 
Impact Assessment to evaluate the likely effects of such acquisition on 
local and regional food availability, agricultural productivi ty, and 
livelihoods dependent on agriculture from such land. 
(b)  The Food Security Impact Assessment shall be undertaken  by 
a scientific or agricultural institution, as notifi ed by the appropriate 
Government and shall include — 
(i) an assessment of the projected loss of agricultural  output, 
soil fertility, and irrigation potential; 
(ii)  an analysis of the impact on food supply chains an d local 
employment in the agricultural sector; and 
(iii)  recommendations for mitigation measures or alterna tive 
sites, wherever feasible. 
(c)  A summary of the 
Food Security Impact Assessment and the 
steps proposed to safeguard food security shall be made public in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed and also annex ed to the Social 
Impact Assessment study report under section 4. 
(d)  Within five years of acquisition of such land, the  appropriate 
Government shall conduct a Post-Acquisition Food Se curity Review to 
assess the actual impact on food production and security in the affected 
area and cause the report containing the findings t o be laid before the 
State Legislature or Parliament, as the case may be. 
Explanation . — For the purposes of this sub-section, “Food 
Security Impact Assessment” means a scientific and socio-economic 
evaluation undertaken to determine the potential an d actual impacts of 
proposed land acquisition on agricultural productiv ity, food 
availability, soil and water sustainability and the  livelihoods of persons 
dependent on agriculture.” 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
30 of  2013. 
 
  

 
 
3 
 
  STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS   
  The intent of Section 10 of the Right to Fair Compe nsation and Transparency 
in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlemen t Act, 2013 is to safeguard 
national food security by limiting the diversion of  productive agricultural land. 
However, the exception in sub-section (2)  allows acquisition of irrigated multi-
cropped land in “exceptional circumstances,” which has weakened the protection 
envisaged by Parliament. 
In light of increasing climate vulnerability, manif ested through droughts, 
floods, and soil degradation, this amendment seeks to strengthen the  food security 
and climate resilience framework of the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation an d Resettlement Act, 2013 by 
prohibiting the acquisition of irrigated multi-crop ped land in such climate-
vulnerable districts, and by introducing a mandator y Food Security Impact 
Assessment before acquisition and a Post- Acquisition Food Security Review to 
monitor impacts on agricultural productivity, food availability, and r ural 
livelihoods. These measures shall ensure that land use decisions are scientifically 
informed, sustainable, and aligned with national fo od and livelihood security 
objectives. 
The amendment upholds the principles of sustainable  development, 
environmental protection, and livelihood security c onsistent with articles 21, 48, 
and 51A(g) of the Constitution of India. 
Hence, this Bill. 
     RENUKA CHOWDHURY.  
 
  
 
  

 
 
4 
 
  ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE RIGHT TO FAIR COMPENSATION AND TRANSPARENCY IN 
LAND ACQUISITION, REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT ACT, 2013  
(30 OF  2013) 
 
*   *   *   *   * 
  
Special 
provision to 
safeguard food 
security. 
 10 . (1)  Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2) , no irrigated multi-
cropped land shall be acquired under this Act. 
(2)  Such land may be acquired subject to the condition  that it is being done 
under exceptional circumstances, as a demonstrable last resort, where the 
acquisition of the land referred to in sub-section (1)  shall, in aggregate for 
all projects in a district or State, in no case exceed such limits as may be 
notified by the appropriate Government considering the relevant State 
specific factors and circumstances. 
(3)  Whenever multi-crop irrigated land is acquired und er sub-section (2) 
, an 
equivalent area of cultur able wasteland shall be developed for agricultural 
purposes or an amount equivalent to the value of th e land acquired shall be 
deposited with the appropriate Government for inves tment in agriculture for 
enhancing food-security. 
(4)  In a case not falling under sub-section (1) 
, the acquisition of the 
agricultural land in aggregate for all projects in a district or State, shall in no 
case exceed such limits of the total net sown area of that district or State, as 
may be notified by the appropriate Government: 
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the case of 
projects that are linear in nature such as those re lating to railways, 
highways, major district roads, irrigation canals, power lines and the like. 
  
  *   *   *   *   *    
 
  

RAJYA SABHA 
______________ 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013. 
______________ 
(Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)–145–16.03.2026. 