AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 7TH FEBRUARY, 2025 
Bill No.  LXXIII of 2024 
THE ONLINE HATE SPEECH (PREVENTION) 
BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the prevention and control of hate speech on online 
platforms, to promote digital harmony and responsible online  
behaviour, to define offences related to online hate speech  
and provide for penalties thereto, to create a  
regulatory framework for online platforms,  
and to provide for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Online Hate Speech (Prevention) Act,
2024.
(2) I t shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act.
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
10 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— Definitions. 
(a) “complainant” means any person who files a complaint or reports
content on an online platform as potential online hate speech;

2 
(b) “content” means any data, information, text, graphics, images,
GIFs, audio, video, or other material that can be created, u ploaded,
shared, or viewed on an online platform;
(c) “digital harmony” refers to a state of respectful and inclusive
online interactions free from hate speech, discrimination, and
communal disharmony;
(d) “digital literacy” means the knowledge, skills and  attitudes that
allow individuals and communities to understand and use digital
technologies and find, evaluate, and communicate information using
online platforms while being both safe and empowered in an
increasingly digital world;
(e) “hate speech” mean s any communication that promotes or incites
hatred, discrimination, or violence against an individual or group
based on attributes including but not limited to race, religion, caste,
ethnic origin, sexual orientation, gender, disability, or language;
(f) “hate speech content” means such content published, propagated or
disseminated on online platforms that leads to or aids in the
commission of the offence of online hate speech as defined under
section 3 of this Act;
(g) “intermediary” will have the same meaning as assigned to it i n
cl
ause (w) of sub- section (1) of section 2 of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000; 
(h) “online platform” means any website, application, or digital service
that allows users to create, upload, share, or view user -generated
content, including social media platforms, messaging services, and
content-sharing websites;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) “r
esponsible online behavior” means such ethical and respectful
conduct, aimed at fostering positive  digital citizenship and creating a
safer online environment, exhibited by users when interacting with
others and engaging in activities on the internet;
(k) “significant social media intermediary” means a social medi a
intermediary which primarily or solel y enables online interaction
between two or more users and allows them to create, upload, share,
disseminate, modify or access information using its services, having
number of registered users above such threshold as may be notified by
the Central Government;
(l) “user” means any person, who accesses or uses an online platform;
and
(m) “user verification” means the process of confirming a user's
identity on an online platform. 
5 
 
10 
1
5 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
 
21 of 2000. 
CHAPTER II 
ONLINE HATE SPEECH 
Online Hate 
Speech.
3. A user who intentionally uses, publishes, presents, produces, plays,
provides, distributes or directs the performance of any speech on online
platforms that:—
 
45 
(i) promotes or spreads, propagates or disseminates, provokes or
arouses religious enmity and religious sentiment, discrimination, 
hatred, or violence against a person or group of persons or community; 
or 
 
50 

3 
5
(ii) denigrates a person or group of persons by r easons of their real
or attributed characteristics or status, which includes religion, race, 
caste or community, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, place of 
birth, national or ethnic origin, language, age, or disability; 
shall be guilty of the offence of online hate speech. 
 
10 
4. No legal proceedings shall be instituted against a user under section 3 for
an action done in good faith during the course of engagement in: — 
(i) any artistic or creative performance or other form of expression,
to the extent that such performance or expression does not advocate 
hatred or online hate speech; or 
(ii) any academic or scientific inquiry; or
(iii) fair and accurate reporting or co mmentary or critique in the
greater public interest. 
Protection of 
acts done in 
good faith by a 
user. 
15 
 
20 
5. (1) Whoever commits the offence of online hate speech under this Act
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or 
with both: 
Provided that the account of such user on the online platform shall 
be disabled for such period as may be prescribed.  
(2) For second or subsequent offence, the user shall be punished wit h
i
mprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall
also be liable to fine along with permanent shutdown of the account of
such user on the online platform.
Punishment for 
online hate 
speech by users. 
 
25
CHAPTER III 
OBLIGATIONS AND REGULATIONS FOR ONLINE PLATFORMS 
3
0 
3
5 
 
40 
4
5 
6. Every online platform shall: —
(a) i mplement appropriate measures to prevent the spread of online
hate speech; 
(b) de velop and enforce clear community guidelines prohibitin g
online hate speech, with special consideration for India's diverse 
cultural and linguistic context; 
(c) establish efficient mechanisms for reporting and reviewing
potential online hate speech in multiple Indian languages; 
(d) r emove or disable access to online hate speech content withi n
tw
enty-four hours of receiving a valid complaint from a complainant; 
(e) implement user verification mechanisms to reduce anonymous
online hate speech; 
(f) provide to the Central Government, in such form and manner,
regular quarterly transparency reports on online hate speech incidents 
and actions taken thereon; 
(g)
regularly send correction notices to the users in case
unintentional and non-provocative online hate speech is propagated on 
digital platforms; 
(h) co llaborate with Central G overnment agencies, local authorities
and civil society organizations to promote digital literacy, responsible 
online behaviour and formulation of a framework for co-regulation. 
Obligations of 
online 
platforms. 

4 
Appointment 
of 
Compliance 
and Grievance 
Officers.
7. (1)  Every significant social media intermediary shall appoint:
(a) a Chief Compliance Officer, who shall be responsible for
ensuring compliance with this Act and the rules made thereunder; 
(b) a Nodal C ontact Person, who shall be responsible for round- the-
clock coordination with law enforcement agencies in India; and 
(c) a Resident Grievance Officer, who shall be responsible for
addressing complaints related to online hate speech on the platform. 
(2) The names and contact details of the persons appointed under sub-
section (1) shall be prominently displayed on the online platforms for
information of all users.
 
5 
 
10 
Proactive 
monitoring 
and AI-based 
detection.
8. Every significant social media intermediary shall deploy: —
(a) technology-based measures, including automated tools or
artificial intelligence, to proactively identify and remove online hate 
speech content; and  
(b) effective machine learning tools in order to develop abilities of
t
he system to restrict the virality and propagation of online hate speech 
content: 
     Provided that such measures shall be in consonance and 
consideration with the interests of free speec h and expression, as 
provided in the Constitution of India. 
15 
 
20 
User 
education and 
awareness.
9. (1) Online platforms shall conduct regular awareness campaigns about
responsible online behaviour and the consequences of engaging in or
propagating online hate speech.
(2) Online platforms shall provide to all users easily accessible resources
on digital literacy, with special focus on India's diverse culture.
 
25 
Penalties for 
online 
platforms.
10. (1) Any online platform that fails to comply with any of the provisions of
this Act shall be   punished with a fine which may extend to fifty lakh
rupees.
(2) In case of continued non -compliance against a specific number of
complaints, as may be notified by the Central Government, an additional
fine of ten lakh rupees per day may be imposed until the non- compliance
is remedied.
30 
CHAPTER IV 
ADJUDICATION OF OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
Adjudicating 
Authority.
11. (1) The Central Government shall, within a year of commencement of
this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish an
Adjudicating Authority for the purpose of holding inquiries and
adjudging whether any person has committed a contravention of an y
of the provisions under this Act or of any rule, regulation, direction or
order made thereunder which renders him liable to pay penalty or
compensation.
(2) The Adjudicating Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and
two members, to be appointed by the Central Government, in such
manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Chairperson shall be a person who has 
been a Judge of a High Court: 
      Provided also that no person shall be appointed as a member 
of the Adjudicating Authority unles s he possesses such experience in 
the field of Information Technology and legal or judicial experience 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
 
35 
40 
 
45 
 
50 

5 
 
5 
 
10 
1
5 
(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall, after giving the person referred
to in sub- section (1), a reasona ble opportunity for making
representation in the matter and if, on such inquiry, is satisfied that
the person has committed the contravention, may impose such
penalty or award such compensation as it thinks fit in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
(4) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers
and staff to the Adjudicating Authority as it may deem fit for
carrying out the purposes of this Act:
        Provided that the officers and staff so appointed shall discharge 
their functions under the general superintendence of the Chairperson 
of the Adjudicating Authority. 
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of the service of the Chairperson, members, officers and
staff of the Adjudicating Authority s
hall be such as may be
prescribed.
 
20 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
4
0 
 
45 
 
50 
12. (1) The Central Government shall, within a year of commencement of
this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish an Appellate 
Tribunal to hear appeals against the decisions of the Adjudicating 
Authority, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) An appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of
ninety days from the date of the judgment, sentence or order issued
by the Adjudicating Authority and it shall be in such form and
manner and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:
 Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of ninety days if it is satisfied that 
there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. 
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and not
more than two members to be appointed by the Central Government,
in such form and manner as may be prescribed:
 Provided that the Chairperson shall be a person who has 
either been a Chief Justice of a High Court or a Judge of the Supreme 
Court:        
 Provided also that no person shall be appointed as a member 
of the Appellate Tribunal unless he possesses such experience in the 
field of Information Technology and legal or judicial experience as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub- section (2), the Appellate
Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the appeal, a reasonable
opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon a s it thinks fit,
confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by
it to the parties to the appeal and to the Adjudicating Authority.
(6
) T
he appeal filed before the Ap pellate Tribunal under sub-section
(2) shall be dealt with as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall
be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within six months fro m
t
he date of receipt of the appeal.
(7) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers
and staff to the Appellate Tribunal as it may deem fit for carrying out
the purposes of this Act:
Appellate 
Tribunal. 

6 
Provided that the officers and staff so appointed shall 
discharge their functions under the gen eral superintendence of the 
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal. 
(8) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of the service of the Chairperson and members and other
officers and staff of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such a s may be
prescribed.
5 
Adjudicating  
Authority and 
Appellate 
Tribunal to 
have powers 
of civil court. 
13. The Adjudicating  Authority and the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the
powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence or affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or
office;
(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses or documents;
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
10 
 
15 
 
5 of 1908 
Appeal 
against orders 
of Appellate 
Tribunal.
14. An appeal against the decision of the Appellate Tribunal shall lie to the
Division Bench of a High Court having appropriate jurisdiction, before
the confirming, modifying or annulling an order made or notice issue d
unde
r this Act.
 
20 
CHAPTER V 
REPORTING 
Reporting of 
registered 
online hate 
speech and 
convictions.
15. (1) The Adjudicating Authority shall prepare annually in such form and
manner as may be prescribed, both national and State -wise data 
regarding:— 
(a) o nline hate speech cases registered and at their disposal;
(b) pe
rsons convicted for the of fence of online hate speech and
hate crime by the Appellate Tribunal; 
and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid before
each
 House of Parliament, within a period of one year from the date of
publishing of such report.
 
25 
 
30 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
35 
Promotion of 
digital literacy 
and digital 
harmony. 
16. The Central Government shall, for the purpose of promoting digital
harmony, in collaboration with the State Governments: —
(a) conduct online and offline workshops to promote responsible
online behavior on online platforms;
(b) provide legal assistance to individuals or users affected b y
o
nline hate speech   through relevant District Legal Services
Authority as created under Legal Services Authority Act,
1987;
(c) collaborate with civil society organisations  in order to
promote advocacy and outreach of this Act and rules and
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
45 
3
9 of 1987. 

7 
regulations made thereunder, effective use of online 
platforms and legal recourse available to curb online hate 
speech. 
5 
17. No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government, the Adjudicating Authority, or any officer or employee 
thereof for anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith 
and in discharge of official legal duty under this Act. 
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith and 
in discharge of 
official legal 
duty. 
10 
18. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other
law for the time being in force.
Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 
19. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary
or expedient for removing such difficulty.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
15 
2
0 
 
25 
20. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of  Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesa
id, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make 
rules. 

8 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In recent years, India has witnessed an increase in the discrimination and 
dehumanization of marginalized groups through hate speech. Notably, hate speech 
is not defined in any current Indian law. While the provisions within the repealed 
Indian Penal Code , 1860 (IPC), and the provisions of Section 299 and Section 196 
under the existing Bhar a
tiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS) and the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 provide some recourse, they face significant challenges. 
Section 153A of the repealed IPC criminalized promoting enmity between groups 
and Section 295A penalized acts intended to outrage religious feelings.  Section 
196 of BNS provides punishment for promoting enmity between different groups 
on the grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing 
acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony. Section 299 provides punishment for 
deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage religious feelings of any class by 
insulting its religion or religious beliefs. Additionally,  the Information Technology 
(Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021, issued under 
the Information Technology Act, 2000 
impose obligations on social media 
platforms to proactively reduce hate speech, misinformation, and other har mful 
content. India is also bound by its international obligations under article 20(2) of 
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966, to prohibit hate 
speech. 
Hate speech is particularly concerning as it creates a hostile environment 
that alienates victims, depriving them of opportunities and autonomy; it undermines 
victims' dignity and self -worth; and it entrenches societal stereotypes, leading to 
inequality and subordination. Social media platforms, with their vast reach and 
algorithmi
c amplification, have become breeding grounds for hate speech, 
exacerbating existing societal divisions and tensions. 
Accordingly, t o effectively prevent and control hate speech on online 
platforms, and to promote digital harmony and responsible online behaviour, this 
Bill proposes to:— 
(a) define offences related to online hate speech and provides penalties for
such offences;
(b) establish a regulatory framework for online platforms to prevent the
spread of hate speech;
(c) mandate online platforms to deve lop and enforce communit y
guidelines prohibiting hate speech, with special consideration for
India's diverse cultural and linguistic context;
(d) require online platforms to implement user verification mechanisms to
reduce anonymous hate speech and to provide regular transparency
reports on hate speech incidents and actions taken;
(e) ensure that online platforms establish efficient mechanisms for
reporting and reviewing potential hate speech in multiple Indian
languages, and mandates the removal or disabli ng of access to content
determined to be hate speech within 24 hours of receiving a vali d
c
omplaint;
(f) oblige significant social media intermediary  to appoint a Chief
Compliance Officer, a Nodal Contact Person for coordination with law
enforcement agencies, and a Resident Grievance Officer to address
complaints related to hate speech;
(g) mandate significant social media intermediaries to deploy technology -
based measures, including automated tools or artificial intelligence, to
proactively identify and remove hate speech content, balancing the
interests of free speech and expression;

9 
(h) require online platforms to conduct regular awareness campaigns about
responsible online behaviour and the consequences of engaging in hate
speech, providing easily accessible resources on digital literacy;
(i) establish penalties for non -compliance by online platforms, including
fines that may extend to fifty lakh rupees and additional fines for
continued non-compliance;
(j) provide penalties for individual users who create or share hate speech
content, including imprisonment and fines, with harsher penalties for
repeat offenders;
(k) create an Adjudicating Authority, consisting of a Chairperson and two
members appointed by the Central Government, to hold inquiries under
this Act;
(l) establish an Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals against the decisions of
the Adjudicating Authority;
(m) grant the Central Government the power to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of this Act and protect  actions taken in good faith under
this Act from legal proceedings.
(n) to foster digital harmony and responsible use of social media and digital
platforms and provides that the Central Government will collaborate
and work closely with relevant stakeholders.
This Bill aims to embody the principles of ‘ Sarva Dharma Sadhbhavana’ as 
outlined in the Fundamental Rights, ensuring equal dignity for individuals and 
communities. As citizens of this great nation, we share the responsibility to uphold 
ethical values of harmony, respect, and fraternity. Consequently, the Bill proposes a 
co-regulation-based ethical digital framework to encourage responsible behaviour 
by both users and online platforms. 
Hence, this Bill. 
VIKRAMJIT SINGH SAHNEY 

10 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 11 of the Bill proposes to establish an  Adjudicating Authority for holding 
inquiries and adjudging whether there has been any contravention of the provisions of 
the Bill and provides for appointment of Chairperson, members, officers and staff 
therein and salary and allowances payable thereto. Clause 12 proposes to establish an 
Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals against the decisions of the Adjudicating Authority 
and provides for appointment of a Chairperson, members and other officers and staff 
therein and salary and allowances payable thereto. Clause 16 provides for steps to be 
taken by the Central Government for promotion of digital literacy and digital harmony.  
Th
e Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve, both non- recurring and recurring 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India , amounting to rupees ten crore  per 
annum. 

11 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make provisions 
through an order to remove any difficulties likely to arise in giving effect to the 
provisions of the Bill, if enacted. Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central 
Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  
As the orders and rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
________________ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the prevention and control of hate speech on online 
 platforms, to promote digital harmony and responsible online 
be
haviour, to define offences related to online hate speech 
and provide for penalties thereto, to create a  
regulatory framework for online platforms,  
and to provide for matters connected 
 therewith or incidental thereto. 
________________ 
(Shri Vikramjit Singh Sahney, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—111—10.02.2025. 