THE SUGARCANE GROWERS (REMUNERA TIVE PRICE AND
WELFARE)  BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the remunerative price for the produce of the sugarcane growers,
insurance of sugarcane crop free of cost and for their overall welfare and for
 matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sugarcane Growers (Remunerative Price and Welfare)
Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
extent and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2011
Bill No. LXXIX of  2010
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “sugarcane grower” means any person who cultivates sugarcane; and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to procure the entire sugarcane
produced in the country through an agency to be set up for the purpose.
(2) The Central Government shall fix the price of sugarcane every year after taking into
consideration,—
(i) the increase in the price of seeds, pesticides and fertilizers and other inputs;
(ii) total investment of the sugarcane growers; and
(iii) such other factors as may be prescribed.
 4.  The entire crop of sugarcane and its growers shall be compulsorily insured free
of cost by the Central Government against natural calamities, fall in the yield of sugarcane,
fall in the price of sugarcane and such other eventualities as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Sugarcane
Growers Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
6. The Sugarcane Growers Welfare Fund shall be used for the following purposes,
namely:—
(a) to provide financial assistance to sugarcane growers for purchasing
sugarcane seeds, pesticides and fertilizers, and in case of low yields of sugarcane or
loss of their crops due to rains, storms, floods, hailstorms and drought;
(b) to pay compensation to the next of kin of sugarcane growers in the event of
their death;
(c) to pay life insurance premium on behalf of the sugarcane growers;
(d) to provide free health facilities for sugarcane growers and their families;
(e) to provide assistance to the sugarcane growers in the event of disability;
(f) to compensate the farmer(s) suitably in case as yield being less than
estimated; and
(g) for such other purposes as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
5
Procurement
of sugarcane
and fixation
of its
remunerative
Price.
Insurance of
sugarcane and
its growers.
Sugarcane
Growers
Welfare Fund.
Utilisation of
fund.
Power to
make rules.
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Sugarcane is a cash crop. It is cultivated in various States in the country. It is a
crop of the whole year and it is one of the major materials to produce sugar. The
Sugarcane growers are facing problems, as they are not getting remunerative price for
their produce. Sugarcane growing has become a non-profitable agricultural activity
due to increase in the prices of seeds, fertilizers and pesticides and other inputs and the
prices of sugarcane produce have not increased in the same proportion. There is demand
the price of the Sugarcane be fixed on the basis of cost of production and price of sugar.
To meet the demand that sufficient production of sugarcane is necessary. It is possible,
if, the growers get remunerative price for sugarcane. Sugarcane growers have to go for
loans as the investment in the cultivation has gone up. They are also not getting
payment of their produce on time. This has led to their indebtedness and when they are
unable to repay loans, they take the extreme step of committing suicide or self
immolations. Further, due to unremunerative price for sugarcane, the aggrieved
sugarcane growers are forced to abandon sugarcane farming in favour of other crops
resulting in decline in the growth of sugarcane production.
The Government is required to provide remunerative price and also immediate
relief to sugarcane growers in the event of natural calamities like storm, heavy rains,
drought, hailstorm and flood so that sugarcane growers can feel respite. There is an
urgent need to enact a law, which can ensure governmental assistance to sugarcane
growers in the event of fall in prices or damage to their crops. Therefore, setting up of
a fund for sugarcane growers and provision of insurance scheme for them will prove to
be beneficial. An agency is also required to be set up by the Central Government to
procure the sugarcane produce.
The Bill, if enancted, will protect the interests and promote the welfare of the
sugarcane growers in the country and will help growth of the sugarcane production in
the country in a big way.
Hence, this Bill.
SHADI  LAL  BATRA

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for procurement of sugarcane from sugarcane growers
by an agency to be set up by the Central Government and fixation of remunerative
prices for sugarcane by the Central Government. Clause 4 provides for compulsory free
insurance of sugarcane and its growers by the Central Government against natural
calamities. Clause 5  of the Bill provides for setting up of a Sugarcane Growers Welfare
Fund to which the Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute in
such ratio, as may be prescribed.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. Though, it is not possible to quantify the actual expenditure at this
juncture, but it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees Five thousand
crore may be incurred per annum.
A non-incurring annual expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also
likely to be incurred on it.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only. The
delegation of legislative power is of normal character.

GMGIPMRND—6674RS(S3)—28-2-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
Bill
to provide for the remunerative price for the produce of the sugarcane growers, insurance
of sugarcane crop free of cost and for their overall welfare and for
 matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shadi Lal Batra, M.P .)