1
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. LXXI of 2010
THE FREEDOM OF EARNING LIVELIHOOD BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for complete freedom to earn livelihood to the hawkers, vendors,  potters
kabariwallas, cycle rickshaw and cart pullers, roadside eateries,  mechanics, fish
and chicken outlets, patriwallahs etc., by prohibiting  the local police  personnel of
local bodies from impounding or  taking away the tools, wares, stuff, cycle rickshaw,
cart,  rehri, etc., so as to enable the poverty stricken and  unemployed youth and
other citizens to earn their  livelihood without fear and feed their dependent  families
and for matters connected therewith  and incidental  thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Freedom of Earning Livelihood Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2011

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(b) "hawker" means a person who earn his livelihood by selling household
articles or items like fruits, vegetables, clothes, utensils, food items, dry fruits, paani
puri, chaat, pakoras and such eatables by going from house to house or street to
street hawking on cart, bicycle, basket, rehri or any other mode;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "rickshaw puller" means a person who physically pulls a cycle rickshaw of
any kind which includes a hand cart in order to earn his livelihood;
(e) "roadside mechanic" include the person repairing bicycle, cycle rickshaw,
scooter, moter cycles and other two wheelers and motorized vehicles, those repairing
footwear purses, utensils and other wares, electronic items, etc. by the roadside or
under the tree without erecting  any permanent structure at the site and without
hindering the smooth traffic flow on the road;
(f) "vendor" include any person who sells food items, fruits, vegetables and
other small items, eatables like chana-bhatura, puri-chhole, ice-creams, chaat, roasted
or fried groundnuts and such other eatables and household items from a stall or place
in the open space.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
every citizen including the hawkers, vendors, roadside mechanics, bicycle rickshaw and cart
pullers, potters, kabariwallahs, fish or chicken sellers, eateries owners,  patriwallahs, etc.,
and similar other vocations shall have complete freedom to earn their livelihood through
such vocations without any hindrance or interference from any authority of the Government
including those of Police and local self Government like Corporations, Municipalities, etc.
(2) Any authority of the Government who contravenes the provisions contained in
sub-section (1) of sections shall be guilty of dereliction of his duties and shall be punished
accordingly.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
authority of any Local Self Government such as Municipalities, Municipal Corporations,
Municipal Councils or by whatever name known or called as well as the authorities of local
Police shall confiscate or impound or forcibly take away the articles, foodstuff, wares, tools,
bicycle, rickshaw, carts, etc. of the citizens covered under this Act.
5. For earning hassle free livelihood under the provisions of this Act, the concerned
citizen shall not,—
(a) sell or hawk any article or stuff which is injurious to health of the public;
(b) obstruct the public place such as roads, footpath, parks and such other
places declared as public places by the appropriate Government;
(c) obstruct the flow of traffic or vehicles and pedestrians, as the case may be;
(d) sell anything which is injurious to health or which is vulgar, toxic and against
the moral values of the general public; and
(e) such other conditions as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify.
Definitions.
Freedom of
earning
livelihood to
citizens.
Local Self
Government
authorities and
Police
Personnel not
to confiscate
or impound
the articles,
wares, etc.
Conditions to
be followed
for earning
livelihood.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. It shall be duty of the appropriate Government to ensure strict compliance of the
provisions of this Act to ensure freedom of earning livelihood by every citizen residing
within its territorial jurisdiction.
7. Any Officer of Local Self Government or of any Department of the appropriate
Government including Police, who contravenes the provisions of section 3 and 4 of the Act
shall, notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law or service rules of any
nature, be dismissed from service forthwith and shall also be liable for fine which may extend
to two lakhs rupees.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force but save aforesaid the
provisions of this Act shall be addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time
being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
9. The Central Government may give directions to the Government of any State for
implementing the provisions of this Act in the State.
10. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
11. The Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure
compliance.
Penalty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to give
directions.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a vast Country and after China, we have the largest population, in the globe.
With this population boom, our nation is facing the ever growing unemployment scenario
which does not match with the growing population. Employment generation is decreasing
and the number of unemployed is increasing rapidly. The problem has become more acute
due to global meltdown and recession all over the world. Government services are becoming
scarce and so is the case of private sector. Agriculture, micro, small and medium industries
used to be biggest employment providers, but whereas recession has taken the toll on micro,
small and medium industries.  Agriculture has become the victim of vagaries of nature and
slump because of unremunerative price structure and fall in prices of commodities and,
therefore, the employment generation is not commensurate with the ever growing population.
In such a scenario self employment appears to be the only way to tackle the
unemployment problem but due to financial constraints everybody can not become self
employed. However, quite a large number of citizens try to earn their livelihood through
various means such as pulling bicycle rickshaw, carts etc., hawking or vending articles,
fruits, vegetables, clothes, wares, eatables, fish chicken etc., working as potters,
kabariwallahs, roadside mechanics repairing two wheelers, motorized vehicles, footwear,
pursed, utensils and other wares, electronic items, selling readymades, etc. in the streets,
roadside and other places to earn their livelihood and feed their poor families but most of
them are hounded by local Police and Municipal authorities. They are compelled to pay
heavy bribes and if they do not do so then their articles, wares and other things are taken
away and confiscated and impounded and heavy fines are imposed on them. As such they
are unable to earn their livelihood because they remain under threat and they fall in the net of
anti-social elements. When State can not provide employment opportunities, the poor should
not be denied their right to earn livelihood. So there should be complete and hassle free
freedom for all the citizens of the Country so that people will earn their livelihood and
support their families and there should be no interference from Police or local authorities in
their vocation. Recently, even the Supreme Court of India expressed its concern about the
plight of Rehri and Patriwallahs and directed to formulate rehabilitation plans for them.
This  Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
Hence this Bill.
DR.  AKHILESH  DAS  GUPTA
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carry out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is, of normal character.
5

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
Bill
to provide for complete freedom to earn livelihood to the hawkers, vendors,  potters
kabariwallas, cycle rickshaw and cart pullers, roadside eateries,  mechanics, fish and
chicken outlets, patriwallahs etc., by prohibiting  the local police  personnel of local
bodies from impounding or  taking away the tools, wares, stuff, cycle rickshaw, cart,
rehri, etc., so as to enable the poverty stricken and  unemployed youth and other
citizens to earn their  livelihood without fear and feed their dependent  families and for
matters connected therewith  and incidental  thereto.
————
(Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—6686RS(S3)—28-02-2011.