AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bill No. LXXIV of 2000

THE PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
AND GIRLS BILL, 2000
A
BILL

to protect the women and girls from domestic violence of various kinds including physical
and mental violence by providing deterrent punishment for such violence and to help
the victim woman or girl to move out from her house to a safer place and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called The Prevention of Domestic Violence against Women and
Girls Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

5 (3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;

(0) “domestic violence” includes beating and such other physical torture, sexual

1

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Prohibition of
domestic
violence
against
woman and
girl.

Penalty.

Right of the
woman or girl
to move out of
house for
safety.

Appointment
of Special
Protection
Officers.

Savings

Power to
make rules.

2

abuse, non providing of money for personal expenses, emotional blackmail, abusing
and using foul language and psychological abuse of a woman or girl in the household;

(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(बी terms and phrases used but not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian
Penal Code 1860 shall have the same meaning assigned to them in the said Act.

3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
domestic violence against any woman or girl, as the case may be, is hereby prohibited.

(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.

4. Whoever,—

(a) beats or inflicts physical torture of the nature of hurt on any woman or girl in
the household shall on conviction in a court of law, be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than two years but may extend to five years and also
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees;

(6) causes grevious hurt to any woman or girl in his house shall on conviction in
a court of law, be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than five years
but which may extend to ten years and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees;

(c) indulges in sexual violence against the woman or girl in his house
notwithstanding his relation with such a woman or girl, as the case may be, and also
sexually exploits the woman or girl shall on conviction in court of law, be punishable
with imprisonment for life;

(d) indulges in emotional blackmail or psychological abuse or abuses or uses
foul language against any woman or girl in his house shall on conviction in a court of
law, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months and with fine
which may extend to twenty five thousand rupees.

5. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up such number of short stay homes as it
may deem necessary for the purposes of this Act.

(2) Any abused woman or girl, as the case may be, under this Act shall have the right
to move out of her house with bag and baggage to a safer place or short stay home for her
safety.

6. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the appropriate Government shall appoint such
number of Special Protection Officers as it may deem necessary, in such manner as may be
prescribed.

(2) The Special Protection Officer shall be responsible for,—

(0) assisting the abused woman or girl to remove her belongings from her house
to a safe or short stay home set up under this Act;

(ii) coordinating the functioning of various Government and non Governmental
Organisations providing medical, legal counselling and other services to the women
and girls who are victims of domestic violence;

(ii) such other responsibilities as may be prescribed.

7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.

8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for giving effect to the provisions of sections 5(1) and 6(1) of the Act.

5 45 of 1860.

20

25

30

35

40

45


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Domestic violence inflicted on women and girls over the years through heinous
practices. Domestic violence in a family can be more than physical. It is increasingly taking
a non-verbal form as well. Often it is simply a lack of concern, support and care for the
women.

Though sections 498A and 304B of the IPC cover aspects of domestic violence,
however, justice through these laws takes time and the woman is not immediately removed
from potentially dangerous situation. Moreover, in cases where the violence is extreme and
unbearable, judicial separation does not necessarily grant immediate safety. Most of the
women who undergo such violence neither want divorce nor go to a criminal court complaining
against such abuse which brings more harassment to the victim. It often ends up with more
beatings and physical punishments. There is right now no remedy for domestic violence, So
the Bill if implemented can certainly be effective.

Hence this Bill.

SANTOSH BAGRODIA


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 provides that appropriate Government shall set up such number of short stay
homes for the purposes of this Act. Clause 6 provides for the appointment of Special Protection
Officers, The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a sum of Rupees one hundred crore may involve as recurring expenditure
per annum.

A sum of Rupees Two hundred crores may also involve as non recurring expenditure.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill which will relate to matters of details only.

The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.



RAJYA SAHBA

A
BILL

to protect the women and girls from domestic violence of various kinds including physical
and mental violence by providing deterrent punishment for such violence and to help the
victim woman and girl to move out from her house to a safer place and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.

(Shri Santosh Bagrodia, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5228RS—1.12.2000.