AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025 
Bill No. LXXII of 2024 
THE URBAN AREAS (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) 
BILL, 2024 
A 
BILL 
to establish an Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Committee to ensure 
regulation and development of urban areas in the country and for all matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Urban Areas (Development and Regulation)
Act, 2024.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title  and 
commencement. 
 
10 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the State
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;  
(b) “Committee” means the Urban Areas (Development and
Regulation) Committee established under section 3; 
Definitions. 

2 
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) “Urban Areas” means the territorial areas of a Municipality as is
notified by the Government under article 243Q of the Constitution. 
Explanation:  For the purposes of this clause, “Municipality” means an 
institution of Self -Government constituted under article 243Q of the 
Constitution. 
 
5 
 
Establishment 
of  Urban 
Areas 
(Development 
and 
Regulation) 
Committee. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Committee to be known as the Urban Areas 
(Development and Regulation) Committee for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) the Prime Minister of India who shall be the ex- officio
Chairperson of the Committee; 
(b) the Union Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs — ex-
officio Member; 
(c) one Member of Parliament each from the House of the
People and the Council of States to be nominated by the Presiding 
Officers of the Houses concerned— ex-officio Member; 
(d) a representative of the NITI Aayog to be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed — ex-officio 
Member; 
(e) a representative from the Indian Administrative Services to
be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed, who shall be the Member-Secretary to the Committee; and 
(f) one senior architect engineer to be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner and on such salary and 
allowances and terms and conditions of service, as may be 
prescribed— Member. 
(3) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and
staff, as it deems necessary, to aid the efficient functioning of the
Committee.
(4) The salary, allowances and other terms of conditions of services of
officers and staff of the Committee shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(5) The Committee shall meet at least twice in a month and shall observe
such rules of procedure with regard to transaction of business at its meetings
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Provided that the Committee shall meet at such time and place and at 
such intervals, as the Chairperson of the Committee deems fit. 
Provided further that the Union Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
shall provide secretarial assistance during the meetings of the Committee. 
 
10 
 
 
15 
 
 
20 
 
 
25 
 
 
30 
 
 
35 
Functions of 
the 
Committee. 
4. (1)   The Committee shall recommend to the appropriate Government to,—  
40

3 
 
5 
 
 
10 
 
 
15 
 
 
20 
 
 
25 
 
 
30 
 
 
35 
(a) ensure availability of means for the development and
regulation of urban areas under this jurisdiction; 
(b) impart modern training in techniques of urban
development to the institutions and persons involved in the regulation 
and development of urban areas; 
(c) ensure adherence to the stipulated method for financin g
t
he development of urban areas, i.e., seventy-five percent. of the 
expenditure shall be borne by the Central Government and rest of the 
twenty-five percent. by the State Government;  
(d) put an obligation on  the District Magistrate concerned to
ensure appropriate development and regulation of urban areas under 
his jurisdiction;  
(e) establish durable, strong and inclusive infras tructure
required for the development and regulation of urban areas in the 
country; 
(f) establish natural land cover including parks and
playgrounds in the urban areas in the country; 
(g) ensure availability of safe housing, clean water, water
management, healthcare facilities and appropriate educational facilities 
in the urban areas of the country;  
(h) ensure complete ban on encroachment upon lakes, wet
lands and rivers; 
(i) establish balance between supply and demand of public
transport facilities in the urban areas; 
(j) ensure availability of electric buses, establish bus corridor
and bus rapid transit system for promoting green mobility in the urban 
areas;  
(k) promote e -participation of urban local bodies in the
development and regulation of urban area under their jurisdiction; 
(l) establish suburbs along with metropolitan cities to make a
balance between population and resources; and 
(m) undertake such other measures as are required for th
e
r
egulation and development of urban areas; 
(2)
The Committee shall prescribe the form and manner and the time within
which the appropriate Government shall prepare and submit an action taken
r
eport on its recommendations.
 
40
5. T
he appropriate Government shall prepare a report on the action taken on the
recommendations of the Committee including the reasons for non-
implementation and/or delay in taking action thereon and submit the report
to the Committee, in such form and manner and within such time, as may be
prescribed by the Committee.
Duties of the 
appropriate 
Government. 
6. (1 )  The Committee shall prepare once every year, in such form and manner
as may be prescribed, an annual report giving the summary of its activities,
Annual report. 

4 
including schemes it has undertaken and recommended to the State 
Governments during the previous calendar year containing therein the 
statements of annual accounts of the Authority.  
(2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and
the Central Government shall lay the report before each House of Parliament
as soon as it is received.
5 
C
entral 
Government 
to provide 
funds.
 
7. T he Central Government, shall from time to time provide, after du e
ap
propriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
P
ower to 
remove 
difficulty.
 
8. If
 any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, may make
such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of any
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of three years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 
 
10 
 
 
15 
Power to 
make rules. 
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section, shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before  each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of  thirty  days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid , both Houses agree
in making  any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree  that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
 
20 
 
 
25 

5 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India’s biggest tragedy after independence is the migration of about fifty crore 
people from their ancestral homes and villages.  A study of the changes in this socio-
economic structure reveals that almost one-third of the country’s population (about 
31.16 percent.) is now living in cities. Census data of 2011 shows that the number of 
people leaving the villages and migrating to the cities is increasing constantly and now 
thirty-seven crore and seventy lakh people live in the cities. On comparing the figures 
of 2001 and 2011 census, it is found that during this period the population of cities 
increased by nine crore and ten lakhs, whereas the population of villages increased by 
only nine crore and five lakh. 
The population of villages in the country is still about 68.84 crore, that is, two-
thirds of the total population of the country, but the contribution of agriculture in the 
country’s GDP has been continuously decreasing to only fifteen per cent. There is a 
decline in the standard of living in villages, lack of education, health care and basic 
facilities and lack of employment, and so people there are moving to the cities in 
search of a better life. As a result, all big cities including the metropolitan cities of the 
country have turned into slums. Out of a total of 7.89 crore families living in cities 
across the country, 1.37 crore families live in slums. 
Urbanization should be seen as an opportunity and urban centers as engines of 
growth. Urban and rural development in the country should complement each other. 
If we analyze from the perspective of development in the field of urbanization in 
different States of India, it is evident that the quantum and speed of urbanization in 
different States is not the same. For urbanization and development to move on the 
same track, there should be people-centric urban development, which can weave the 
fabric of such cities and which shall be built according to the required global 
standards. A city that is two steps ahead of people’s aspirations, a city built on global 
best practices, a city that integrates technology, transportation, energy efficiency, 
proximity to work, etc. A city where all urban development plans are undertaken with 
people’s participation. 
As per a report by the United Nations, globally, a total of 31 such cities are home 
to an estimated 5 crore people. This is 6.8 per cent. of the world’s total population. By 
the year 2030, the number of mega cities shall increase to 41 and their population shall 
be 7.3 crore, which would be 8.7 per cent. of the population of the entire world. The 
administrative boundaries of the cities have not been relied upon in this report. 
Instead, priority has been given to use the concept of growing urban area. The report 
reveals that only people from urban areas live in these mega cities. About 21 per cent. 
of the world’s people live in cities, whose population is between 50 thousand and one 
crore. By the year 2030, 60 percent of the world’s population shall live in small and 
big cities, which is currently 54 per cent. Most developing cities in Asia and Africa 
are seeing population growth, and by 2030, 33 of the 41 mega cities shall be in third 
world countries. 
According to a report by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of 
United Nations, by the year 2030, India shall have seven mega cities, each with a 
population of 96 lakh. Among these seven, Delhi shall be second in terms of 
population. 
The World Cities Report, 2016 states that at present, the country has five mega 
cities, - Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore and Chennai, each with a population of 

6 
more than one crore. Hyderabad and Ahmedabad will also join the ranks by the year 
2030. 
The need is to create development centers across the country instead of adopting 
foreign models for urbanization. Inequality and imbalance shall increase further by 
adopting foreign models. Uneven and imbalanced urbanization is not correct 
considering the diversity of India. In view of the above, the present Bill is very 
important so that the people of the urban areas of India may be able to live in 
conditions suitable for humans. 
Hence, this Bill. 
 BHIM SINGH. 

7 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of an Urban Areas 
(Development and Regulation) Committee with a senior architect engineer to be 
appointed as a member thereto. It also provides for appointment of requisite number 
of officers and staff to assist the Committee as well as their salary and allowances and 
other terms and conditions of their service.  Clause  7 provides for the Central 
Government to provide requisite funds to the Committee for carrying out the purposes 
of the Bill.  
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two 
hundred crore per annum will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be 
involved. 

8 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, in consultation with the 
State Governments, to make such order or give such direction for removing any 
difficulty in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.  Clause 9 empowers the Central 
Government to frame rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the orders, 
directions and rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative 
power is of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to establish an Urban Areas (Development and Regulation) Committee to ensure 
regulation and development of urban areas in the country and for all matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(D
r. Bhim Singh, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS-PMB(E)—257–08.12.2025. 