THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) The Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force, at once.
2. In article 53 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(4) Schemes approved and implemented by the Union Government providing
for allotment of finances and for carrying developmental works, shall be deemed to be
approved and implemented under the executive powers of the Union:
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. LXXII of 2010
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH FEBRUARY, 2011
Amendment
of article 53.5

2
Provided that no scheme involving an expenditure of more than rupees fifty
crore  shall  be approved and implemented by the Union Government under its executive
powers, and that, Parliament may by law provide for enactment of all such schemes.”

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Union Government has rightly enacted a scheme known as Members of Parliament
Area Development (MPLAD) Scheme which is running very effectively. The Members of the
apex legislature of this great democracy were virtually powerless before the enactment of the
scheme in 1993. The Scheme, now involves disbursement of crore of rupees towards the
developmental projects recommended by MPs. Despite the magnitude of the scheme, there
is no law to regulate the scheme. No doubt, the Government has issued some guidelines
which, however, are vague and confusing. Further, there are hundreds of District Magistrates
who are in-charge of the schemes in various States and each one of them, interpreting the
scheme in his own way.
There is no system of getting clarification over a procedural or legal point of dispute
from the Directorate of MPLAD Scheme in New Delhi through electronic mechanism in 48
hours, which should have been the case when we are in an era of e-governance. Although
the State Governments could have enacted a special procedure to implement MPLAD projects,
State Governments have failed to do it. They have preferred to follow the Public Works
Departments Manual, which is also at times confusing. Union Government could have
provided in their guidelines a shorter procedure but the guidelines, do not provide for any
procedure.
Schemes are only executive orders. They are not legislations. Besides, Parliament
enacts laws for everyone and on every subject. Why should not the members enact an ideal
law to regulate MPLAD, in their own interest and, more particularly, to bring in transparency
in the matter? After the law is enacted laying down the fundamentals, necessary rules can be
framed and a scheme be prepared.
Hence this Bill.
SHANTARAM  LAXMAN  NAIK

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for allotment of finances for schemes approved by Central
Government and for carrying out the developmental works to the tune of rupees fifty crore.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two crore per member per year is
likely to be involved. Non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also
likely to be involved.

GMGIPMRND—6672RS(S3)—28-02-2011.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P.)