RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

to repeal the Vaccination Act, 1880.

(Dr. C.P. Thakur, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—5284RS—01.12.2000,


AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA

Bil’No. LXXIX of 2000
—————

THE HAJ COMMITTEE BILL, 2000

ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY

CLAUSES

1. Short title and commencement,

2. Definitions.

CHAPTER II
Hay Comm rrree oF INDIA

3. Constitution and incorporation of the Haj Committee of India.

4, Composition of Committee.

5. Notification of members.

6. Term of office.

7. Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersons.

8... Reconstitution of Committee.

9. Duties pf Committee.
10. Meetings of Committee.
11. Appointment of Standing Committees and sub-committees.
12. Disqualification for being appointed, or for continuing as a member of Committee.
13, Resignation of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and members.
14, Removal of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and members.
15. Filling of a casual vacancy.
16. Chief Executive Officer and other employees.

CHAPTER III
‘Stare Hay CoMMImrTEes

17. Establishment and incorporation of State Haj Committee.
18. Composition of State Committee.
19. Notification of members.
20. ‘Term of office.
21. Chairperson.
22. Reconstitution of a State Committee.
23. Disqualification for being appointed, or for continuing as a member of Commnittee.
24. Resignation of Chairperson and members.
25. Removal of Chairperson and members.
26. — Filling up of a casual vacancy.
27. Duties of State Committee.
28. Meetings of State Committee.
29, Executive Officer and other employees of State Committee.


CHAPTER IV
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT

‘CLAUSES
30. Central Haj Fund.
31. Application of Central Haj Fund.
32. State Haj Fund.
33. Application of State Haj Fund.
34. Accounts and audit.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
35. Powers of Committee to issue Pilgrim Passes and levy fees.
36.  Supersession of Committee.
37. Membership of Committee or State Committee not to constitute office of profit.
38. Vacancies, etc., not invalidate proceedings of Committee.
39. Officers and employees of Committee to be public servants.
40. Indemnity.
41. Power to amend Schedule.
42.  Redressal of grivences.
43. Vesting of properties and other rights, etc., in Committees.
44. Power to make rules.
45. Power to make bye-laws.
46. Power to delegate.
47. Power to make rules by State Government.
48. Provisions as to employees of the existing Committee before the commencement of
this Act.
49. Protection of action taken in good faith.
50. Power to remove difficulties.
51. Powers to give directions.
52. Repeal.

THE SCHEDULE.

Gi)


Bill No. LXXIX of 2000

THE HAJ COMMITTEE BILL, 2000
A
BILL

to establish a Haj Committee of India and State Haj Committees for making
arrangements for the pilgrimage of Muslims for Haj, and for matters connected

therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

1. (J) This Act may be called the Haj Committee Act, 2000.

(2) It shall come into force on such date or dates as the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this
Act and for different States.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “bye-laws” means bye-laws made under section 45;

(b) “Chief Executive Officer or the Executive Officer” means the Chief Executive
Officer of the Committee or the Executive Officer of the State Committee appointed
under sub-section (/) of section 16 or sub-section (/) of section 29, as the case may
be;

Short title and
commence-
ment,

Definitions.


Constitation
and incorpora-
tion of the Haj
Committee of
India,

Composition
of Committee.

2
(c) “Committee” means the Haj Committee of India constituted under section 3;

; (व) “member” means amember of the Haj Committee of India nominated under
section 4 or of a State Haj Committee nominated under section 18, as the case may
be, and includes the Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson;

(e) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazetté of India
or the Official Gazette of a State, as the case may be;

(f) “pilgrim” means a Muslim proceeding to, or returning from, Haj;

(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under section 44 by the Central
Government or, as the case may be, under section 47 by the State Government;

(h) “State Committee” means a State Haj Committee constituted under section
18 and includes a Joint State Committee;

( “State Government”, in relation toa Union territory, means the Administrator
of that Union territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the
Constitution.

CHAPTER IL
HA) Comm irre OF INDIA

3. (7) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be constituted a Committee by the
name of the Haj Committee of India.

(2) The Committee shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, to create a charitable trust or
endowment, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued,

(3) The Committee shall have its headquarters at New Dethi and the existing office
of the “Haj Committee” at Mumbai constituted under the Haj Committee Act, 1959 shall.
function as the regional office of the Committee till such time as it may be considered
necessary by the Committee.

4, The Committee shall consist of the following members, namely:—

(i) three members of Parliament of whom two are to be nominated by the
Speaker of the House of the People from among its Muslim members, and one by
the Chairman of the Council of States from among its Musliny members:

Provided that a Member of Parliament shall, upon ceasing to be a member,
cease to be a member of the Committee and the Speaker of the House of the People
or the Chairman of the Council of States, as the case may be, shall make a fresh
nomination upon request by the Central Government.

(ii) six Muslim members of the Committee shall be elected, one from each
zone as specified in the Schedule, in such manner as may be prescribed.

(ii) four persons not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of

India nominated by that Government to represent the Ministries of External Affairs,

Home, Finance and Civil Aviation, as, ex officio members;
(iv) six Muslim members shall be nominated by the Central Government from
among the following categories of persons, namely:—

(a) two members who have special knowledge of public administration,
finance, education, culture or social work and out of whom one shall be a Shia
Muslim;

51 of 1959.


(6) a woman member;

(c) three members who have special knowledge of Muslim theology and
law, out of them one shall be a Shia Muslim.

5. As soon as may be after the nomination of the members of the Committee under
section 4, the Central Goyernment shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of all
such members,

6. (1) The term of office of the members of the Committee (other than the ex officio
members and members filling casual vacancies) shall be not less than three years,
commencing on the day following the publication of the list of members under section 5:

Provided that the term of the members of the Committee may be extended by the
Central Government by a notification in the Official Gazette for a period not exceeding
six months at a time but, in any case, not exceeding beyond a total period of one year.

(2) The allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairpersons and members shall be such as may be prescribed.

7. (1) After the publication of the names of members of the Committee under section 5,
the Central Government shall convene the first meeting of the Committee at which the
Committee shall elect a Chairperson and two Vice-Chairpersons from amongst its members.

(2) If the Committee fails to elect a Chairperson or Vice-Chairpersons the Central
Government may appoint a member of the Committee to be the Chairperson thereof or
Vice-Chairpersons, as the case may be.

(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such powers and discharge such duties as may be
prescribed.

(4) The Vice-Chairpersons shall exercise such powers and discharge such duties as
may be determined by bye-laws made in this behalf by the Committee.

(5) ‘The @ection of the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairpersons shall be notified by
the Central Government in the Official Gazette.

(6) The term of office of the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairpersons, as the case may
be, shall be for a period of three years and no person shall hold office of the Chairperson or
of the Vice-Chairperson, as the case may be, for more than two consecutive terms.

(7) Any casual vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or a Vice-Chairperson shall
be filled in accordance with sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), as the case may be.

8. (1) The Central Government shall take or cause to be taken all necessary steps for
the reconstitution of a new Committee at least four months before the expiry of the term,
or the extended term, as the case may be, of the Committee.

(2) An outgoing member shall be eligible for renomination on the Committee for
not more than two terms:

Provided that not more than fifty per cent. of the members may be re-nominated for a
second term in such manner as may be prescribed.

9. (1) The duties of the Committee shall be—

(i) to collect and disseminate information useful to pilgrims, and to arrange
orientation and training programmes for pilgrims;

(ii) to advise and assist pilgrims during their stay at the embarkation points in
India, while proceeding to or returning from pilgrimage, in all matters including
vaccination, inoculation, medical inspection, issue of pilgrim passes and foreign
exchange, and to liaise with the local authorities concerned in such matters;

(iié) to give relief to indigent pilgrims;

Notification of
members.

Term of office.

Chantperson
and Vice-

Chairpersons.

Reconstitution
of Committee.

Duties of
Committee.


Meetings of
Committee.

Appointment
of Standing
Cortmittees
and sub-
committees.

Disqualifica-
tion for being
appointed, or
for continuing
as a member

of Committee.

4

(iv) to finalise the annual Haj plan with the approval of the Central Government,
and execute the plan, including the arrangements for travel by air or any other means,
and to advise in matters relating to accommodations;

(v) to approve the budget estimates of the Committee and submit it to the Central
Government at least three months before the beginning of the financial year for its
concurrence;

(vi) to negotiate and co-operate with railways, airways and travel agencies for
the purpose of securing travelling facilities for pilgrims;

(vii) to generally look after the welfare of the pilgrims;

(viii) to publish such proceedings of the Committee and such matters of interest
to pilgrims as may be determined by bye-laws made in this behalf by the Committee;

(ix) to discharge such other duties in connection with Haj as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.

(2) The Central Government shall afford all reasonable assistance to the Committee
in the discharge of the duties specified in sub-section (/).

10. (/) The Committee shall meet at least three times in a year before the
commencement of the Haj season to plan and make arrangements for Haj and once after
that to review all arrangements made by the Committee.

(2) In addition to the meetings specified in sub-section (1), the Committee may hold
meetings as and when requisitioned by at least one-third of its members or when considered
necessary by the Chairperson.

(3) The number of members required to make a quorum at any meeting of the
Committee shall be one-third of its members.

(4) All matters shall be decided by a majority of votes of the members present and,
in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or other person presidifig shall have a
casting vote.

(5) The Committee shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction
of business at its meetings as may be determined by bye-laws.

11. (1) The Committee shall appoint three Standing Committees to deal with matters
relating to finance, transport and pilgrims’ welfare from amongst its members consisting
of not more than five members each, with such powers and functions as may be determined
by bye-laws made in this behalf by the Committee.

(2) The Committee may also appoint other sub-committees for such purposes as it
may think fit and any such sub-committee shall consist of such number of members and
other persons as may be determined by bye-laws made in this behalf by the Committee.

12. A person shall be disqualified for being nominated, or for continuing as amember
of the Committee, if he—

(i) is not acitizen of India;

(ii) is not a Muslim, except for ex officio members as provided in clause (iii) of
sub-section (/) of section 4;

(iii) is less than twenty-five years of age;
(iv) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(v) is an undischarged insolvent;

(vi) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves a moral turpitude;


5
(vii) has been on a previous occasion—
(a) removed from his office as a member; or

(b) removed by an order of a competent authority either for not acting in
the interest of the pilgrims or for corruption.

13. The Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson or any other member may resign his
office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government and it shall be
effective from the date of such resignation.

14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, remove
the Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson of the Committee or any member thereof, if he—

(i) is or becomes subject to any of the disqualifications specified in section 12;
or

(ii) refuses to act or is incapable of acting or acts in a manner which the
Central Government, after hearing any explanation that he may offer, considers to
be prejudicial to the interests of the Committee or the interests of the pilgrims; or

(iii) fails in the opinion of the Committee, to attend three consecutive meetings
of the Committee, without sufficient excuse.

(2) Where the Chairperson or a Vice-Chairperson of the Committee is removed
under sub-section (/), he shall also cease to be a member of the Committee.

15. (/) When the seat of a member becomes vacant by his removal, resignation,
death or otherwise, a new member shall be nominated in his place and such member shall
hold office so long as the member whose place he fills would have been entitled to hold
office if such vacancy had not occurred.

(2) Any casual vacancy under sub-section (/) shall be filled up by the same category
to which the former member belonged.

16. (7) The Central Government shall appoint a person, from a panel of Muslim
officers of the Central Government and of the State Governments not below the rank of
Deputy Secretary to the Government of India, to be the Chief Executive Officer of the
Committee on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.

(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall be the ex officio Secretary of the Committee.

(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall be appointed for a period of three years, which
may be extended by a maximum period of one year by the Central Government.

(4) The Chief Executive Officer shall execute the decisions of the Committee and
perform such other functions as may be prescribed.

(5) The Chief Executive Officer shall be responsible to the Central Government and
shall be under its administrative control.

(6) The Committee may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government,
employ such other officers and employees as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes
of this Act, on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.

CHAPTER III
‘State HA) ComMITTEES

17. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, the Government of a State shall constitute a
Committee by the name of the ......[name of the State] Haj Committee:

Provided that in case it appears to the Central Government for any reasons that it is

Resignation of
Chairperson,
Vice-
Chairperson
and members,
Removal of
‘Chairperson,
Vice-
Chairperson
and members,

Filling of a
casual vacancy.

Chief
Execative
officer and
other
employees.

Establishment
and
incorporation
of State Haj
Committee.


6

not necessary for a State or Union territory to establish a Haj Committee, it may authorise
the State Haj Committee of a contiguous State to deal with those pilgrims and suggest
suitable representation of those States and Union territories.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, an agreement may be entered
into—

(a) by two or more Governments of contiguous States, or

(b) by the Central Government (in respect of one or more Union territories)
and one or more Governments of States contiguous to such Union territory or Union
territories,

to be in force for such period and to be subject to renewal for such further period, ifany,
as may be specified in the agreement to provide for the constitution of a Joint State
Committee,— हु

(i) in a case referred to in clause (a), for all the participating States, and

(ii) in a case referred to in clause (0), for the participating Union territory or
Union territories and the State or States.

(3) An agreement under this section shall be published, in a case referred to in
clause (a) of sub-section (2), in the Official Gazette of the participating States and in a
case referred to in clause (b) of that sub-section, in the Official Gazette of the participating
Union territory or Union territories and participating State or States.

(4) Any reference in this Act to the State Committee shall, unless the context
otherwise requires, be construed as including a Joint State Committee.

‘Composition of 18. (1) A State Committee shall consist of thirteen members, to be nominated by the
State | State Government, namely:—
Committee.

(i) three members from the Muslim members of —-
(a) Parliament representing the State;
(9) State Legislative Assembly; and
(c) Legislative Council, where it exists;

(ii) three members from Muslim members representing local bodies in the
State;

(iii) three members having expertise in Muslim theology and law including one
who shall be a Shia Muslim;

(iv) two members representing Muslim voluntary organisations working in the
fields of public administration, finance, education, culture or social work;

(v) the Chairperson of the State Wakf Board; and

(vi) Executive Officer of the State Committee, who shall be the ex officiomember
of the State Committee:

Provided that a Committee for any Union territory or a Joint State Committee shall
consist of such number of members as may be prescribed.

(2) In case where there is no Muslim member in any of the categories mentioned in
clauses (i) and (ii) of sub-section (/), or where there is no Legislative Council in a State,
nomination may be made in such manner as may be prescribed.

Notification of 19, As soon as may be after the nomination of the members of a State Committee
members. under sub-section (/) of section 18, the State Government shall publish in the Official
Gazette of that State the names of all such members.


7

20. (/) The term of office of the members of the State Committee (other than the ex
officio members and members filling casual vacancies) shall be not less than three years,
commencing on the day following the publication of the list of members under section 19.

(2) The allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of the Chairperson
and members shall be such as may be prescribed.

21. (1) After the publication of the names of members of the State Committee under
section 19, the State Government shall convene the first meeting of the State Committee
at which the State Committee shall elect a Chairperson from amongst its members.

(2) If the State Committee fails to elect a Chairperson, the State Government may
appoint a member of the State Committee to be the Chairperson thereof.

(3) The election of the Chairperson shall be notified by the State Government in the
Official Gazette of the State.

(4) The term of office of the Chairperson shall be three years and no person shall hold
oftice of the Chairperson for more than two consecutive terms.

(5) Any casual vacancy in the office of the Chairperson shall be filled in accordance
with sub-section (/) or sub-section (2), as the case may be.

22. (1) The State Government shall take or cause to be taken all necessary steps for
the reconstitution of a new State Committee at least four months before the expiry of the
term of the State Committee.

(2) An outgoing members shall be eligible for re-nomination of the State Committee
for not more than two terms:

Provided that fifty per cent. of the nominees may be renominated for a second term in
such manner as may be prescribed.

23. A person shall be disqualified for being nominated, or for continuing as a member
of the State Committee, if he—

(A is not a citizen of India;

(ii) is not a Muslim, except for an Executive Officer as provided in clause (vi) of
sub-section (J) of section 18,

(iii) is less than twenty-five years of age;
(iv) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(v) is an undischarged insolvent;

(vi) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the State
Government, involves a moral turpitude;

(vii) has been on a previous occasion—
(a) removed from his office as a member; or

(b) removed by an order of a competent authority either for not acting in
the interest of the pilgrims or for corruption.

24. The Chairperson or any other member may resign his office by writing under his
hand addressed to the State Government and it shall be effective from the date of such
resignation,

25. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, remove
the Chairperson of the State Committee or any member thereof, if he—
(i) is or becomes subject to any of the disqualifications specified in section 23;
or

Term of office.

Chairperson,

Reconstitution
of a State
Committee

Disqualification
for being
appointed, or
for continuing
as a member
of the
Committee.

Resignation of
Chairperson
and members.

Removal of
chairperson
and members.


Filling up of a
casual
vacancy.

Duties of

Meetings of
State

Executive
Officer and
other
employees of
State
Committee.

Central Haj
Fuad.

8

(ii) refuses to act or is incapable of acting or acts in a manner which the State
Government, after hearing any explanation that he may offer, considers to be
prejudicial to the interests of the State Committee or the interests of the pilgrims; or

(iii) fails in the opinion of the State Committee, to attend thrve ¢onsecutive
meetings of the State Committee, without sufficient excuse.

(2) Where the Chairperson of the State Committee is removed under sub-section
(J), he shall also cease to be a member of the State Committee.

26. (1) When the seat of a member becomes vacant by his removal, resignation,
death or otherwise, a new member shall be nominated in his place and such member shall
hold office so long as the member whose place he fills would have been entitled to hold
office if such vacancy had not occurred.

(2) Any casual vacancy under sub-section (/) shall be filled up by the same
category to which the former member belonged.

27. (1) It shall be the duty of a State Committee to implement the policy and directions
of the Committee in the interests of Haj pilgrims. ‘

(2) The State Committee shall provide assistance to the Haj pilgrims including, in
the matter of their transport between their home States and the point of exit from India
and their transit accommodation at points of exit.

(3) The State Committee shall discharge such other duties in connection with Haj as
may be prescribed by the State Government concerned, in consultation with the Central
Government.

28. (1) A State Committee shall meet at least twice in a year before the Haj day and
once after the Haj is over.

(2) The number of members required to make a quorum at any meeting of the State
Committee shall be one-third of its members.

(3) In addition to the number of meetings specified in sub-section (/), the State
Committee may hold meetings as and when requisitioned by at least one-third of its
members or when considered necessary by the Chairperson.

(4) All matters shall be decided by a majority of votes of the members present and,
in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or other person presiding shall have a
casting vote.

29. (1) The State Government shall appoint a person, from amongst its officers not
below the rank of Under Secretary, to be the Executive Officer of the State Committee:

Provided that the person so appointed shall preferably be a Muslim.

(2) The Executive Officer of the State Committee shall act as its Secretary.

(3) The Executive Officer shall execute the decisions of the State Committee and
perform such other functions as may be prescribed.

(4) The State Committee shall, with the previous sanction of the State Government,
employ such officers and other employees as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes
of this Act.

(5) The term of office and conditions of service of officers and other employees
shall be such as may be prescribed.

CHAPTER IV
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT

30. ‘Fhe Committee shall have its own Fund to be called the Centra! Haj Fund, and
there shall be placed to the credit thereof the following sums, namely:—
(a) sums realised from any fees and service charges which may be levied by
the Committee: —
(i) for registration of applications for Haj; and


9
(ii) for issue of Haj pilgrim travel passes;
(0) money collected from pilgrims for performance of Haj;
(c) the income from all deposits and investment of the Committee's funds;

(d) the sums realised from the sale of the effects of deceased pilgrims and
sums of money left by them, which are unclaimed and have lapsed to the
Government;

(e) any sums loaned by the Central or a State Government, or any other source
approved by that Government; .

(f) any amount that may be legally due to the Committee from any source; and

(g) the amount standing at the commencement of this Act to the credit of the Haj
51 of $959. Fund or the Indigent Pilgrims Fund established under the Haj Committee Act, 1959.

31. The Central Haj Fund shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder, be under the control and management of the Committee, and shall be
applied to the following purposes, namely:—

(a) pay and allowances of the Chief Executive Officer and other employees of
the Committee;

(b) payment of charges and expenses incidental to the objects specified in
section 9;

(c) any other expenses which are required to be met by the Committee or a
State Committee, as approved by the Central Government.

32. The State Committee shall have its own fund to be called the State Haj Fund and
the following sums shall be placed to the credit thereof, namely:—

(i) all sums of money paid to it or any grant made by the Committee for the
purposes of this Act;

(ii) any grant, or loan that may be made‘to the State Committee by the State
Government, or any other source for the purposes of this Act as approved-by the
State Government;

(iii) any amount that may be legally due to the State Committee from any
sources; and
(iv) the moneys, if any, standing to the credit of a State Haj Committee, at the
commencement of this Act.
33. The State Haj Fund shall, subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, be
under the control and management of the State Committee and shall be applied to the
following purposes, namely:—

(i) pay and allowances of the employees of the State Committee other than its
Executive Officer whose pay and allowances shall be borne by the State Government,

(ii) payment of charges and expenses incidental to the due performance of its
duties by the State Commitice for the objects specified in section 27; and

(iii) any other expenses, as approved by the State Government which are
required to be met by the State Committee,

34, (1) The Committee and every State Committee shall maintain proper accounts

and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form as _

may be prescribed by the Central Government, or, as the case may be, the State Government.

(2) The accounts shall be examined and audited annually by ‘such auditors as the
Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government may approve.

Application
of Central Haj
Fund.

State Hay

Application of
‘State Hay
Fund.

Accounts and
audit.


Powers of
Commuttec to
issue Pilgrim
Passes and levy
fees.

Supersession
of Committee

Membership
of Committee
or State
Commuttee not
to constitute
office of
profit.

10

(3) The accounts of the Committee or the State Committee as certified by the auditor
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually by the said Committee 10
the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government.

(4) The Central Government shall, as 5001 as may be after the receipt of the audit
report under sub-section (3), cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

(5) Thé State Government shall, as soon as may be, after the receipt of the audit
report unde: sub-section (3), cause the same to be laid before the State Legislature.

CHAPTER ५
MISCELLANEOUS,

35. (1) The Committee, shall have the power to issue a travel document called “Pilgrim
Pass” to a Haj pilgrims for his departure from India as a bona fide pilgrim to Saudi Arabia
and the said Pilgrim shall be decmed to be exempted from the provisions of section 3 of
the Passport Act, 1967

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Passports Act, 1967, the Central
Government may, in consultation with the Committee, levy such fees for registration of a
Haj pilgrim, issuahce of Pilgrim Pass by the Committee and other related matters, as may
be prescribed in connection with rendering of such services.. -

36. (/) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the Committee is unable to
perform, or persistently makes default in the performance of the duties imposed on it by or
under this Act or exceeds or abuses its powers, the Central Government may by an order
published, together with a statement of the reasons therefor, in the Official Gazette,
supersede it for such period as may be specified in the order:

Provided that before making an order of supersession as aforesaid, the Central
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Committee to show cause why it
should not be superseded.

(2) When the Committee is superseded by an order under sub-section (1),—

(a) ail members shall, on such date as may be specified in the order, vacate their
offices as such members without prejudice to their eligibility for nomination under
clause (व);

(b) during the period of supersession of the Committee, all powers and duties
conferred and imposed upon the Committee by or under this Act shall be exercised
and performed by such officer or authority as the Central Government may appoint in
that behalf;

(०) all property vested in the Committee shall, until it is seconstituted, vest in
the Central Government;

(d) before the expiry of the period of supersession, nominations shall be made
by the Central Government for the purpose of reconstituting the Committee.

(3) An order of supersession made under this section together with a statement of the
reasons therefor shall be laid before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after it has
been made.

(4) A State Government may exercise the same powers and duties in respect of a State
Committee as mentioned in sub-sections (/), (2) and (3) of this section subject to the
conditions mentioned therein and any directions issued by the Central Government in this
regard.

37. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the office of a member of the Committee or State Committee shall not be deemed to be an
office of profit.

15 of 1967

15 of 1967.


45 of 1860.5"

51 of 1959.

il

38. No act or proceeding of the Committee or of a State Committee or of a Joint State
Committee, as the case may be, shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any
vacancy amongst its members, or any defect in the constitution thereof.

39. The officers and employees of the Committees and other persons duly appointed
to discharge any duty under this Act or rules or bye-laws made thereunder, shall be deemed
to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

40. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairpersons or any member of the Committee or a State Committee in respect of
anything in good faith done or purporting to have been done under this Act, except with the
prior permission of the Central or State Government, as the case may be.

41. (/) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do,
it may by notification published in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule and thereupon
the Schedule shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.

(2) A copy of every notification made under sub-section (/) shall be laid before each
House of Parliament as soon ag may be after it is made.

42. Any Haj pilgrim, who is aggrieved by the discharge of any of the duties performed
by the Haj Committee or the State Haj Committee, shall make a representation for the
redressal of his griévance to the Haj Committee or the State Haj Committee, as the case
may be, and the same shall be disposed of by the said Committee, if necessary, after
hearing the aggrieved person.

43. (1) On and from the commencement of this Act, all assets, rights, leaseholds, powers,
authorities and privileges and all properties, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings,
stores, cash balances, cash on hand, reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests
in or arising out of such properties as were immediately before such commencement in the
ownership, power or control of Haj Committee, Mumbai, constituted under the Haj Committee
Act, 1959 and all books of account, registers and alk other documents of whatever nature
relating thereto shall vest absolutely in and belong to the Committee.

(2) On and from the commencement of this Act, all assets, rights, leaseholds, powers,
authorities and privileges and ail properties, movabie and immovable, including lands,
buildings, stores, cash balances, cash on hand, reserve funds, investments and all other
rights and interests in or arising out of such properties as were immediately before such
commencement in the ownership, power or control of Haj Committee of a State and, all
books of account, registers and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto shall
vest absolutely in and belong to the Haj Committee of a State.

(3) All debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters
and things engaged to be done by, with or fur the Committee or a State Committee immediately
before such commencement for or in connection with the purposes of the Committee or a
State Committee shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into and engaged to be done
by, with, or for the Committee or a State Committee, as the case may be.

(4) All sums of money due to the Committee or a State Committee immediately before
such commencement shall be deemed to be due to the Committee or a State Committee, as
the case may be. ~

(5) All contracts made with and all instruments executed on behalf of the Haj
Committee, Mumbai or the Haj Committee of a State shall be deemed to have been made or
executed on behalf of the Committee, or as the case may be, the State Committee and shall
be performed accordingly.

(6) In all suits and legal proceedings pending on the commencement of this Act in or
to which the Haj Committee, Mumbai or the Haj Committee of a State was a party, the
Committee, or as the case may be, the State Committee shall be deemed to have been
substituted therefor.

Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of Committee.

Officers and
employees of
Committee to
be public
servants

Idemnity.

Power to
amend
Schedule.

Redressal of
grievances.

Vesting of
properties and
other rights,
etc, in
Committees.


Power to make

rules,

12

44. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, under
sub-section (/), such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—

(i) the manner of election of members of the Committee, under clause (ii)
of section 4;

(ii) the terms and conditions of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairpersons and members
under sub-section (2) of section 6;

(iii) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub-section (3) of section

क्र

(iv) the manner in which the members may be re-nominated under the proviso
to sub-section (2) of section 8;

(v) duties in connection with Haj under clause (ix) of sub-section (-/) of section
9;

(vi) the functions of the Chief Executive Officer and the terms and conditions
of service of the Chief Executive Officer and other employees of the Committee
under section 16;

(vii) the number of members of a Joint State Committee or of a Committee for
Union territory under the proviso to clause (vi) of sub-section (/) of section 18;

(viii) the manner in which the accounts shall be maintained by the Committee
and the State Committees and the audit of such accounts under section 34;

(ix) issue of Haj Pilgrim Pass under sub-section (/) of section 35;

(x) amendment of the schedule relating to the zones comprising contiguous
States or Union territories under section 41;

(xi) any other matter which may be prescribed.

(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid, or the session immediately following,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the
tule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

45. (1) The Committee may, by notification, make bye-laws consistent with the
provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder in respect of the following matters,
namely:—

(i powers and duties of the Vice-Chairpersons under sub-section (4) of section 7;
(ii) providing for the publication of the proceedings of the Committee and any

matter of interests to pilgrims under sub-section (/) of section 9;

(iii) laying down the rules of procedure. for transaction of business at meeting

of the Committee under sub-section (5) of seetion 10;

(iv) powers and functions of the Standing Committee and determination of

number of members and other persons in sub-committees under se¢tion 11;

(v) providing for any other matter which the Committee deems necessary for
giving effect to the provisions of this Act.


51 of 1959.

13

(2) Bye-laws made by the Committee under this seetion shaft be submitted to the
Central Government and shall not take effect until they have been confirmed by the Central
Government.

(3) Bye-laws which have been confirmed by the-Central Government shall be published
in the Official Gazette.

46. Subject to the provisions of thisAct and the rules made thereunder, the Committee
may, by general or special order in writing, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, delegate to any member or Chief Executive Officer .of the Committee, and
subject to such conditions and limitations, as may be specified in the order, such of its
powers under this Act (except the powers to make bye-laws under section 45) as it may
deem necessary.

47. The State Governments may, in consultation with the Central Government, by
notification make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act in respect of the State
Committees.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(i) terms and conditions of the Chairperson and members of the State Committee
under sub-section (2) of section 20;

(ii) the manner in which the members may be re-nominated under the proviso
to sub-section (2) of section 22;

(iii) duties of the State Committee under sub-section (3) of section 27;

(iv) the functions of the Executive Officer and the terms and conditions of
service of officers and other employees under section 29;

(v) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.

(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before the State Legislature.

48. Every officer and other employee of any of the existing Committee and the State
Committee, as the case may be, shall, on and from the commencement of this Act, stand
transferred to or become an officer or other employee of the Committee or the State
Committee as the case may be, with such designation as such Committee may determine
and shall hold office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration,
upon the same terms and conditions of service 2s he would have held under the Haj
Committee constituted under the Haj Committee Act, 1959 and shall continue to do so as
an officer or other employee of the Committee till such time the terms and conditions are
duly altered by such Committee:

Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any
such officer or other employees of the Committee or of a State Committee, as the case
may be, shall not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous sanction of the
Central Government or State Government, as the case may be:

Provided further that any service rendered by any such officer or other employee
before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the service rendered under
the Committee or, as the case may be, the State Committee.

49, No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government
or any officer or other employee of the Government or the Committee constituted under
this Act in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under
this Act.

50. (J) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may by order not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove
the difficulty:

Power to make:
rules by State
Government.

Provisions as
to employees
of the existing
Committee
before the

‘mencement of |
this Act.

Protection of
action taken in
good faith,

Powerto
remove


Powersto give
directions.

Repeal.

14

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a périod of two years
from the commencement of this Act.

(2) Any order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.

51. The Central Government may, in exercise of its powers and performance of its
functions under this Act, issue directions in writing to the Committee or the State
Government or the State Committee and such Committee, State Government or State
Committee, as the case may be, shall be bound to comply with such directions.

52. (1) The Haj Committee Act, 1959 is hereby repealed:

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, the Haj Committee constituted under the said Act
shall, until the establishment of the Committee under this Act, continue to function as if
this Act had not been passed and on such notification under sub-section (2) of section 5 on
the establishment of the Committee, the former Committee shall stand dissolved.

(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Haj
Committee Act, 1959 shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding
provisions of this Act.

51 of 1959.

51 of 1959.


ZONE-I.

ZONE-II

ZONE-IIL.

ZONE-IV.

ZONE-V.

ZONE-VI.

THE SCHEDULE
(see sections 4 and 41)

NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI, RAJASTHAN,
JAMMU AND KASHMIR, PUNJAB, HARYANA, HIMACHAL
PRADESH AND UNION TERRITORY OF CHANDIGARH.

UTTAR PRADESH, BIHAR, UTTARANCHAL AND JHARKHAND.

ANDHRA PRADESH, MADHYA PRADESH, CHHATTISGARH AND
ORISSA.

ASSAM, WEST BENGAL, TRIPURA, MANIPUR, SIKKIM,
MEGHALAYA, ARUNACHAL PRADESH, MIZORAM, NAGALAND
AND UNION TERRITORY OF ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR
ISLANDS.

MAHARASHTRA, GUJARAT, GOA AND UNION TERRITORIES OF
DAMAN AND DIU AND DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI.

TAMIL NADU, KERALA, KARNATAKA AND THE UNION
TERRITORIES OF PONDICHERRY AND LAKSHADWEEP.

15


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Haj Committee Act, 1959 (hereunder referred to as the Act), replaced the Port
Haj Committee Act, 1932. The central position given to Bombay in the Act, and the
composition and the relatively limited powers of the Haj Committee, as established under
the Act, was primarily intended to regulate the selection of Indian pilgrims, and their safe
transportation, by ships, from Bombay to Jeddah. The said Act, thus established a Central
executive authority to regulate sea, and later air travel between Indian points and Jeddah. In
Saudi Arabia, the Indian Embassy in Jeddah, which was replaced by the Indian Consulate
General from 1984, continued to have full responsibility for all aspects of Haj management.
The Government of India, through the Ministry of External Affairs, were, in consequence
responsible for all aspects of Haj management in India and Saudi Arabia.

2. Uptill mid-1960's, all Indian pilgrims going for Haj travelled by sea from the Port
of Bombay. After that, the number of pilgrims travelling by air gradually increased until, in
1995, travel of pilgrims by sea was discontinued, and all Haj pilgrims began to go by air on
chartered flights. During the year 1999, these flights embarked from five points in India,
that is, Mumbai, Calcutta, Delhi, Chennai and Bangalore; and efforts were made at that
time to add other points as soon as additional facilities for handling international passengers
become available. Thus, for the Haj-2000, Cochin and Ahmedabad have also been added
as embarkation points for Haj pilgrims.

3. Uptill the year 1981, all intending pilgrims were required to send their applications
to the Haj Committee, Bombay: which selected the pilgrims by a draw of lots, also called
“Qurrah". Subsequently, this selection was decentralised, and State Haj Committees were
asked to conduct their respective “Quarrah". They were also given greater participation in
Haj management in such areas as pré-embarkation arrangements, transportation to
embarkation points and provision for camp facilities at such points. Thus, from the year
2000, the primary responsibility for training and orientation of pilgrims has also been
entrusted to State Haj Committees.

4. Since the Haj CommittceAct, 1959 is more than forty years old, and since importapt
changes in matters relating to Haj, including those mentioned above, have made the Act
obsolete, it no longer serves current needs. Some additional and important developments in
this regard are:—

(i) The number of Indian pilgrims who perform Haj through the Committee has
increased from about 24,000 ifi the year 1992 to 72,000 in the year 2000. This has
presented new management challenges to the Haj Committee.

(ii) The composition of the Haj Committee, as provided in the Act is
unrepresentative in nature. It gives primary importance to Maharashtra, and specifically
to Mumbai in the areas of Haj management; this is no longer tenable. Further, Haj
sailings were reduced to three in 1984, and were finally ended in 1995. Now, the
movement of all Haj pilgrims is by air from different points in India.

(ii) Over the last forty years, from time to time questions have been raised in
different quarters regarding the respective powers and responsibilities of the Central
and State Governments and of the Haj Committee. Again, over the last few years,
complaints have been received by the Central Government regarding the
mismanagement of its finances by the Haj Committee. These developments have
emphasised the importance of ensuring that the new legislation relating to Haj should
clearly define the authority of the Central and State Governments in the area of Haj

16


17

policy and management, as also provide for a reformed and representative Haj
Committee, with an effective mechanism to ensure financial propriety, and above all,
eliminate ambiguities relating to jurisdicational matters.

5. The Bill seeks to repeal and re-enact the Haj Committee Act, 1959 so as to achieve
the above objects.

New DELHI; JASWANT SINGH.
The, 29th November, 2000.


Notes on Clauses

Clause J contains short title and commencement of the Bill.

Clause 2 pertains to definitions of the term "Committee", "State Committee",
"member", "pilgrim" etc., in the context of the Bill.

Clause 3 makes provision for constitution and incorporation of the Haj Committee of
India which shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with
power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, to create a charitable trust or endowment
and may by the said name sue and be sued like any other statutory body constituted under
an Act of Parliament.

Clause 4 provides for the composition of the Committee which include nominated
Members from Parliament, representatives from the State Haj Committees, officials from
the Central Government and six Muslim members having special knowledge of public
administration, finance, education, culture, social work or Muslim theology and nominated
by the Central Government. The Committee shall have at least one woman as its member.

Clause 5 provides that the nomination of members shall be notified in the Offical
Gazette.

Clause 6 deals with the term of office of the members of the Committee which shall
not be less than three years. It may be extended by the Central Government by a notification
for a period not exceeding six months at a time but in no case the term may be extended
beyond a total period of one year.

Clause 7 makes provision for the election of a Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersons of
the Committee from amongst its members and in case the Committee fails to elect the
Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersons, the Central Government may appoint a member of
the Committee to be Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson. It has been provided that the Central
Government may make rules so as to provide for the powers and duties of the Chairperson.
In case of Vice-Chairpersons the powers and duties shall be determined by bye-laws made
by the Committee itself. It also makes provision for the term of their office as three years
and makes it clear that they cannot hold the said office for more than two consecutive
terms.

Clause 8 contains provision for the reconstitution of the new Committee atleast four
months before the expiry of the term or the extended term of the existing Committee. This
is being proposed to avoid any gap between the new Committee and the existing Committee.
It is also proposed to restrict the renomination of the outgoing members to the Committee
for not more than two terms and in no case the number of members renominated under this
clause shall exceed more than fifty per cent. of the total membership of the Committee.

Clause 9 contains details of the duties of the Committee which, inter alia, include—

(i) collection and dissemination of information useful to pilgrims and
arrangement of training programmes for them;

(ii) assistance to pilgrims during their stay at the embarkation points in all
matters including vaccination, inoculation, medical examination, issue of pilgrim passes
and foreign exchange to them;

(iii) giving relief to indigent pilgrims;
(iv) finalisation of the annual Haj Plan and execution of the Plan.

18


19

The Commuttee 1s also entrusted with the duties of negotiating with the railways,
airways, etc , so as to look after the welfare of the pilgrims It shall discharge such other
duties in connection with Haj as may be provided under the rules made by the Central
Government The Central Government 1s also required to afford all reasonable assistance
to the Committee in discharge of its duties

Clause 10 contains provisian for meetings of the Committee and makes it mandatory
that it shall meet at least three umes in a year initially before the commencement of the
Hay seasorts and once after the Haj 1s over so as to review arrangements made by the
Committee A meetings may be called either when it 1s requisitioned by atleast one-third of
its members or when the Chairperson considers it necessary For the transaction of business
at 15 meeting, the Committee will observe such rules of procedure as may be determined
by bye-laws made by such Committee

Clause 11 contains provision for appoinment of standing committee and sub-
committees which shall deal with matters relating to finance, transport and pilgrim's welfare

Clause 12 contains provision for disqualifications for being appointed or for continuing
as a member of the Commuttee

Clause 13 relates to resignation of Chairperson, Vice-Chairpersons and other members

Clause 14 contains provision for removal of Chairperson, Vice-Chairpersons and
members and stipulates that for certain acts of commission or omission the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson or a member of the Committee may be removed

Clause 15 provides for the filling up of a casual vacancy when such vacancy 1s
caused by the removal, resignation or death of a member

Clause 16 provides for the appointment of the Chief Executive Officer of the
Committee from the panel of Muslim Officers of the Central Government/State Governments.
holding a post of not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government of India
Initially, the appointment shall be made for a period of three years, which may be extended
by a maximum period of one year by the Central Government The Chief Executive Officer
shall be responsible for the execution of decisions of the Commuttee and such other functions
as may be provided in the rules made by the Central Government

Clause 17 makes provision for the establishment and incorporation of the State Hay
Committee by the State Government and in case where it appears to the Central Government
that it 1s not possible for, a State or a Union territory to establish a Hay Commuttee, 1t may
authorise the State Hay Committee of a contiguous State to deal with those pilgrims Two
or more contiguous States may enter into an agreement and may set up a joint State Hay
Committee to deal with the Hay pilgrims of such States

Clause 18 pertains to the composition of the State Hay Commuttees which include
representatives from Muslim members of Parliament, State Legislative Assembly,
Legislative Council (af any), and from the local bodies Other members of the State Hay
Committee will be the persons havirig expertise in Muslim theology and law and the
representatives of the voluntary organisations working 1n the field of public administration,
finance, education, culture or social work who may be nomunated by the State Government

Clause 19 provides that the nomination of members shall be notified in the Official
Gazette of the State

Clause 20 provides for the term of office of the members of the State Hay Commuttees,
allowances payable to such members and other terms and conditions of such members
which are to be provided by the rules made by the State Government


20

Clause 21 stipulates that the Chairperson shall be elected in the first meeting of the
State Committee from amongst its members and if the members fail to elect the Chairperson,
the State Government may appoint a member of the State Committee as its Chairperson. It
is also provided that the term of office of the Chairperson shall be for three years and no
person shall hold the office of the Chairperson for more than two consecutive terms.

Clause 22 pertains to the reconstitution of a State Haj Committee and provides that
all necessary steps for the reconstitution of a new State Committee shall be taken atleast
four months before the expiry of the term of the existing Committee. It also provides for
renomination of an outgoing member with a condition that it shall not be for more than two
terms and in no case the number of members renominated under this clause shall exceed
more than fifty per cent. of the total membership of the Committee.

Clause 23 contains provision for disqualifications for being appointed or for continuing
as a member of the State Committee.

Clause 24 relates to resignation of Chairperson and members.

Clause 25 contains provision for removal of Chairperson and members and stipulates
that for certain acts of commission or omission that Chairperson or a member of the State
Committee may be removed.

Clause 26 provides for the filling up of a casual vacancy when such vacancy is caused
by the removal, resignation or death of a member.

Clause 27 enumerates the duties of the State Haj Committee and makes it mandatory
to implement the policy and directions of the Committee in the interests of Haj pilgrims. It
has also been made mandatory for the State Committee to provide assistance, such as transport
or transit accommodation, to the Haj piigrims. The State Government has also been
authorised to make rules in consultation with the Central Government for other duties of
the State Committee in connection with Haj.

Clause 28 provides that a State Committee shall meet atleast twice in a year initially
before the Haj day and once after the Haj is over. A meeting may be convened either when
it is requisitioned by atleast one-third of the members of the State Committee or when the
Chairperson considers it necessary. All matters in a meeting are to be decided by majority
of the members present in such meeting.

Clause 29 makes provision for the appointment of the Executive Officer and other
employees of the State Haj Committee. The Executive Officer shall act as Secretary of the
Committee.

Clause 30 makes provision for the Central Haj Fund in which the sums realised on
account of registration of Haj pilgrims, issue of Haj pilgrim travel passes to such pilgrims,
money collected from pilgrims for performance of Haj, income from deposits and
investments from the funds of the Committee shall be credited. Any sums loaned by the
Central or a State Government, or any other source which is approved by that Government
and the amount standing at the credit of the Haj fund or the Indigent Pilgrims Fund
established under the Haj Committee Act, 1959 shall also form part of the Central Haj
Fund. .

Clause 31 enumerates the purposes for which the Central Haj Fund shall be applied.
This fund shall be mainly applied for the payment of charges and expenses incidental to
the objects specified in clause 9 of the Bill and towards the pay and allowances of the
Chief Executive Officer and other employees of the Committee or such other expenses of
the Committee or a State Committee as may be approved by the Central Government.

Clause 32 makes provision for the State Haj Fund of the State Committee. Any grant
or loan that may be made to the State Committee by the State Government or any other
sourcé as approved by the State Government shall be credited in such Fund. Haj Committee
of India may also make grant to the State Haj Fund.


21

Clause 33 enumerates the purposes for which the State Haj Fund shall be applied by
the State Haj Committee. The application of the State Haj Fund will be mainly for payment
of charges and expenses incidental to the due performance of its duties by the State Committee
for the objects specified in clause 27 of the Bill. The fund will also be used towards the
payment of the pay and allowances of the employees of the State Haj Committee, other than
its Executive Officer whose pay and allowances will be borne by the State Government.

Clause 34 requires that the Committee and every State Haj Committee shall maintain
proper accounts. The accounts shall be audited by such auditors as the Central Government
or as the case may be, the State Government, may approve.

Clause 35 empowers the Committee to issue a travel document to a Haj pilgrim for
the purposes of Haj. Pilgrim pass to a Haj pilgrim shall be used only for his departure from
India to Saudi Arabia and back to India. Since the subject matter of passports is regulated
under the provisions of the Passports Act, 1967, it has been considered necessary to exempt
the Haj pilgrims from the provisions of section 3 of the said Act to facilitate the issuance of
Pilgrim Passes to them. It has also been provided that the Central Government may, in
consultation with the Committee, levy fees for registration of a Haj pilgrim, for the issuance
of a Pilgrim Pass and for other related matters in connection with rendering of services to
the Haj pilgrims.

Clause 36 empowers the Central Government to cause supersession of the Committee
if the Committee is unable to perform or persistently makes defaults in performance of the
duties imposed under this Bill.

Clause 37 makes provision that the office of the member of the State Committee shall
not be deemed to be an office of profit so as not to disqualify such person from’ being a
member of Parliament or of the State Legislature.

Clause 38 provides that the act or proceeding of the Committee or of a State Committee
or of a Joint State Committee shall not become invalid owing to any vacancy or defect in
their constitution.

Clause 39 provides that the officers and other employees of the Committees shall be
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

Clause 40 contains provision that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding for
the action taken in good faith shall lie against the Chairperson, Vice-Chairpersons or any
member of the Committees, without the prior approval of the Central Government or of the
State Government, as the case may be.

Clause 41 empowers the Central Government to amend the Schedule of Zones which
will be represented on the Central Haj Committee, as the composition of the Committee
includes representatives from such Zones also.

Clause 42 provides for redressal of grievances. A Haj pilgrim who is aggrieved by the
actions of the Haj Committee or of the State Haj Committee shall make a representation for
the redressal of his grievance to the Haj Committee or the State Haj Committee, as the case
may be, and the same will be disposed of by the said Committee, after hearing the aggrieved
person.

Clause 43 provides for the vesting of properties and other existing rights and liabilities
of the existing Haj Committee constituted under the Haj Committee Act, 1959 in the
Committee or in the State Haj Committee, as the case may be, proposed to be constituted by
clause 3 and clause 17 of the Bill.

Clause 44 empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the purposes
of this Bill with respect to subjects enumerated under this clause.


22

Clause 45 empowers the Committee to make bye-laws in respect of the subjects
specified under this clause. ,

Clause 46 contains provision for delegation of powers by the Committee to Chief
Executive Officer or any Member thereof with the prior approval of the Central Government.

Clause 47 empowers the State Government to make rules in consultation with the
Central Government to carry out the purposes of this Bill with respect to subjects enumerated
under this clause.

Clause 48 contains provisions as to the transfer of the employees of the existing
Committees as employees of the proposed Committee or of the State Committee, as the
case may be. It also makes provision for the protection of the tenure, remuneration, and
terms and conditions of the service of such persons which will not be altered to their
disadvantage without the previous sanction of the Central Government or, as the case may
be, of the State Government.

Clause 49 makes provision for protection of action taken in good faith.

Clause 50 contains powers of the Central Government to remove the difficulties in
giving effect to the nrovisions of this Bill within a period of two years from the
commencement of the proposed legislation.

Clause 51 empowers the Central Government to issue directions in the exercise of its
powers and performance of its functions under this Bill, to the Committee or to the State
Government or to the State Committee.

Clause 52 provides for repeal of the Haj Committee Act, 1959 and makes provision
for saving of actions taken under that Act.

Schedule contains provision for dividing the States of the Union into different Zones,
which relates to representation of the State Committees in the composition of the Central
Haj Committee.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Sub-clause (1) of clause 44 empowers the Central Government to make rules generally
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) of clause 44 enumerates various
matters in respect of which rules may be made. These matters relate, amongst others, to
election, nomination, disqualification, resignation, etc. of the members of the Committee,
filling up of casual vacancies in the office of Chairperson or other members, the term of
office of the Chairperson and his powers and duties. It also relates to accounts to be kept by
the Committee and their audit; issuance of pilgrim pass by the Committee and levy of fees
for registration of a Haj pilgrim.

2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 47 empowers the State Government to make rules in
consultation with the Centrai Government for carrying out the purposes of the Bill in
respect to the State Committees. Sub-clause (2) enumerates various matters in respect of
which rules may be made by the State Governments. These matters relate, amongst others,
the terms and conditions of the Chairperson and Members of the State Committee, duties
of the State Committee, the functions of the executive officer of the State Committee and
the terms and conditions of service of officers and other employees of the State Committee.

3. Clause 45 empowers the Haj Committee to make bye-laws which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill or the rules made thereunder in regard to
powers and duties of the Vice-Chairperson, publications of the proceedings of the Committee,
laying down the rules of procedure for transaction of business at meeting of the Committee,
powers and functions of the Standing Committee and determination of number of members
and other persons in the sub-Committees and any other matter considered necessary for
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. The bye-laws which are to be made by the
Committee shall be subject to confirmation by the Central Government.

4, The rules and bye-laws will thus be confined to matters of procedure and the
delegation of legislative powers to the Central Government, State Government and to the
Committee is of a normal type.

23