AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAYA SABHA

Bill No. LXXIV of 2001

THE INDIAN SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001
A
BILL
fulther to amend the Indian Succession Act, 1925.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, This Act may be called the Indian Succession (Amendment) Act, 2001.

39 of 1925. 2. In section 32 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), the Explanation shall be omitted.

3. In section 213 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the word
"Muhammadans", the words "or Indian Christians" shall be inserted.

Short title.

Amendment
section 32.

Amendment
section 213.

of

of


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Indian Succession Act, 1925 was aimed at consolidating the Indian law relating
to testamentary and intestate succession. Section 32 of this Act recognises the Christian
widow as one of the heirs to succeed to the property of her deceased husband dying intestate.
However, the Explanation to the said section provides that a widow would not be entitled
to succeed to such distributive share if there is a valid contract made before her marriage to
that effect. The Kerala Women's Commission and some non-governmental organisations
have pointed out that this provision of the Act excluding a Christian widow from her
distributive share on the basis of the contract is discriminatory and they have suggested
that she should be entitled to succeed to her distributive share notwithstanding any contract
to the contrary.

2. Section 213 of this Act requires that no person claiming right as executor or
legatee of a will can establish such right in any Court of Justice under the will unless he has
been granted a probate or letter of administration or a copy of an authenticated copy of that
will by a Court of competent jurisdiction. No such probate or letter of administration is
required for a Muhammadan to establish his rights under a will nor there is any such
requirement in the case of other communities on an all-India basis. The Law Commission of
India, Kerala Women's Commission, Members of Parliament belonging to Christian
community and various other individuals and organisations have pointed out and
represented to the Government that this provision is discriminatory and should not apply
to Christians alone.

3. The matter has been examined by the Government and it has been decided to—
(a) delete Explanation to section 32; and
(b) make section 213 inapplicable to Indian Christians,
by amending the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DELHI;
The 16th November, 2001. ARUN JAITLEY.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN Succession AcT, 1925
(39 oF 1925)

* * * * *

32. The property of an intestate devolves upon the wife or husband, or upon Devolution of
those who are of the kindred of the deceased, in the order and according to the rules such property.
hereinafter contained in this Chapter.

Explanation —A widow is not entitled to the provision hereby made for her if,
by a valid contract made before her marriage, she has been excluded from her
distributive share of her husband's estate.

* * * * *

213. (1) * * * * Right as executor
or legatee when
established.

(2) This section shall not apply in the case of wills made by Muhammadans, and
shall only apply—

(i) in the case of wills made by any Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina where
such wills are of the classes specified in clauses (a) and (0) of section 57; and

(ii) in the case of wills made by any Parsi dying, after the commencement
16 of 1962. of the Indian Succession (Amendment) Act, 1962, where such wills are made
within the local limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High
Courts at Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, and where such wills are made outside
those limits, in so far as they relate to immovable property situate within those
limits.

* * * * *


RAJYA SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Indian Succession Act, 1925.

(Shri Arun Jaitley, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3510RS—20-11-2001.