 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
ON THE 5TH DECEMBER, 2025
 
Bill No. LXXIII of 2025 
THE PROTECTION OF ALL RELIGIONS AND PROMOTION 
OF MUTUAL RESPECT FOR FAITHS BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
to promote inter-faith harmony, ensure protection of all religions and sacred 
beliefs, and prevent acts intended to insult or malign any religion or 
 religious community in the country in accordance with the  
secular and pluralistic spirit of the Constitution of 
 India, and to provide for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto. 
 WHEREAS, the Constitution of India guarantees to all citizens the 
freedom of    conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate 
religion; 
AND WHE
REAS, it is expedient to safeguard the dignity of every faith, 
promote mutual respect among followers of different religions, and  prevent 
deliberate acts that incite hatred or disturb communal harmony. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:– 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of All Religions and Promotion of
Mutual Respect for Faiths Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) Commission” means the National Commission for Inter -Faith
Harmony established under section 3 of this Act; 
(b ) “deliberate insult” means any public act, publication,
communication, or display intentionally meant to outrage religious 
feelings or show contempt towards any religion;  
(c) “faith” means a system of beliefs, rituals, practices and sacred
texts adhered to by a community or class of persons professing or 
practising a religion; 
(d) “faith-based offence” means any act or omission committe d
unde
r this Act which violates the rights of persons practising a religion or 
faith, or which insults, vilifies, demeans a religion or sacred object or 
incites hatred between communities or classes of persons; 
(e) “Fund” means the National Inter -Faith Harmony Fund
established under section 6 of this Act; 
( f) “inter-faith harmony” means peaceful coexistence, dialogue,
and respect amongst persons of diverse faiths or religions; 
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) “religion” includes all faiths, spiritual paths, and systems of
belief practised in India; and 
(i) “sacred object” means any text, symbol, structure, place or item
held in reverence by the followers of a religion or faith. 
5 
1
0 
1
5 
2
0 
CHAPTER II 
PROMOTION OF INTER-FAITH HARMONY 
Establishment 
of the National 
Commission 
for Inter-Faith 
Harmony. 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette,
establish a body to be known as the National Commission for Inter -Faith 
Harmony to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions
of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and
immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi and it may,
with the prior approval of Central Government, establish office(s) at any
other place in the country, as it may deem fit, for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(4) The Commission shall consist of the following, namely 
‒
(i) a Chairperson with substantial knowledge of various
religious traditions and high level of commitment to the promotion,
protection and preservation of inter-faith harmony; and 
(ii) ten members, who shall be persons of eminence from
different religions and faiths in the country, in such proportion as 
may be prescribed; 
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(5) The term of office of, the salary and allowances payable to, and other
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the 
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
25 
3
0 
3
5 
 
40 
 
45 

3 
5 
(6) The Commission shall meet as and whe n necessary and at such times and
places as the Chairperson may deem fit for the efficient discharge of the
functions assigned to it under this Act.
(7) T he Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure with
regard to transaction of its business. 
10 
4. (1) The Commission shall appoint such number of officers and staff with
the prior approval of the Central Government, as may be required, for its 
efficient functioning.  
(2) The method of recruitment, qualifications and experience, salaries and
allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and staff of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 
Officers and 
staff of the 
Commission. 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
5. The Commission shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely:―
(a) advise the appropriate Government on policies for promoting
inter-faith harmony, respect amongst religions and prevention of faith-
based offences; 
(b) recommend measures to prevent communal conflicts;
(c) organise awareness and educational programmes in schools,
Universities, and through media for promoting mutual respect 
amongst different religions and faiths and peaceful co-existence; 
(d) c oordinate with the Central and State Governments, religious
institutions, non -governmental organisations etc. for inter -faith 
dialogues; 
(e) prepare reports, annually and also at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit on any matter relating to promotion or 
preservation of inter -faith harmony and in particular in relation to its 
functions assigned under this Act, in such form and manner, as may be 
prescribed, containing therein its recommendations to the Centre and the 
States, as the case may be, for the effective implementation of the 
provisions of this Act; and 
(f) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the
Central Government under this Act. 
Functions of the 
Commission. 
 
35 
 
40 
45 
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a fund to be called the National Inter -Faith Harmony Fund for 
financing programmes promoting religious tolerance, peace and inter-
faith cooperation and for other purposes as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Fund shall be administered by the Commission under the supervision
and control of the Union Ministry of Home Affairs.
(3) There shall be credited to the Fund:―
(i) any sums provided by the Central Government to carry out the
purposes of this Act; 
(ii) grants, CSR contributions or donations from institutions or
persons, approved by the Central Government; 
(iii) amount accrued on account of monetary penalties imposed; and
(iv) such other sums as may be specified from time to time.
(4) The Fund shall be subject to audit by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India and the Central Government shall cause such audit report to be laid, as
soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
National Inter -
Faith Harmony 
Fund. 
50 
7. The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the 
Commission, as it may deem fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 

4 
CHAPTER III 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
Offence of 
insulting 
religion or 
religious 
beliefs. 
8. Whoever, with deliberate intent to insult or demean the religious beliefs or
practices of any class of citizens of India, commits any act, publication, or
representation that insults or attempts to insult the religion or religious beliefs
or feelings of that class of persons, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and
with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.
Provided that the penal provision shall be read in addition to the
punishment, if any, prescribed in the relevant sections of the Bha ratiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023 and not in derogation  of it.
5 
 
45 of 2023. 
Protection of 
sacred places 
and symbols. 
9. Whoever defiles, damages or desecrates any place of worship or sacred object
of any religion with the deliberate or malicious intent to insult that religion or
any class of persons of that religion shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to two
lakh rupees.
Provided that the penal provision shall be read in addition to the
punishment, if any, prescribed in the relevant sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023 and not in derogation of it.
 
10 
1
5 
 
45 of 2023. 
Dissemination 
of hatred on 
grounds of 
religion. 
10. Whoever promotes enmity or hatred between persons on the ground of religion, 
or by speech, writing, image, or electronic communication intends to do so
deliberately, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.
Provided that the penal provision shall be read in addition to the
punishment, if any, prescribed in the relevant sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023 and not in derogation of it.
 
20 
2
5 45 of 2023. 
Protection of 
artistic and 
academic 
expression. 
11. (1) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to —
(a) any fair and bona fide  expression made in good faith in art,
literature, research or academic discourse; and 
(b) any constructive criticism, discussion or commentary made
without malicious intent. 
(2) The Commission established under this Act shall frame guidelines for the
purposes of this section, within such period as may be prescribed.
 
30 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Accounts and 
audit. 
12. (1) The Commission shall, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India, maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner and at such
time of each financial year, as may be prescribed.
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the
Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(3) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together
with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually by the Commissi on
t
o the Central Government, which shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as
may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
 
35 
4
0 
 
45 
Annual report. 13. (1) The Commission shall prepare every year, in such form and within such
time, as may be prescribed, an annual report, giving a true and full account of

5 
 
5 
10 
 
15
its activities during the previous year and forward a copy thereof to the Central 
Government. 
(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after its receipt, cause to
be laid before each House of Parliament, the annual report under sub- section
(1
) as well as any report under clause (e) of section 5 along with a memorandum 
of action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendation(s) of the
Commission and the reasons, if any, for non- acceptance of any of the
recommendation(s) contained therein.
(3) Where the report or any of its part  thereof is relates to any matter with the
which any State Government is concerned, the Commission shall forward a 
copy of such report or part thereof to the concerned State Government, who 
shall in turn, as soon as may be after its receipt, cause it to be laid before the 
each House of State Legislature concerned, where it consists of two Houses, or 
where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House, along with a 
such report along with an explanatory memorandum on the action taken or 
proposed to be taken on the recommendation(s) related to the State, if any, and 
reasons, if any, for not accepting any of the recommendation(s) made therein.  
 
20
14. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on a
complaint made by a public authority or with prior sanction of the District 
Magistrate. 
(2) All offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
Cognizance and 
investigation. 
15. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Commission
or any of its members or any other person for any action taken in good faith
under this Act or any rule made thereunder.
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
 
 
25 16. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any 
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have over  riding effect on the 
provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency. 
Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 
 
30
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) The Commission may, with the approval of the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all matters
for which provisions is necessary or expedient for the purposes of
implementing the provisions of this Act.
(3) Every rule or regulation made under this  Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the  session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both
Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or
regulation shall therea fter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule or regulation.
Power to make 
rules. 
 
50 
18. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or 
expedient for removing such difficulty. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 

6 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
        The purpose of this Bill is to strengthen India’s secular and plural ethos by 
e
nsuring that every religion receives equal protection from deliberate insult or 
desecration, while upholding freedom of expression and to provide for a legal 
framework that safeguards the dignity of every faith, promotes mutual respect, and 
prevents acts which incite communal hatred or disturbance of communal harmony. 
It seeks to create an institutional framework for inter-faith dialogue, education, and 
prevention of communal hatred. 
 Hence, this Bill. 
MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI. 

7 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National 
Commission for Inter-Faith Harmony consisting of a Chairperson and ten Members 
and their salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of their service. 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appointment of officers and staff of the 
Commission, their salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of their 
service. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the functions of the Commission inter -
alia including the organization of awareness and educational programmes in 
schools, Universities, and through media for promoting mutual respect for different 
religions and peaceful co-existence. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for establishment 
of the National Inter -faith Harmony Fund for financing programmes promoting 
religious tolerance and peace. Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the Central 
Government to provide adequate funds  to the Commission for carrying out the 
purposes of this Bill. 
 The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non- recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is 
difficult, at this juncture, to estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved. 

8 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Gov ernment to make rules and 
the Commission with the approval of the Central Government to make regulations 
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 18 of the Bill provides that the 
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, as may be 
necessary, for removing any difficulty to give effect to the provisions of this Bill.  
As the rules or regulations or orders or directions will relate to matters of 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

RAJYA SABHA 
________________ 
A 
BILL 
to promote inter-faith harmony, ensure protection of all religions and sacred 
beliefs, and prevent acts intended to insult or malign any religion or 
 religious community in the country in accordance with the  
secular and pluralistic spirit of the Constitution of 
 India, and to provide for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto. 
_______________ 
(Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni, M.P.) 
RS-P&PS–PMB(E)–343–08.12.2025. 