THE COMPULSORY QUOTING OF SOURCE LAW BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory quoting of source law while publishing notifications, orders,
circulars, tenders etc. for bringing in transparency in government functioning and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Quoting of Source Law Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official gazette, appoint, however different dates may be appointed for different States
and Union Territories.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate government" means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "publishing" means publishing through official gazette;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. LXXII of 2006
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
ON 11TH AUGUST, 2006.

2
Compulsory
quoting of
source law by
appropriate
government.
Power to
make rules.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it
shall be compulsory for the appropriate government to quote the provisions of the source
law viz. Constitution of India, Act of  Parliament or State Legislature, rules, regulations, bye-
laws etc. while publishing notifications, orders, circulars, tenders etc., thereunder.
4. The Central Government may, by notification  in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provision of this Act.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Central Government as well as State Governments publish, from time to time
notifications, orders, tenders, etc. in Official Gazettes, newspapers and other print media.
However, in most of the cases, the source law, viz. Constitution of India, act of Parliament or
the act of  a State Legislature, rules, regulations or bye laws, under which these are issued,
do not find mention therein.
In order to ensure transparency in the administration public should know all the
relevant aspects of government orders, notifications, tenders etc. which are published under
the authority of concerned source law.
Public companies, corporations or other bodies affected by such notifications, orders,
etc. will get a clear idea if such  source of law under which these documents are published, is
made known to them.
This will also prevent the authorities concerned from issuing notifications or orders,
etc. which are outside the scope of the law.
Hence this Bill.
SHANTARAM LAXMAN NAIK
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purposes of
this Bill. The rules relate to matters of details only.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
4

RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory quoting of source law while publishing notifications, orders,
circulars, tenders etc. for bringing in transparency in government functioning and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2216RS(S5)—11-08-2006.